Appletons' Cyclopaedia of American Biography, Vol. 5 (James Grant Wilson and John Fiske, 1888)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/appletonscyclop05wilsuoft): the 1888 New York (D. Appleton) first edition, vol. 5 of 6 (Pickering–Sumter), ed. Wilson & Fiske — complete through END OF VOLUME V.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================



VOL.  V.
PICKERING-SUMTER


.APtLKTLK  3c  C  5


APPLETONS'


CYCLOPEDIA  OF  AMERICAN


BIOGEAPHY


EDITED BY

JAMES GRANT WILSON

AND

JOHN FISKE


As  it  is  the  commendation  of  a  good  huntsman  to  find  game  in  a  wide  wood,
80  it  is  no  imputation  if  he  hath  not  caught  all.  Plato.


VOLUME  V.
PICKERING-SUMTER


NEW YORK
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

1,  8  AND  6  BOND  STREET
1891


Copyright,  1888,

Bt  d.  appleton  and  company.


LIST OF PORTRAITS ON STEEL.


ARTIST

■MORAVER

PAOB

Sherman,  William  Tecumseh

Sarmiy

Schleeht

Frontispiece

Pierce,  Franklin

Healy

Hall

Face  7

Polk,  James  Knox

Poole

Reich

50

Porter,  David  Dixon

Bell

Girach

75

Scott,  Winfield

Brady

Hall

440

Seward,  William  Henry

Bogardus

Ritchie

470

Sheridan,  Philip  Henry

Bell

Hall

497

SIMMS,  William  Gilmore

Unknoum

Oribayedq(f

588

Stowe,  Harriet  Beecher

Richmond

Ritchie

718

*
Sumner,  Charles

Warren

Hall

744

SOME  OF  THE  CHIEF  CONTRIBUTORS
TO APPLETONS' CYCLOPAEDIA  OF AMERICAN BIOGRAPHY.


r


Adams,  Charles  Kendall,

I'lVftiiitMii  of  lornoll  University.

Allibone,  S.  Austin,

Atitliur  ■'  Dictioimry  of  Authore."

Amory,  Thomas  C,

Author  "  Lifi-  of  (Jcneral  Sullivan."  etc

Baird,  Henry  Carey,

Kcoiioinlst.

Bancroft,  Gteorge,

Aiitluir  •  Hitftory  of  the  United  States."

Bayard,  Thomas  F.,

Secretary  of  State.

Beehler,  William  H.,

Lieutenant  II.  S.  Navy.

Bigelow,  John,

Autlior  ••  Life  of  Franklin,"  etc.

Boker,  Gteorge  H.,

Poet,  late  Minister  to  Russia.

Bradley,  Joseph  P.,

Justice  I'nited  States  Supreme  Court.

Brooks,  Phillips,

Author  "Sermons  in  English  Churches."

Browne,  Junius  Henri,

Journulist  anil  .Viithor.

Buckley,  James  Monroe,

Cler!.;yn)ar.  aiul  Author.

Carter,  Franklin,

President  of  Williams  College.

Chandler,  William  E.,

Kx-Secretary  of  the  Navy.

Conway,  Moncure  Daniel,

Author  "Idols  and  Ideals."

Cooke,  John  Esten,

Author  "  Life  of  (Jen.  Robert  E.  Lee."

Cooper,  Miss  Susan  Fenimore,

Author  "  Rural  Hours,"  etc.

Copp§e,  Henry,

Professor  in  Lehigh  University,  Pa.

Coxe,  Arthur  Cleveland,

p.  E.  Bisho|)  of  Western  New  York.

Cullum,  Gen.  George  W.,  XJ.  S.  A.,

Author  "  Ri'>;ister  of  West  Point  Graduates,"  etc.

Curtis,  George  Ticknor,

Author  "  Life  of  James  Buchanan,"  etc.

Curtis,  George  William,

Author  and  Editor.

Custer,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  B.,

Author •  Tenting  on  the  Plains."

Davis,  Jefferson,

Ex-President  Confederate  States  of  America.
Delafield,  Maturin  L.,

Miscellani'ons  Writer.

De  Lajicey,  Edward  F.,

Hx-President  (Jenealouical  and  Biographical  Society.
Didier,  Eugene  Lemoine,

Author  "  Life  of  Eklgar  Allan  Poe."


Dix,  Morg^an,

Rector  of  Trinity  Church,  New  York.

Doane,  William  C,

p.  E.  Bishop  of  Albany.

Draper,  Lyman  C,

Secretary  of  Wisconsin  Historical  Society.

Egle,  William  Henry,

Author  "  History  of  Pennsylvania."

Ewell,  Benjamin  Stoddert,

President  of  William  and  Mary  College.

Fiske,  John,

Author  and  Professor.

Frothingham,  Octavius  Brooks,

.\uthor  "  Life  of  George  Ripley."

Gallatin,  Albert  H.,

Author  and  Professor.

Gayarrd,  Chanes  E.  A.,

Author  "  History  of  Louisiana."

Gerry,  Elbridge  T.,

Member  of  New  York  Bar.

Gilman,  Daniel  C,

President  of  Jolins  Ho|)kin8  LTniverslty.

Gilmore,  James  Roberts,

Author  "  Rear-Guard  of  the  Revolution."

Gleig,  George  Robert,

Ex-Chaplain-General  British  Army.

Greely,  Gen.  Adolphus  W.,  U.  S.  A.,

Chief  Signal  Oftlcer.

Greene,  Capt.  Francis  Vinton,  TJ.  S.  A.,

Author  "The  Vicksburg  Campaign."

Griffis,  William  Elliot,

Author  "  Life  of  Com.  .M.  C.  Perry."

Hale,  Edward  Everett,

Author  "  Franklin  in  France."

Hart,  Charles  Henry,

Author  "  Memoir  of  William  H.  Prescott,"  etc.

Hay,  John,

Author  "  Life  of  Abraham  Lincoln."

Hayne,  Paul  H.,

Author  and  Poet.

Headley,  Joel  Tyler,

Author  "  Washington  and  his  Generals."

Henry,  William  Wirt,

Of  the  Virginia  Historical  Society.

Higginson,  Col.  Thomas  W.,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States."  etc.

Hills,  (George  Morgan,

Author  "  History  of  the  Church  in  Burlington,  N.  J."

Holmes,  Dr.  Oliver  Wendell,

Author  and  Poet.

Huntingfton,  William  R.,

Rector  of  (Jrace  Church.  New  York.

Isaacs,  Abram  S.,

Journalist.

Jay,  John,

Late  Minister  to  Austria.


VUl


SOME  OP  THE  CHIEF  CONTRIBUTORS.


Johnson,  Bradley  Tyler,

Mtinbir  i)f  the  Maryland  Bar.

Johnson,  Rossiter,

Author  and  lyiilor.

Johnston,  William  Preston,

Presidi-nt  of  Tiilane  I'uiveniity.

Jones,  Horatio  Gates,

Vice  Pnnidi-ni  iif  Pennsylvania  Ilistorical  Society.

Jones,  William  Alfred,

AiiMior  ■■  C'lmrncti'r  and  CriticiBin,"  etc.

Kendrick,  James  Ryland,

Kx-Pri'i*idfnt  Vaswir  Collt'tje.

Lathrop,  Oeorge  Parsons,

Author  ••  A  Study  of  Hawthorne,"  etc.

Latrobe,  John  H.  B.,

Mt'uibi-r  of  the  .Maryland  Bar.

Ijeach,  Josiah  Granville,

Member  of  the  I'hiladclpbia  Bar.
Lewis,  William  H.,

clergyman  and  Author.

Lincoln,  B>obert  T.,

Ex-Secretary  of  War.

Lodge,  Henry  Cabot,

Author  ■•  Life  of  Hamilton."

Mackay-Smith,  Alexander,

Archdeacon  of  New  York.

MacVeagh,  Wayne,

Ex-.\tiorneyGeneral  United  States.
Marble,  Manton,

Late  Etlitor  "The  World."

Mathews,  William,

Aullior  '•  Orators  and  Oratory,"  etc.

McMaster,  John  Bach,

Author  ••  lli.-itory  of  the  People  of  the  United  States."

Mitchell,  Donald  G.,

Author  ■■  Keveries  of  a  Bachelor,"  etc.

Mombert,  Dr.  Jacob  I.,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

Ochsenford,  S.  E.,

Clergyman  and  Author.

O'Connor,  Joseph,

Editor  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  "Poet-Express."

Parker,  Cortlandt,

Member  of  the  New  Jersey  Bar.

Parkmau,  Francis,

Author  "  Frontenac,"  "  French  in  Canada,"  etc.
Parton,  James,

.\uthor  "  Life  of  Andrew  Jackson,"  etc.

Phelan,  Jam.es,

Editor  Memphis,  Tenn.,  "Avalanche."
Phelps,  William  Walter,

Member  of  Congress  from  New  Jersey.

Pierrepont,  Edwards,

KxAttorney-(ieneral  United  States.

Porter,  David  D.,

Admiral  United  States  Navy.

Porter,  Gen.  Horace,

Formerly  of  (ien.  Grant's  Staff.

Potter,  Henry  C,

p.  E.  Hishop  of  New  York.

Preston,  Mrs.  Margaret  J.,

Poet.


B«ad,  John  Meredith,

Ijtte  Minister  to  (ireece.

Bicord,  Frederick  W.,

Of  New  Jersey  Ilistorical  Society.

Bobinson,  Ezekiel  G.,

I'resident  of  Brown  University.

Bodenbough,  Gen.  Theophiltis  F.,

Author  •■  Uncle  Sam's  Medal  of  Honor."

Bomero,  Mattias,

Mexican  Minister  to  the  United  States.

Scharf,  John  Thomas,

Late  of  the  Confederate  Army.
Schurz,  Carl,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Interior.

Schweinitz,  Edmund  A.  de.

Late  Moravian  Bishop.

Sherman,  William  T.,

Late  General  of  the  United  States  Army.

Smith,  Charles  Emory,

Editor  Philadelphia  "  I'ress."

Spencer,  Jesse  Ames,

Author  and  Professor.

Stedman,  Edmiind  0.,

Poet  and  Critic.

Stills,  Charles  Janeway,

Author  "  History  of  the  Sanitary  Commission."

Stewart,  George,  Jr.,

President  Quebec  Historical  Society.

Stoddard,  Bichard  Henry,

Author  "  Songs  of  Summer."

Stone,  William  L.,

Author  '  Life  of  Red  Jacket,"  etc.

Stowe,  Charles  Edward,

Clergyman  and  Author.

Strong,  William,

Ex-Justice  United  States  Supreme  Court.

Stryker,  William  Scudder,

Adjutant-General  of  New  Jersey.

Symington,  Andrew  James,

Author  •  Life  of  William  Cullen  Bryant."

Tanner,  Benjamin  T.,

Editor  "  African  Methodist  Episcopal  Review."

Wadleigh,  Bainbridge,

Ex-United  States  Senator.

Warner,  Charles  Dudley,

Author  and  Journalist.

Washbume,  Elihu  B.,

Late  Minister  to  France.

Welling,  James  C,

President  of  Columbian  University.
Wilson,  Gen.  James  Grant,

Author  "  Bryant  and  his  Friends,"  etc.

Wilson,  Gen.  James  Harrison,

Author  "  Life  of  Uly.s8e8  S.  Grant."

Winter,  William,

Poet  and  Theatrical  Critic.

Winthrop,  Bobert  C,

Ex-United  States  Senator.

Wright,  Marcus  Joseph,

Late  of  the  Confederate  Army.

Young,  John  Bussell,

Journalist  and  Author.


Among  the  Contributors  to  the  fifth  volume  of  thu  work  are  the  follmDing,


Samuel  Atistin  Allibone,  LL.  D.

I'rKSCOTT.  VVlM.lAM IIlCKLlNU.

Thomas  Coffin  Amory.

Sri.i.ivAX,  John.

Henry  Carey  Baird.
Smith.  Charlks  Ferguson.

Lieut.  William  H.  Beehler,  U.  S.  N.

Akticlks  ox  Okkickrs  ok  the  U.  S.  Navy.

Marcus  Benjamin,  F.  C.  S.
TuK  Schuyler  Family,
SiLLiMAN,  Benjamin,  and  Family.

Arthur  Elmore  Bostwick,  Ph.  D.
PoE,  Eduar  Allan,
Shays,  Daniel.

James  C.  Brogan.

Artk  LEs  OX  Roman  Catholic  Clergymen.

Bev.  Phillips  Brooks,  D.  D.
Kiciiarusox,  IIexry  Hobson.

Junius  Henri  Browne.
.  Stoddard,  Richard  Henry.

Roberdeau  Buchanan.

'J'he  Roberdeau  Family,
Shippex,  William.

Bev.  James  M.  Buckley,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.

Articles  ON  Metikjdist  Episcopal  Bishops.

Mrs.  Isa  Carring^on  Cabell.
Raleuii.  Sir  Walter,
The  Roosevelt  Family.

Henry  W.  Cleveland.

Stephens,  Alexaxder  Hamilton.

Moncure  Daniel  Conway.

The  Raxdolph  Family.

Prof.  Henry  Copp6e.
Sheridan,  Philip  Henry,
Sherman.  William  Tecumseh.

George  William  Curtis.
Sumner,  Charles.

Maturin  L.  Delafield.

Ross,  .James.

Eugene  Lemoine  Didier.
I'ixckxev,  William.

B«v.  Morgan  Dix,  D.  D.
Potter,  Horatio.

William  Henry  Egle,  M.  D.
Rupp.  Israel  Daniel,
Steele,  John.


Col.  Benjamin  Stoddert  Ewell.

Stoddert,  Benjamin.

Prof.  John  Fiske.
Putnam,  Israel,
Sumter,  Thomas.

Bobert  Ludlow  Fowler.

Pownall,  Thomas.

Octavius  Brooks  Frothingham.
Ripley,  George.

James  Boberts  Gilmore.

Stark,  John.

Daniel  Goodwin.
The  Pitts  Family.
Poole.  William  Frederick.

Samuel  S.  Green.

RuuGLEs,  Timothy.

Capt.  Francis  Vinton  Greene.
ScHOFiELD,  John  McAllister.

Bev.  William  Elliot  Griffls,  D.  D.
Spence,  Robert  Traill.

Jacob  Henry  Hager.
Polk,  James  Knox,
Pope,  John.

Charles  Henry  Hart.
Pine,  Robert  Edge,
St.  Memin,  Charles  B.  J.  F.  de.

CoL  John  Hay.
Reid,  Whitelaw,
Stone.  Amasa.

Miss  Emma  Polk  Harris.
Sower,  Christopher,  and  Family,
Sumner,  Edwin  Vose.

Bev.  Horace  E.  Hayden.

Pollock,  Oliver.

Bev.  Joel  Tyler  Headley.
Steuben,  Baron  von.

Cecil  H.  C.  Howard.

Sewall*,  Samuel,
Shillaber,  Benjamin  P.

Bt,  Bev.  M.  A.  de  Wolfe  Howe.

Potter,  Alonzo.

Frank  Huntington.
The  Rutledge  Family,
Sparks,  Jared.

Abram  S.  Isaacs,  Ph.  D.

Articles  on  Jewish  Cleroymek.


CONTRIBUTORS  TO  THE FIFTH VOLUME.


Gen.  Bradley  Tyler  Johnson.
Pickett,  Georoe  Edwaru,
Seduon,  James  Alexander.

Bossiter  Johnson,  Ph.  D.

ReALK,  UlCllARl).

Smith,  Peter  and  Gerrit.

Horatio  Gates  Jones.

PiciH,  Ellis.

John  William  Jordan.

Articles  on  Moravian  Cleroymen.

Bev.  James  Byland  Kendrick,  D.  D.
Articles  on  Baptist  Clergymen.

Samuel  Jordan  Kirkwood.

Prick,  Hiram.

Col.  Josiah  Granville  Leach.

Articles  on  Noted  Pennsylvanians.

Bev.  William  H.  Lewis.
Articles  on  Protestant  Episcopal  Bishops.

Bobert  Todd  Lincoln.

Stuart,  John  T.

Neil  Macdonald.

Articles  ox  Canadian  Statesmen.

Bev.  Alexander  Mackay-Smich.
Smith,  Nathan  and  Perry,
Stuakt,  Robert.

Luther  B.  Marsh.
Stewart,  Alvan.

William  Mathews,  LL.  D.

Prentiss,  Sergeant  Smith.
Story,  .Joseph.

Charles  A.  Nelson.

Sibley,  John  Langdon.

Bev.  S.  E.  Ochsenford.

Artk  les  on  Lutheran  Clergymen.

Joseph  O'Connor.

Rochester.  Nathaniel.
Seymour.  Horatio.

Edwards  Pierrepont.
Stanton,  Edwin  A1cMaster.s.

Frederick  Eugene  Pond.
Pike,  Albert.

Gen.  Horace  Porter.

Pullman,  (Jeorge  Mortimer.

Mrs.  Margaret  J.  Preston.
SiMMs,  William  Gilmore.

John  V.  L.  Prujoi.
The  Pruyn  Family.

Prof.  Thomas  Buggies  Pynchon.
The  Pvnchon  Family.


Gen.  John  Meredith  Bead.

Si'AioHT,  Richard  Dobbs.

Eugene  Coleman  Savidge.
Kawle,  William  Henry.

CoL  John  Thomas  Scharf.

Semmes,  Raphael.

Bev.  William  Jones  Seabury,  D.  D,

The  Seabury  Family.

Miss  Esther  Singleton.
Porter,  David,

STUYVE.SANT,  PeTER,

Dr.  Charles  Janeway  Stills,  LL.  D.
Printz,  John.

William  Leete  Stone.
The  Stone  Family.

Bev.  Charles  Edward  Stowe.

Stowe,  Calvin  Ellis  and  Harriet  Beechee.

Gen.  William  S.  Stryker.

Stryker,  John.

Andrew  James  Symington.

Selkirk,  Alexander,
Stanley,  Henry  Morton.

William  Christian  Tenner.

ROCHAMBEAU,  CoUNT  DE.

Arthiir  Dudley  Vinton.

Redpath,  James,

Rice,  Allen  Thokndike.

Bainbridge  Wadleigh.

Pierce,  Franklin.

Charles  Dudley  Warner.

Smiiii,  John.

John  William  Weidemeyer.
Powhatan  and  Pocahontas,
Simpson,  Edmund.

Frank  Weitenkampf.

Articles  on  Artists  and  Musicians.

James  Clark  Welling,  LL.  D.

Shields,  Charles  Woodruff.

Edward  C.  Wharton.

Slidell,  John,
Soule,  Pierre.

Gen.  James  Grant  Wilson.
Scott,  Winkield,
Stewart,  Alexander  Turney.

Gen.  James  Harrison  Wilson.

Rawlins,  John  Aakon.

Gren.  Marcus  Joseph  Wright.
Pillow,  Gideon  J.,
Smith,  Edmund  Kirby.

John  Bussell  Young.
Smalley,  George  Washburn.


APPLETONS'

CYCLOP/EDIA  OF  AMEKICAN  BIOGRAPHY.


PICKERING

PICKERING,  Charles  Whipple,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  II..  23  Dec,  1815;  d.  in  St.
Aujifiistine.  Fla.,  29  Feb.,  1888.  He  was  appointed
midshipman  on  22  May,  1822,  became  lieutenant
on  8  Dec,  1838.  and  was  attached  to  the  Pacific
squadron.  In  1854  he  served  as  executive  officer
of  the  *'  Cyane,"  which  conveyed  Lieut.  Isaac  G.
Strain  {q.  v.)  and  his  exploring  party  to  Darien,
and  afterward  rescued  them  and  brought  them  to
New  York.  He  was  at  the  bombardment  of  Grey-
town,  Nicaragua,  in  1854,  which  was  reduced  to
ashes  after  four  hours'  siege.  On  14  Sept.,  18,55,  he
became  commander,  and  in  1859-'G1  he  was  inspec-
tor of  a  light-house  district  near  Key  West,  Pla.
He  was  commissioned  captain  on  15  July,  1862.
commanded  the  "  Kearsarge  "  in  the  Mediterranean
and  in  the  West  Indies,  and  was  in  charge  of  the
"  Housatonic"  when  that  vessel  was  destroyed  by  a
submarine  torpedo  near  Charleston  on  17  Feb.,
18G5.  When  he  had  recovered  from  his  wounds  he
took  command  of  the  "  Vanderbilt,"  and  in  1865
he  was  ordered  to  Portsmouth  navy-yard.  He  was
placed  on  the  retired  list  on  1  Feb.,  1867,  and
made  commodore  on  8  Dec.  of  the  same  year.

PICKERING,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Newington.
N.  PI.,  22  Sept.,  1737:  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  11
April,  1805.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1761,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  and  was  a
member  of  the  New  Hampshire  constitutional  con-
vention. In  1787  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the
convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  but  he  declined  to  serve.  He  was
judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Hampshire  in
1790- '5,  and  at  one  time  chief  justice,  and  subse-
quently judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  for  New
Hampshire;  but  his  mind  became  impaired, and  he
was  removed  from  office  in  1804.  Dartmouth  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1792.

PICKERING.  Timothy,  statesman,  b,  in  Sa-
lem. Mass.,  17  July.  1745;  d.  there,  29  Jan.,  1829.
He  was  great-great-grandson  of  John  Pickering,
who  came  from  England  and  settled  in  Salem  in
1642.  Timothy  was  gniduated  at  Harvard  in  1763.
He  studied  law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1768,  but  practised  very  little,  and  never  attained
distinction  as  a  lawyer.  Pie  served  for  some  time  as
register  of  deeds  for  Essex  county,  and  at  the  same
time  showed  considerable  interest  in  military  stud-
ies. In  1766  he  was  commissioned  by  Gov.  Ber-
nard lieutenant  of  militia,  and  in  1775  was  elected
colonel,  which  office  he  held  until  after  he  had
joined  the  Continental  array. Twelve  days  after

TOL. V. —  1


PICKERING

his  election  be  witnessed  and  peacefully  resisted
Col.  Leslie's  expedition  to  Salem.  On  19  April  he
marched  at  the  head  of  300  men  to  cut  off  the  re-
treat of  the  British  from  Jjexington,  and  at  sunset
had  reached  Winter  Hill,  in  Somerville,  a  few  min-
utes after  the  British
had  passed  on  their
disorderly  retreat  to
Charlestown.  In  later
years  political  ene-
mies unfairly  twitted
him  for  failing  to  ef-
fect the  capture  of  the
whole  British  force  on
this  occasion.  In  the
course  of  that  year  he
published  a  small  vol-
ume, illustrated  with
copper-plate  engrav-
ings, entitled  "  An
Easy Plan  of Disci-

fline  for  a Militia."
t  was  a  useful  book,
and showed consid-


<^^^^/l^***Vi^-


erable  knowledge  of  the  military  art.  It  was
adopted  by  the  state  of  Massachusetts,  and  was
generally  used  in  the  Continental  army  until  su-

Eerseded  by  the  excellent  manual  prepared  by
laron  Steuben.  In  September,  1775,  Col.  Pickering
was  commissioned  justice  of  the  peace,  and  two
months  later  judge  of  the  maritime  court  for  the
counties  of  Suffolk,  Essex,  and  Middlesex."  In  May,
1776,  he  was  elected  representative  to  the  general
court.  On  24  Dec.  of  that  year  he  set  out  from
Salem,  at  the  head  of  the  l5ssex  regiment  of  700
men,  to  join  the  Continental  armv,  and  after  stop-

?ing  for  some  time,  under  Gen.  fleath's  orders,  at
arrytown,  reached  Morristown,  20  Feb.,  where  he
made  a  very  favorable  impression  upon  Washington.
The  office  of  adjutant-general  falling  vacant  by  the
resignation  of  Col.  Reed,  Washington  at  once  of-
fered it  to  Col.  Pickering,  who  at  fii*st  declined  the
appointment  because  he  did  not  consider  himself
fit  for  it  and  because  it  would  conflict  with  the
discharge  of  his  duty  in  the  place  that  he  already
held.  He  afterward  reconsidered  the  matter  and
resigned  all  his  civil  offices,  and  his  appointment
as  adjutant-general  was  announced,  18  June,  at
the  headquarters  of  the  army  at  Middlebrook.  He
then  expressed  an  opinion  that  the  war  would  not
and  ought  not  to  last  longer  than  a  year,  and  on
several  occasions  was  inclined  to  criticise  impa-


PICKERING


PICKERING


tiently  the  superb  self-restraint  and  caution  of
Washington,  but  for  which  the  war  would  doubt-
less have  ended  that  year  in  the  overthrow  of  the
American  cause.  Col.  Pickering  was  present  at
the  battles  of  the  Brandywine  and  Gerinantown,
and  was  elected,  7  Nov.,  a  member  of  the  newly
created  board  of  war.  On  5  Aug.,  1780,  he  was
appointed  quartermaster-general  of  the  army,  in
place  of  Gen.  Greene,  who  had  just  resigned.  He
joined  the  army  at  Peekskill,  27  June,  1781,  took
part  in  the  march  to  Virginia,  and  was  present  at
the  surrender  of  Cornwallis,  of  which  he  gives  an
interesting  account  in  his  journal.  The  tact  that
there  was  no  detention  in  the  course  of  Washing-
ton's wonderful  march  from  Hudson  river  to  Chesa-
peake bay  shows  with  what  consummate  skill  the
quartermaster's  department  was  managed.  At
every  point  the  different  columns  found  the  needed
supplies  and  means  of  transportation  in  readiness.
For  such  a  triumph  of  logistics  great  credit  is  due
to  Col.  Pickering.  He  retained  the  office  of  quar-
termaster-general until  it  was  abolished,  28  July,
1785.  He  made  himself  conspicuous,  along  with
Alexander  Hamilton  and  Patrick  Henry,  in  oppos-
ing the  harsh  and  short-sighted  vindictive  meas-
ures that  drove  so  many  Tories  from  the  country,
to  settle  in  Nova  Scotia  and  Upper  Canada.

On  leaving  the  army  in  1785,  he  went  into  business
in  Philadelphia  as  a  commission  merchant  in  part-
nership with  Maj.  Samuel  Hodgdon,  but  he  did
not  find  this  a  congenial  occupation.  He  was  as-
sured that  if  he  were  to  return  to  Massachusetts
he  would  be  appointed  associate  justice  of  the  su-
preme court  of  that  state,  but  he  refused  to  enter-
tain the  suggestion,  because  he  distrusted  his  fit-
ness for  that  office.  He  preferred  to  remove  with
his  family,  to  some  new  settlement  on  the  frontier,
and,  with  some  such  end  in  view,  had  already  pur-
chased extensive  tracts  of  unoccupied  land  in
western  Pennsylvania  and  Virginia  and  in  the  val-
ley of  the  Ohio.  In  1787  he  settled  in  Wyoming,
and  there  became  involved  in  the  disturbances  at-
tendant upon  the  arrest  and  imprisonment  of  John
Franklin,  leader  of  the  insurgent  Connecticut  set-
tlers. Col.  Pickering's  house  was  attacked  by
rioters,  and  he  would  have  been  seized  as  a  hostage
for  Franklin  iiad  he  not  escaped  into  the  woods
and  thereupon  made  his  way  to  Philadelphia,  where
he  was  chosen  member  of  the  convention  for  rati-
fying the  new  constitution  of  the  United  States.
After  his  return  to  Wyoming,  toward  the  end  of
June,  1788,  Col.  Pickering  was  taken  from  his  bed
at  midnight  by  a  gang  of  masked  men  and  carried
off  into  the  forest.  His  captors  kept  him  prisoner
for  three  weeks,  and  tried  to  prevail  upon  him  to
write  to  the  executive  council  of  the  state  and  have
P'ranklin  set  at  liberty.  When  they  found  their
threats  unavailing,  and  learned  that  militia  were
pursuing  them,  they  lost  heart,  and  were  glad  to
compound  with  Col.  Pickering  and  set  him  free
on  condition  that  he  would  intercede  for  them.
This  affair,  the  incidents  of  which  are  full  of  ro-
mantic interest,  marked  the  close  of  thirty  years  of
turbulence  in  the  vale  of  Wyoming.  By  the  end
of  1788  complete  order  was  maintainecl,  largely
through  the  firmness  and  energy  of  Col.  Pickering.
In  1789  he  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that
framed  the  new  constitution  of  Pennsylvania.  This
body  did  not  finish  its  work  till  2  Sept.  1790,  and
the  very  next  day  President  Washington  sent  Col.
Pickering  on  a  mission  to  the  Seneca  Indians,  who
had  been  incensed  by  the  murder  of  two  of  their
tribe  by  white  men  at  Pine  Creek,  Pa.  The  mission
ended  in  July,  1791.  in  the  successful  negotiation
of  a  very  important  treaty  between  the  United


States  and  the  Six  Nations.  Col,  Pickering  was
appointed  postmaster-general,  14  Aug.,  1791,  and
held  that  office  till  1795.  In  the  mean  time  was
waged  the  great  war  with  the  Indians  of  the  North-
western territory,  and  Col.  Pickering  was  called
upon  several  times  to  negotiate  with  the  chiefs  of
the  Six  Nations  and  keep  up  the  alliance  with  them.
He  knew  how  to  make  himself  liked  and  respected
by  the  red  men,  and  in  these  delicate  missions  was-
eminently  successful.  On  the  resignation  of  Knox
he  was  appointed  secretary  of  war,  2  Jan.,  1795.
The  department  then  included  Indian  affairs,  since
transferred  to  the  department  of  the  interior.  It
also  included  the  administration  of  the  navy.  Id
these  capacities  Col.  Pickering  was  instrumental  in
founding  the  military  school  at  West  Point,  as
well  as  in  superintending  the  building  of  the  three
noble  frigates  "  Constitution,"  "  United  States,"^
and  "  Constellation,"  that  were  by  and  by  to  win
imperishable  renown.  On  the  resignation  of  Ran-
dolph in  the  autumn  of  1795,  Col.  Pickering  for  &
while  acted  as  secretary  of  state,  and  after  three
months  was  appointed  to  that  office.  He  continued
as  secretary  of  state,  under  the  administration  of
John  Adams,  until  the  difficulties  with  France,
growing  out  of  the  X.  Y.  Z.  papers,  had  reached  a.
crisis  and  led  to  a  serious  disagreement  between
Mr.  Adams  and  his  cabinet.  (See  Adams,  John.)
Then  Col.  Pickering  was  dismissed  from  office,  12-
May,  1800.

I^rom  the  department  of  state  to  a  log-cabin
on  the  frontier  was  a  great  change  indeed.  CoL
Pickering  spent  the  summer  and  autumn  with
his  son  Henry  and  a  few  hired  men  in  clearing  &
farm  in  what  is  now  Susquehanna  county,  near  the
northeastern  corner  of  Pennsylvania,  tie  had  al-
ways been  poor,  and  was  now  embarrassed  with
debt.  To  relieve  him  of  this  burden,  several  citi-
zens of  Boston  subscribed  f 25,000,  and  purchased
from  him  some  of  his  tracts  of  unoccupied  land.
After  payment  of  his  debts,  the  balance  in  cash  was
$14,055.35,  and  being  thus  placed  "in  comfortable
circumstances  he  was  prevailed  upon  to  return  to
Massachusetts,  where  he  settled  iipon  a  modest
farm,  which  he  hired,  in  Danvers.  In  1802  he  wa&
appointed  chief  justice  of  common  pleas,  and  was  a
candidate  for  congress  for  the  Essex  south  district,
but  Jacob  Crowninshield  was  elected  over  him.
The  next  year  Col.  Pickering  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  to  fill  the  vacancy  left  by  Dwight  Fos-
ter's resignation.  In  1804  he  was  elected  to  the
senate  for  six  years,  and  became  conspicuous
among  the  leaders  of  the  extreme  Federalists.  He
disapproved  of  the  Louisiana  purchase,  and  after-
ward made  himself  very  unpopular  in  a  large  part
of  the  country  by  his  energetic  opposition  to-  the
embargo.  In  1809  he  was  hanged  in  effigy  by  a
mob  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  the  following  year  an
infamous  attempt  was  made  to  charge  him  with
embezzlement  of  public  funds,  but  the  charge  was
too  absurd  to  gain  credence.  In  1811  he  was  for-
mally censured  by  the  senate  for  a  technical  viola-
tion of  the  rules  in  reading  certain  documents
communicated  by  the  president  before  the  injunc-
tion of  secrecy ;  but  as  this  measure  was  too  plainly
prompted  by  vindictiveness,  it  failed  to  injure  him.
In  1812,  having  faile^  of  a  re-election  to  the  sen-
ate, he  retired  to  the  farm  he  had  purchased  some
time  before  in  Wenham,  Mass. ;  but  he  was  to  return
to  Washington  sooner  than  he  expected.  In  the
November  election  he  was  chosen  a  member  of
congress  by  an  overwhelming  majority.  To  this
office  he  was  again  elected  in  1814,  and  would  have
been  elected  a  third  time  had  he  not  declined  a
renomination. During  1817  he  was  member  of


PICKERING


PICKERING


8


the  executive  council  of  Massachusetts,  his  last
public  office.  The  last  years  of  his  life  were  !<|>eiit
in  SaU'in,  with  frequent  visits  to  the  WcMihiini  farm.
On  Sunday.  4  Jan.,  1)^29,  sitting  in  an  ill-warnicd
church,  he  caught  the  cold  of  which  he  dictl.  The
section  of  the  Fetleralist  jmrty  to  which  Col.  Pick-
ering belonged  was  led  by  a  ^roup  of  men  known
as  the  "  Essex  Junto,"  comprising  Parsons,  Cabot,
Sedgwick,  H.  G.  Otis,  and  the  Lowells,  of  Massa-
chusetts, with  Griswold  and  Reeve,  of  Connecticut.
In  1804,  and  again  in  1809,  the  question  of  a  disso-
lution of  the  Union  and  the  formation  of  a  sepa-
rate Eiustern  confederacy  was  seriously  discussed
by  thes(>  Federalist  leaders,  and  in  1814  thqy  were
foremost  in  the  proceedings  that  led  to  the  Hart-
ford convention.  Attempts  to  call  such  a  conven-
tion had  been  made  in  1808  and  1812.  The  designs
of  the  convention  were  not  clearly  understood,  but
the  suspicion  of  disunion  tendencies  that  clung  to
it  sufflced  to  complete  the  ruin  of  the  Federalist
partv,  which  did  not  survive  the  election  of  1816.
In  the  work  of  the  conventionists  of  1814  Col.
Pickering  took  no  direct  part,  and  he  was  not  pres-
ent at  Hartford.  Col.  Pickering  married,  8  April,
1770,  Rebecca  White,  who  was  born  in  Bristol,
England,  18  July,  1754,  and  died  in  Salem,  14
Aug.,  1828.  Their  wedded  life  was  extremely  hap-
py. Col.  Pickering's  biography,  with  copious  ex-
tracts from  his  correspondence,  was  begun  by  his
son,  Octavius  Pickering — "  Life  of  Timothy  Picker-
ing "  (vol.  i.,  Boston,  1867) — and  after  the  death  of
the  latter,  was  finished  by  Charles  W.  Upham
(vols.  ii.-iv.,  1873).  See  also  Adams's  "  Documents
relating  to  New  England  Federalism "  (Boston,
1877)  and  Schouler's  "History  of  the  United
States  "  (vols.  i.  and  ii.,  Washington,  1882). — Timo-
thy's eldest  son,  John,  philologist,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  7  Feb.,  1777;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  5  May,
1846,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1796,  and  then
studied  law  with  Edward  Tilghman  in  Philadel-
phia. In  1797  he  became  secretary  to  William
Smith,  on  the  appointment  of  the  latter  as  U.  S.  min-
ister to  Portugal,  and  two  years  later  he  became  pri-
vate secretary  to  Rufus  King,  then  minister  to  Great
Britain.  He  returned  to  Salem  in  1801,  resumed
his  legal  studies,  and,  after  being  admitted  to  the
bar,  practised  in  Salem  until  1827.  Mr.  Pickering
then  removed  to  Boston,  and  was  appointed  city
solicitor,  which  office  he  held  until  shortly  before
his  death.  Notwithstanding  his  large  practice,
he  also  devoted  his  attention  to  politics.  He  was
three  times  in  the  lower  house  of  the  legislature,
twice  a  state  senator  from  Essex  county  and  once
from  Suffolk  county,  and  a  member  of  the  execu-
tive council.  In  1833  he  served  on  the  commission
for  revising  and  arranging  the  statutes  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  the  part  that  is  entitled  "  Of  the  In-
ternal Administration  of  Government "  was  pre-
Eared  by  him.  Mr.  Pickering  became  celebrated
y  his  philological  studies,  which  gained  for  him
the  reputation  of  being  the  chief  founder  of  Ameri-
can comparative  philology.  These  he  began  as  a
young  man,  when  he  accompanied  his  father  on
visits  to  the  Six  Nations  of  central  New  York,  and
as  he  grew  older  they  increased  by  his  study  abroad
until,  according  to  Charles  Sumner,  he  was  famil-
iar with  the  English,  French,  Portuguese,  Italian,
Spanish,  German.  Romaic,  Greek,  and  Latin  lan-
guages ;  less  familiar,  but  acquainted,  with  Dutch,
Swedish,  Danish,  and  Hebrew,  and  had  explored,
with  various  degrees  of  care,  Arabic,  Turkish,
Syriac,  Persian,  Coptic,  Sanscrit,  Chinese,  Cochin-
Chinese,  Russian.  Egyptian  hieroglvphics,  Malay
in  several  dialects,  and  particularly  the  Indian
languages  of  America  and  the  Polynesian  islands.


With  this  great  knowledge  at  his  command,  he
early  used  it  in  the  preparation  of  valuable  articles
in  reviews,  transactions  of  learne<l  WK-ieties,  and
encycloptt'dias.  Among  these  are  "On  the  Adop-
tion of  a  Uniform  Orthography  for  the  Indian  Lan-
guages of  North  America  (1820);  "  Remarks  on
the  Indian  Languages  of  North  America"  (1836);
and  "  Memoir  on  the  Language  and  Inhabitants  of
Lord  North's  Island  "  (1845) ;  also,  in  book-form,
*'  A  Vocabulary  or  Collection  of  Words  and  Phra.ses
which  have  been  SupfX)sed  to  be  Peculiar  to  the
United  States  of  America"  (Boston,  1816).  and
"  A  Comprehensive  Dictionary  of  the  Greek  Lan-
guage" (1826).  The  latter  passed  through  numer-
ous editions  at  home  and  was  reprinted  aoroad.  In
1806  he  was  elected  Hancock  professor  of  Hebrew
in  Harvard,  and  later  was  invited  to  fill  the  chair
of  Greek  literature  in  that  universitv,  both  of
which  appointments  he  declined,  as  well  as  that  of
provost  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He
was  an  active  member  of  the  board  of  overseers  of
Harvard  from  1818  till  1824.  and  received  the  de-

free  of  LL.  D.  from  Bowdoin  in  1822,  and  from
larvard  in  1835.  Mr,  Pickering  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  American  oriental  society  and  its
president  until  his  death,  also  president  of  the
American  academy  of  arts  ana  sciences,  and  a
member  of  various  learned  societies  both  at  home
and  abroad.  Besides  the  works  mentioned  above,
he  was  the  author  of  various  legal  articles,  among
which  are  "  The  Agrarian  Laws,  "  Egyptian  Juris-
prudence," "  Lecture  on  the  Alleged  Uncertainty
of  Law,"  and  "  Review  of  the  International  Mc-
Leod  Question  "  (1825).  See  "Life  of  John  Pick-
ering," by  his  daughter,  Mary  Ome  Pickering  (Bos-
ton, 1887). — Timothy's  third  son,  Henry,  poet,  b.
in  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  8  Oct.,  1781 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  8  May,  1831,  was  born  in  the  historic  Has-
brouck  house,  better  known  as  Washington's  head-
quarters, while  his  father  was  with  Washington  at
tne  siege  of  Yorktown.  He  accompanied  the  fam-
ily to  Boston  in  1801,  and  engaged  in  business  in
Salem,  acquiring  in  a  few  years  a  moderate  for-
tune, from  which  he  contributed  largely  to  the
support  of  his  father's  family  and  to  the  education
of  its  younger  members.  In  consequence  of  losses,
he  removed  to  New  York  in  1825,  and  endeavored
to  retrieve  his  fortune,  but  without  success.  He
then  resided  at  Rondout  and  other  places  along
the  Hudson,  where  he  devoted  his  leisure  to  read-
ing, and  writing  poetry.  His  writings  appeared  in
the  "Evening  Post,"  and  include  "Ruins  of  Pffs-
tum  "  (Salem,  1822) ;  "  Athens,  and  other  Poems  "
(1824):  "Poems"  (1830);  and  "The  Buckwheat
Cake"  (1831).— Another  son  of  Timothy,  Octa-
yius,  lawyer,  b.  in  Wyoming,  Pa.,  2  Sept.,  1791 ;
d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  29  Oct.,  1868,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1810,  and  then  studied  law  with  his
brother,  John  Pickering.  In  March,  1816.  he  was
atlmitted  to  the  bar  of  Suffolk  county,  and  opened
an  office  in  Boston.  He  assisted  in  reporting  the
debates  and  proceedings  of  the  Massachusetts  con-
stitutional convention  of  1820.  In  1822-'40  he
was  reporter  of  the  supreme  court  of  Massachu-
setts. During  these  years  he  prepared  the  "  Re-
ports of  Cases  in  the  Supreme  Judicial  Court  of
Massachusetts  "  (24  vols.,  Boston,  1822-*40).  On
retiring  from  office  he  visited  Europe  and  spent
seven  years  in  England  and  on  the  continent.  He
took  an  active  interest  in  natural  history,  was  a
fellow  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sci-
ences, and  one  of  the  founders,  in  December,  1814,
of  the  New  England  society  for  the  promotion  of
natural  history,  which  subsequentiv  became  the
Linna>an  society  of  New  England,  anil  out  of  which


PICKERING


PICKETT


has  grown  the  Boston  society  of  natural  history.
His  literary  work  included,  besides  various  legal
i>ai>crs,  "  A  Hept)rt  of  the  Trial  by  Impeachment  of
James  Prescott"  with  William  H.  Gardiner  (Bos-
ton, 1821),  and  he  prepared  the  first  volume  of
the  "  Life  of  Timothy  Pickering  by  his  Son  "  (4
vols.,  1867-73).  of  which  the  remaining  volumes
were  issued  by  Charles  W.  Upham.— Timothy's
grandson,  Charles,  physician,  b.  in  Susquehanna
county.  Pa.,  10  Nov.,  1805;  d,  in  Boston,  Mass.,  17
March,  1878,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1823,
and  at  its  medical  dejiartment  in  182G,  after  which
he  si'ttk'(l  in  the  jtnK-tice  of  his  profession  in  Phila-
delphia. Meanwhile  he  developed  interest  in  natu-
ral history  and  became  a  member  of  tlie  Philadel-
phia acjulemy  of  natural  sciences,  to  whose  trans-
actions he  contributed  valuable  panei^.  In  1838-'42
he  was  naturalist  to  the  U.  S.  exploring  expedition
under  Capt.  Charles  Wilkes.  On  his  return  he
was  a  year  in  Washington,  and  then  visited  east-
ern Africa,  travelling  from  Egypt  to  Zanzibar,  and
thence  to  India  for  the  purpose  of  more  thoroughly
studving  the  juM>ple  of  tliose  parts  of  the  world  that
had  not  been  visited  by  the  expedition.  Nearly
two  years  were  occupied  in  these  researches,  after
whicli  he  devoted  himself  to  the  preparation  of
"The  Races  of  Man  and  their  Geographical  Dis-
tribution "  (Boston,  1848),  which  forms  the  ninth
volume  of  the  "  Reports  of  the  U.  S.  Exploring
ExiJcdition,"  and  was  republished  in  "  Bonn's  Il-
lustrated Library"  (London,  1850).  This  he  fol-
lowed N\  ith  his  "  (ieographieal  Distribution  of  Ani-
mals and  Man  "  (1854)  and  "  Geographical  Dis-
tribution of  Plants"  (1801).  Dr.  Pickering  was  a
member  of  the  American  oriental  society,  the
American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society,  and  other  learned  bodies,
to  wnose  proceedings  he  contributed.  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  left  in  manuscript  "Chronological
History  of  Plants:  Man's  Record  of  his  own  Ex-
istence illustrated  through  their  Names,  Uses,  and
Companionship"  (Boston,  1879). — Timothy'sgreat-
gmndson.  Edward  Charles,  astronomer,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass..  19  July,  184G,  was  graduated  in  the
civil  engineering  course  at  tlie  Lawrence  scientific
school  of  Harvard  in  1865.  During  the  following
year  he  was  called  to  the  Massachusetts  institute  of
technology  as  assistant  instructor  of  physics,  of
which  branch  he  held  the  full  professorship  from
1868  till  1877.  Prof.  Pickering  devised  plans  for
the  physical  laboratory  of  the  institute,  and  in-
troduced the  experimental  method  of  teaching
phvsics  at  a  time  when  that  mode  of  instruction
had  not  been  adopted  elsewhere.  His  scientific
work  during  these  years  consisted  largely  of  re-
searches in  physics,  notably  investigations  on  the
polarization  of  light  and  the  laws  of  its  reflection
and  dispersion.  He  also  described  a  new  form
of  spectrum  telescope,  and  invented  in  1870  a  tele-
phone-receiver, which  he  publicly  exhibited.  He
observed  the  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  on  7  Aug.,
1869,  with  the  party  that  was  sent  out  by  the  Nau-
tical almanac  oflice,  at  Mount  Pleasant,' Iowa,  and
was  a  memlier  of  the  U.  S.  coast  survey  expedition
to  Xeres,  Spain,  to  observe  that  of  22  Dec,  1870,
having  on  that  occasion  charge  of  the  polariscope.
In  1876  he  was  appointed  professor  of  astronomy  and
geodesy,  and  director  of  the  observatory  at  Har-
vard, and  under  his  management  this  observatory
has  liecome  one  of  the  foremost  in  the  United
States.  More  than  twenty  assistants  now  take  part
in  investigations  under  his  direction,  and  the  in-
vested funds  of  the  observatory  have  increased  from
$176,000  to  1654.000  during  his  administration.
His  principal  work  since  he  accepted  this  appoint-


ment has  been  the  determination  of  the  relative
brightness  of  the  stars,  which  is  accomplished  by
means  of  a  meridian  photometer,  an  instrument
which  has  been  specially  devised  for  this  purpose,
and  he  has  prepared  a  catalogue  giving  the  bright-
ness of  over  4,000  stars.  Since  1878  he  has  also
made  photometric  measurements  of  Jupiter's  satel-
lites while  they  are  undergoing  eclipse,  and  of  the
satellites  of  Mars  and  other  very  faint  objects.  On
the  death  of  Henry  Draper  (q.  v.)  his  widow  requested
Prof.  Pickering  to  continue  important  researches
on  the  application  of  photography  to  astronomy,
!is  a  Henry  Draper  memorial,  and  the  study  of  the
spectra  of  the  stars  by  photography  has  thus  been
undertaken  on  a  scale  that  was  never  before  at-
tempted. A  fund  of  $250,000,  left  by  Uriah  A,
Boyden  (q.  v.)  to  the  observatory,  has  been  utilized
for  the  special  study  of  the  advantages  of  veiy  ele-
vated observing  stations.  Prof.  Pickering  has  also
devoted  attention  to  such  subjects  as  mountain-
surveying,  the  height  and  velocity  of  clouds,  pa-
pers on  which  he  has  contributed  to  the  Appala-
chian club,  of  which  he  was  president  in  1877,  and
again  in  1882.  He  is  an  associate  of  the  Royal
astronomical  society  of  London,  from  which  in  1886
he  received  its  gold  medal  for  photometric  research-
es, and,  besides  membership  in  other  scientific  so-
cieties in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  he  was
elected  in  1873  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences,
by  which  body  he  was  further  honored  in  1887  with
tiie  award  of  the  Henry  Draper  medal  for  his  work
on  astronomical  physics.  In  1876  he  was  elected  a
vice-president  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science,  and  presented  his  retiring
address  before  the  section  of  mathematics  and
physics  at  the  Nashville  meeting.  In  addition  to
his  many  papers,  which  number  about  100,  he  pre-

gired  annual  "  Reports  on  the  Department  of
hysics  "  for  the  Massachusetts  institute  of  tech-
nology, and  the  "  Annual  Reports  of  the  Director
of  the  Astronomical  Observatory,"  likewise  editing
the  "  Annals  of  the  Astronomical  Observatory  of
Harvard  College."  He  has  also  edited,  with  notes,
"  The  Theory  of  Color  in  its  Relations  to  Art  and
Art  Industry,"  by  Dr.  William  von  Bezold  (Bos-
ton, 187G),  and  he  is  the  author  of  "  Elements  of
Physical  Manipulation "  (2  parts,  Boston,  1873-6).
— Edward  Charles's  brother.  William  Henry,
astronomer,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  15  Feb.,  1858,
was  graduated  at  the  Massachusetts  institute  of
technology  in  1879,  and  in  1880-7  was  instructor
of  physics  in  that  institution.  In  March,  1887,
he  was  called  to  the  charge  of  the  Boyden  depart-
ment of  the  Harvard  observatory,  which  place  he
still  fills.  He  founded  in  1882,  in  connection  with
the  Institute  of  technology,  the  first  regular  labo-
ratory where  dry-plate  photography  was  systemat-
ically taught  to  numerous  pupils.  Mr.  Pickering
observed  the  solar  eclipse  of  1878  from  Colorado,
and  in  1886  conducted  an  expedition  to  the  West
Indies  to  observe  the  total  eclipse  of  that  year.  In
1887  he  led  an  expedition  to  Colorado  to  make  as-
tronomical observation^  for  the  purpose  of  select-
ing the  most  suitable  site  for  an  astronomical  ob-
servatory. In  addition  to  various  articles  on  pho-
tography in  technical  periodicals,  and  the  transac-
tions of  the  American  academy,  he  has  published
"Walking  Guide  to  the  Mount  Washington
Range  "  (Boston,  1882).

PICKETT,  Albert  James,  historian,  b.  in  An-
son county,  N.  C,  13  Aug.,  1810;  d.  in  Montgom-
ery, Ala.,  28  Oct.,  1858.  He  removed  with  his
father  to  Autauga  county,  Ala,,  in  1818,  and  stud-
ied law,  but  never  practised  his  profession,  devot-
ing his  life  to  literary  pursuits  and  to  the  care  of


PICKETT


PICQUET


his  plantation.  He  served  in  the  Creek  war  in
1830.  He  was  the  author  of  a  "History  of  Ala-
bama" (3  vols.,  Charleston,  1851),  and  at  the  time
of  his  death  was  preparing  a  comprehensive  his-
tory of  the  southwest.  See  "Brief  Biographical
Sketch  of  Col.  Albert  J.  Pickett,"  by  Crawford  M.
Jackson  (Montgomerv,  1859).

PICKETT,  George  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Rich-
mond, Va.,  25  Jan.,  1825 ;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  30  July,
1875. His  father  was  a  resident  of  Henrico  county,
Va, The  son  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S."  military
academy  from  Hlinois,
and  graduated  in  1846.
He  served  in  the  war
with  Mexico,  was  made
2d  lieutenant  in  the  2d
infantry,  3  March,  1847,
was  at  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz  and  was  engaged
in  all  the  battles  that
preceded the assault
and  capture  of  the  city
of Mexico. He was
transferred  to  the  7th
infantry,  13  July,  1847,
-  and  to  the  8th  infantry,

./^J^  y.  .JL^  18  J"ly'  1847,  and  bre-
'^^Cyy^U^^UyCc'  vetted  1st  lieutenant,  8
Sept.,  1847,  for  gallant
and  meritorious  con-
duct at  Contrcras  and  Churubusco,  and  captain,
13  Sept.,  for  Chapultepec.  He  became  captain  in
the  9th  infantry.  3  March,  1855,  after  serving  in
garrisons  in  Texas  from  1849,  and  in  1856  he  was
on  frontier  duty  in  the  northwest  territory  at
Puget  sound.  Capt.  Pickett  was  ordered,  with
sixty  men,  to  occupy  San  Juan  island  then,  dur-
ing the  dispute  with  Great  Britain  over  the  north-
west boundary,  and  the  British  governor,  Sir
James  Douglas,  sent  three  vessels  of  war  to  eject
Pickett  from  his  position.  He  forbade  the  land-
ing of  troops  from  the  vessels,  under  the  threat
of  firing  upon  them,  and  an  actual  collision  was
prevented  only  by  the  timely  arrival  of  the  Brit-
ish admiral,  by  whose  order  the  issue  of  force
was  postponed.  For  his  conduct  on  this  occasion
Gen.  Harney  in  his  report  commended  Capt.  Pickett
"  for  the  cool  judgment,  ability,  and  gallantry  he
had  displayed,  and  the  legislature  of  Washington
territory  passed  resolutions  thanking  him  for  it.  He
resigned  from  the  army,  25  June.  1861,  and  after
great  difficulty  and  delays  reached  Virginia,  where
he  was  at  once  commissioned  colonel  in  the  state
forces  and  assigned  to  duty  on  Rappahannock  river.
In  February,  1862,  he  was  made  brigadier-general
in  Gen.  James  Longstreet's  division  of  the  Confed-
erate army  under  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  which
was  then  called  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  but  af-
terward became  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia.
His  brigade,  in  the  retreat  before  McClellan  up  the
peninsula  and  in  the  seven  days'  battles  around
Richmond,  won  such  a  reputation  that  it  was
known  as  "  the  game-cock  brigade."  At  the  battle
of  Gaines's  Mills,  27  June,  1862,  Pickett  was  severe-
ly wounded  in  the  shoulder,  and  he  did  not  rejoin
his  command  until  after  the  first  Maryland  cara-

Saign.  He  was  then  made  major-general,  with  a
ivision  that  was  composed  entirely  of  Virginians.
At  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg  this  division  held
the  centre  of  Lee's  line.  For  an  account  of  Pick-
ett's charge  at  Gettysburg,  3  July,  1863,  see  the
articles  Lee,  Robert  E.,  and  Meade,  George  G.
Pickett  was  afterward  placed  in  command  in  lower
Virginia  and  eastern  North  Carolina.  In  May,
1864,  he  defended  Petersburg  and  saved  it  from


surprise  and  capture  by  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler.
In  the  attack  on  Gen.  Butler's  forces  along  the  line
of  the  railroad  between  Richmond  and  Petersburg,
Pickett's  division  captured  the  works.  Gen.  Lee,
in  a  letter  of  thanks  and  congratulation,  dated  17
June,  said :  "  We  tried  very  hard  to  stop  Pickett's
men  from  capturing  the  breastworks  of  the  ene-
my, but  coulu  not  do  it."  At  Five  Forks  his  di-
vision received  the  brunt  of  the  National  attack,
and  was  entirely  disorganized.  After  the  war  Gen.
Pickett  returned  to  Richmond,  where  he  spent  the
remainder  of  his  life  in  the  life-insurance  Vjusiness.
His  biography  by  Edwartl  A.  Pollard  is  in  Pol-
lard's "  Life  and  Times  of  Robert  E.  Lee  and  his
Companions  in  Arms"  (New  York,  1871).  See  also
"  Pickett's  Men,"  by  Walter  Harrison  (1870).

PICKETT,  James  C,  commissioner  of  patents,
b.  in  Fauquier  countv,  Va.,  6  Feb.,  1793;  d.  in
Washington.  D.  C,  10  July,  1872.  He  removed
with  his  parents  to  Mason  county,  Ky.,  in  1796,
and  received  a  good  education.  He  became  3d
lieutenant  of  U.  S.  artillery  in  1813,  and  was  pro-
moted 2d  lieutenant  in  1814,  but  left  the  service  at
the  close  of  the  war  with  England.  He  served  again
as  deputy  quartermaster-general  from  1818  till  1821,
when  he  resigned,  returned  to  Mason  countv,  and
practised  law.  He  edited  the  "  Maysville  Eagle  "
in  1815,  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1822,
secretary  of  the  state  from  1825  till  1828,  and  secre-
tary of  legation  in  Colombia  from  1829  till  1833,
acting  part  of  the  time  as  charge  d'affaires.  He
was  commissioner  of  the  L^.  S.  patent-office  in  1835,
fourth  auditor  of  the  treasury  in  1835-'8,  minister
to  Ecuador  in  1838,  and  charge  d'affaires  in  Peru
from  1838  till  1845.  For  a  few  years  he  edited
"  The  Congressional  Globe  "  in  Washington,  D.  C.

PICKNELL,  WiUiam  Lamb,  artist,  b.  in
Hinesburg,  Vt.,  23  Oct.,  1854.  He  studied  under
George  Inness,  in  Rome,  in  1873-'5,  and  with  Ge-
rome,  in  Paris,  in  1875-'7.  Then  for  four  years
he  lived  and  worked  in  Brittany,  where  he  painted
under  Robert  Wylie,  but  in  1882  he  returned  to
the  United  States.  He  received  honorable  mention
at  the  Paris  salon  in  1880,  and  medals  in  Boston  in
1881  and  1884.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
Society  of  American  artists  in  1880,  and  of  the  So-
ciety of  British  artists  in  1884.  Among  his  works
are  "  Route  de  Conearneau  "  (1880) ;  "  On  the  Bor-
ders of  the  Marsh."  in  the  Academy  of  fine  arts,
Philadelphia  (1880);  "A  Stormy  "Day"  (1881);
"Coast  of  Ipswich,"  in  Boston  art" museum  (1882);
"Sunshine  and  Drifting  Sand"  (1883);  "  A  Sultn-
Day"  (1884);  "Wintry  March"  (1885);  "Bleak
December"  and  "After  the  Storm"  (1886);  and
"  November  Solitude  "  (1887).

PICQUET,  Francois,  French  missionary,  b.  in
Bourg  en  Bresse,  6  Dec,  1708;  d.  in  Verjon,  15
July,  1781.  He  was  the  son  of  poor  laborers,  but
by  his  intelligence  interested  the  vicar  of  his  par-
ish, who  sent  him  to  school.  He  was  employed  in
missionary  work  among  peasants  when  he  was
eighteen  years  old,  united  with  the  Congregation
of  St.  Sulpice  in  1729,  and,  after  being  ordained
priest,  was  sent  at  his  request  to  Canada.  He  ar-
rived in  Montreal  in  December,  1735,  and  fixed  his
residence  in  1737  among  the  Indians  near  Lake
Temiscaming,  founding  there  a  mission,  which
prospered  from  the  outset.  He  induced  the  Algon-
quins  and  Nipissings  to  swear  allegiance  to  the
king  of  France,  and,  being  much  impressed  with
the  strategical  position  of  Lake  Deux  Montagues,
he  induced  these  tribes  to  abandon  their  old  quar-
ters in  1740,  and  established  them  in  the  fertile
regions  around  the  lake,  thus  securing  Montreal
from  possible  invasion  from  the  north. He  re-


6


PICTON


PIDANSAT  DE  MAIROBERT


ceived  5,000  livres  from  Louis  XV„  and  employed
it  to  build  H  limestone  fortress,  which  wjis  afterward
of  great  value  to  the  colony  during  the  struggle
with  the  English.  He  then  induced  the  Indians  to
cultivate  the  s(iil,  kept  up  a  corresjKjndence  with
the  northern  anil  southern  tribes,  and  was  often
chosen  as  arltitrator  Ijetween  the  natives  and  the
colonial  authorities.  During  the  war  of  1742  he
armed  and  disciplined  the  Indians  of  his  mission,
and  did  good  service.  He  obtained  in  1749  from
Gov.  La  Galissonniere  permission  to  l)egin  a  new
settlement,  and  built  La  Presentation  (now  Kings-
ton). In  1758  he  was  summoned  to  Paris  by  the
secretary  of  the  navy  to  report  on  his  mission,  and
received  from  the  king  a  present  of  3,000  livres
and  some  books.  Returning  to  Canada  in  the
spring  of  1754,  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  fol-
lowing war,  twice  saved  Quelwc  from  invasion,  de-
stroyed the  English  forts  and  establishments  upon
the  southern  shores  of  Lake  Ontario,  also  partici-
pating in  the  defeat  of  Gen.  Braddock.  He
fought  under  Montcalm,  was  slightly  wounded  at
QuelK'c  in  1759,  and  after  the  surrender  of  that

[)la(;e  resolved  to  return  to  France,  as  the  English
lad  put  a  price  on  his  head.  Assuming  Indian
dress,  he  escaped  from  the  citv  during  a  stormy
night,  rejoined  his  Indians,  and,  crossing  northern
Cannda  and  Michigan,  went  by  way  of  Illinois  and
Mississi{)pi  rivers  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  arrived
in  the  spring  of  1700.  Being  detained  twenty-two
months  in  the  latter  city,  he  occupied  his  time  in
studying  the  natural  resources  of  the  country.  In
October,  1702,  he  landed  in  Bordeaux  after  a  dan-
gerous journcv,  in  which  the  vessel  wjis  twice
chased  by  English  cruisers.  The  assemblies  of  the
clergy  of  France  that  met  in  1765  and  1770  recom-
mended him  to  the  king  and  twice  voted  him  a
present  of  1,200  livres  for  his  labors  in  Canada.  In
1777  Pope  Pius  VI.  summoned  hira  to  Rome,  paid
the  exi>enses  of  his  journey,  gave  him  a  public
audience,  appointed  him  a  chamberlain,  and  made
him  a  present  of  5,000  livres.  Despite  these  high
recommendations,  Louis  XV.,  who  felt  that  the
loss  of  Canada  was  owing  to  his  neglect  of  the  best
interests  of  France,  disliked  everything  that  might
remind  him  of  his  former  possession,  and  refused
to  provide  for  Picquet,  who  died  in  great  poverty
at  the  house  of  his  sister,  a  peasant-woman  of  the
little  \  illage  of  Verjon.  1  he  ?]nglish,  who  had!
learned  to  fear  and  respect  him,  gave  him  the  sur-
name of  the  Great  Jesuit  of  the  West,  but  Picquet
had  never  any  connection  with  that  company,  of
which  he  was  even  an  opponent.  The  astronomer
Ijalande  wrote  an  account  of  Picquet's  life,  which
was  published  in  the"Lettres  edifiantes"  (Paris,
1786).  Picouet  published  "  Mt'moire  sur  I'etat  de
la  colonic  du  lac  des  Deux  Montagues"  (1754);
"  Memoire  sur  les  Algonquins  et  Xipissings "
(1754);  "Histoire  du  role  joue  par  les  Indiens  lors
de  rinva.sion  du  Canada  en  1756,"  which  was  writ-
ten at  the  suggestion  of  Pope  Pius  VI.  (1778);
and  "  Histoire  des  etablissements  de  la  foi  fondes
par  la  congregation  de  Saint  Sulpice  dans  la  Nou-
velle  France  du  Nord  ou  Canada^'  (2  vols.,  1780).

PICTON,  John  Moore  White,  physician,  b.  in
Woodbury,  N.  J.,  17  Nov.,  1804;  d.  in  ^ew  Orleans,
La.,  28  Oct.,  18.58.  His  father.  Rev.  Thomas  Pic-
ton,  was  chaplain  and  professor  of  geography,
history,  and  ethics  in  1818-25 in  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  the  son  was  graduated  in  1824.
He  was  jissigned  to  the  2d  artillery,  but  resigned
his  commission  in  March,  1832,  and  in  that  year
was  gnuluated  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania.  He  settled  in  New
Orleans,  where  he  practised  his  profession  for  thirty-


two  years,  acquiring  reputation  as  an  operator.  He
served  for  many  years  as  home  surgeon  in  the  Nevr
Orleans  charity  hospital,  and  was  president  of  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Louisiana.
He  was  a  founder  of  the  New  Orleans  school  of
medicine  in  1856,  in  which  he  was  professor  of  ob-
stetrics from  1856  till  1858.— His  cousin,  Thomas,
jounialist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  9  May,  1822 ;  d.
there,  20  Feb.,  1891,  entered  the  University  of
New  York,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1840.  After
studying  law  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843.
Several  years  later  he  visited  Europe,  and,  after
travelling  over  the  continent,  resided  in  the  envi-
rons of  Paris,  participating  in  the  Revolution  of
1848  as  an  officer  of  the  2d  legion  of  the  Banlieu.
Upon  his  return  to  New  York  he  began  the  publi-
cation of  "  The  Era"  in  1850  in  conjunction  with
Henry  W.  Herbert,  and  in  1851  he  became  one  of
the  editors  of  "  The  Sachem,"  afterward  entitled
the  "  True  American,"  a  vigorous  advocate  of  the
Associated  order  of  united  Americans.  A  little
later  he  edited  the  '*  True  National  Democrat,"  the
organ  of  the  Free-soilers.  On  the  reorganization
of  the  "  Sunday  Mercury "  he  became  one  of  its
editors,  and  contributed  to  the  paper  a  series  of
popular  stories  under  the  name  of  "Paul  Preston."
These  were  subsequently  published  in  book-form,
and  had  an  extensive  sale.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  raised  a  battalion,  which  was
consolidated  with  the  38th  New  York  regiment,
with  which  he  went  to  the  field.  During  the  reign
of  Maximilian  in  Mexico,  Mr.  Picton  was  employed
in  the  service  of  the  Liberals,  and  wrote  a  "  Defence
of  Liberal  Mexico,"  which  was  printed  for  distri-
bution among  the  statesmen  of  this  country.  Gen.
Rosecrans  remarked  that  this  publication  had
"  done  more  for  the  cause  of  Mexico  than  all  oth-
er external  influences  combined."  He  translated
some  of  the  best  modern  romances  from  the  French,
and  several  of  his  light  dramas  are  popular.  He
was  the  author  of  '*  Reminiscences  of  a  Sporting
•Journalist,"  issued  in  serial  form,  and,  besides  the
works  mentioned,  edited  "'  Frank  Forester's  Life
and  Writings"  (New  York,  1881).

PIDANSAT  DE  MAIROBERT,  Mathien
Francois,  French  author,  b.  in  Chaource,  Cham-
pagne, 20  Feb.,  1727;  d.  in  Paris,  29  March,  1779.
He  was  brought  up  in  the  house  of  Madame  Doub-
let de  Persan,  was  afterward  one  of  the  members
of  the  literary  society  that  held  meetings  there,
and  contributed  to  the  manuscript  journal  of  the
society,  which  was  utilized  afterward  in  the  prepa-
ration of  the  "  Memoires  secrets"  (1770).  Pidan-
sat  became  in  1760  royal  censor  for  new  publica-
tions, and  was  elected  an  associate  member  of  the
Academy  of  Caen,  but,  having  been  involved  in  the
noted  trial  of  Marquis  de  Brunoy,  he  fell  into  mel-
ancholy and  shot  himself.  He  published  many
works,  which  enjoyed  a  great  reputation  in  their
time.  Those  that  relate  to  this  country  are  the
most  curious,  as  the  author  had  access  to  secret
documents  that  were  afterward  lost  during  the
French  revolution.  They  include  "  Lettres  sur  les
veritables  limites  des  possessions  Anglaises  et
Frangaises  dans  I'Amerique  "  (Bale,  1755) ;  "  Re-
ponse  aux  ecrits  des  Anglais  sur  les  limites  de
rAmerique  Anglaise"  (Paris,  1755);  "Memoire
sur  I'etat  de  la  Compagnie  des  Indes  Occidentales  "
(Bale,  1756);  "Principes  sur  la  marine"  (Paris,
1775);  "Discussions  soramaires  sur  les  anciennes
limites  de  I'Arcadie"  (Bale,  1776);  "  Anedoctes
sur  Madame  la  Comtesse  de  Barry  "  (London,  1776) ;
"L'Observateur  Anglais"  (4  vols.,  Amsterdam,
1778-'9).  which  was  continued  after  his  death,  and
several  times  reprinted  under  the  title  "  L'Espion


"J  i.pp"  GllSr,  'I-


PIEPER


PIERCE


Anglais,"  and  many  memoirs  on  the  administra-
tion iiiul  commerce  of  the  French  colonies  in  both
Americas.

PIKPKR,  Franz  August  Otto,  clergyman,  b.
in  Carrvitz,  Poijieraiiia,  (lermany,  27  June,  1852.
He  received  his  preliiiiiuarv  training  at  the  Dom-
Gymnasium,  at  Colberg,  Pomerania.  After  his
settlement  in  this  country  he  was  graduated  at
Northwestern  university,  Watertown,  Wis.,  in  1872,
and  at  Conconlia  Lutheran  theological  seminary,
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1875.  In  the  same  year  he  was
ordained  to  the  ministry  at  Centreville,  Wis.,  where
he  remained  until  1878.  In  that  year  he  liecame
professor  of  theology  in  Concordia  seminary,  St.
Louis,  Mo.  This  post  he  held  until  June,  1887,
when  he  was  elected  president  of  the  institution.
He  is  a  frequent  contributor  to  denominational
periotlieals,  and  has  published  "  Das  Grundbekennt-
niss  dor  ev.-Lutherischen  Kircho,  mit  einer  ge-
schichtlic'hen  Einleitung  und  kurzen  erklSrenden
Aninorkungen  versehen"  (St.  Louis,  1880).

PIERCE,  Byron  Root,  soldier,  b.  in  East
Bloomfleld,  Ontario  co.,  N.  Y..  20  Sept.,  1829.  He
received  an  academical  education  at  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  and,  removing  to  Michigan,  early  became  in-
terested in  military  matters.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the  3d  Michigan  volun-
teers, and  was  commissioned  successively  captain,
major,  lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel  of  that  regi-
ment, which  served  throughout  the  war  with  the
Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  made  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  7  June,  1864,  brevetted  major-
general,  6  April,  1865,  and  mustered  out  of  the
service  on  24  Au^.  At  present  (1888)  he  is  comman-
dant of  the  Soldiers'  home  at  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.

FIERCE,  FrankHn,  fourteenth  president  of
the  United  States,  b.  in  Hillsborough,  N.  H.,  23
Nov.,  1804;  d.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  8  Oct.,  1869.
His  father,  Benjamin  Pierce  (b.  in  Chelmsford,
Mass.,  25  Dec,  1757;  d.  in  Hillsborough,  N.  H.,
1  April,  1839),  on  the  da^  of  the  battle  of  Lexing-
ton enlisted  in  the  patriot  army  and  served  until
its  disbandment  in  1784,  attaining  the  rank  of  cap-
tain and  brevet  major.  He  had  intense  political
convictions,  was  a  Republican  of  the  school  of
Jefiferson,  an  ardent  admirer  of  Jackson,  and  the
leader  of  his  party  in  New  Hampshire,  of  which  he
was  elected  governor  in  1827  and  1829.  He  was  a
farmer,  and  trained  his  children  in  his  own  simple
and  laborious  habits.  Discerning  signs  of  future
distinction  in  his  son  Franklin,  he  gave  him  an
academical  education  in  well-known  institutions  at
Hancock,  Francestown,  and  Exeter,  and  in  1820
sent  him  to  Bowdoin  college,  Brunswick,  Me.  His
college-mates  there  were  John  P.  Hale,  his  future

?olitical  rival,  Prof.  Calvin  E.  Stowe,  Sergeant  S.
'rentiss.  the  distinguished  orator,  Henry  W.  Long-
fellow, and  Nathaniel  Hawthorne,  his  future  biog-
rapher and  life-long  personal  friend.  His  ambition
was  then  of  a  martial  cast,  and  as  an  officer  in  a
company  of  college  students  he  enthusiastically  de-
voted himself  to  the  study  of  military  tactics.
This  was  one  reason  why  he  found  himself  at  the
foot  of  his  class  at  the  end  of  two  years  in  college.
Stung  by  a  sense  of  disgrace,  he  devotetl  the  two
remaining  years  to  hard  study,  and  when  he  was
Ifnwluated  in  1824  he  was  third  in  his  class.  While
m  college,  like  many  other  eminent  Americans,  he
taught  in  winter.  After  taking  his  degree  he  be-
gan the  study  of  law  at  Portsmouth,  in  the  office
of  Levi  Woodbury,  where  he  remained  about  a
year.  He  afterward  spent  two  years  in  the  law-
school  at  Northampton,  Mass.,  and  in  the  office
of  Judge  Edmund  Parker  at  Amherst,  N.  H.
In  1827  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  began


practice  in  his  native  town.  Soon  afterward  he
argued  his  first  jury  cause  in  the  court-hou.se  at
Amherst.  This  effort  (as  is  often  the  case  with  emi-
nent orators)  was  a  failure.  But  he  was  not  de-
spndent.  He  replied  to  the  sympathetic  expres-
sions of  a  friend:  "I  will  try  nine  hundred  and
ninety-nine  cases,  if  clients  continue  to  trust  me,
and  if  I  fail  just  as  I  have  to-day,  I  will  try  the
thousandth.  I  shall  live  to  argue  cases  in  this
court-house  in  a  manner  that  will  mortify  neither
myself  nor  my  friends."

\Vith  his  popular  (jualities  it  was  inevitable  that
he  should  talce  a  prominent  part  in  the  sharp  politi-
cal contests  of  his  native  state.  Ho  es|)oused  the
cause  of  Gen.  Jackson  with  ardor,  and  in  1829  was
elected  to  represent  his  native  town  in  the  legisla-
ture, where,  by  three  subsequent  elections,  he  served
four  years,  the  last  two  as  speaker,  for  which  office
he  received  three  fourths  of  all  the  votes  of  the
house.  In  1833  he  was  elected  to  represent  his  na-
tive district  in  the  lower  house  of  congress,  where
he  remained  four  years.  He  serve<l  on  the  judici-
ary and  other  important  committees,  but  di(l  not
participate  largely  in  the  debates.  That  could  not
be  expected  of  so  young  a  man  in  a  body  contain-
ing so  many  veteran  politicians  and  statesmen  who
had  already  acqiiired  a  national  reputation.  But
in  February,  1834,  he  made  a  vigorous  and  sensible
speech  against  the  Revolutionary  claims  bill,  con-
demning it  as  opening  the  door  to  fraud.  In  De-
cember, 1835,  he  spoke  and  voted  against  receiving
petitions  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  District
of  Columbia.  In  June,  1836,  he  spoke  against  a
bill  making  appropriations  for  the  military  academy
at  West  Point.  lie  contended  that  that  institution
was  aristocratic  in  its  tendencies,  that  a  profes-
sional soldiery  and  standing  armies  are  always
dangerous  to  the  liberties  of  the  people,  and  that
in  war  the  republic  must  rely  upon  her  citizen
militia.  His  experience  in  the  Mexican  war  after-
ward convinced  him  that  such  an  institution  is
necessary,  and  he  frankly  acknowledged  his  error.
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  while  in  congress
Mr.  Pierce  sustained  President  Jackson  in  opposing
the  so-called  internal  improvement  policy.  In
1837  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate.  He  was
the  youngest  member  of  that  lx)dy,  and  had  barely
arrived  at  the  legal  age  for  that  office  when  he  took
his  seat.  In  January,  1840,  he  spoke  upon  the
Indian  war  in  Florida,  defending  the  secretary  of
war  from  the  attacks  of  his  political  opjwnents.  In
December  of  the  same  year  he  advocated  and  carried
through  the  senate  a  bill  granting  a  pension  to  an
aged  woman  whose  husband,  Isaac  Davis,  hati  been
among  the  first  to  fall  at  Concord  bridge  on  19  April,
1775.  In  July,  1841,  he  spoke  against  the  fiscal
bank  bill,  and  in  favor  of  an  amendment  prohibit-
ing members  of  congress  from  borrowing  money  of
the  bank.  At  the  same  session  he  made  a  strong
speech  against  the  removal  of  government  officials
for  their  political  opinions,  in  violation  of  the
pledges  to  the  contrary  which  the  Whig  leaders
had  given  to  the  country  in  the  canvass  of  1840.
During  the  five  years  that  he  remained  in  the  sen-
ate it  numbered  among  its  members  Benton,  Bu-
chanan, Clay,  Calhoun,  Webster,  Woodbury,  and
Silas  Wright,  an  array  of  veteran  statesmen  and  in-
tellectual giants  who  IukI  long  Ix'en  party  leaders,
and  who  occupied  the  whole  field  of  debate.  Among
such  men  the  young,  modest,  and  comparatively
obscure  member  from  New  Hampshire  could  not,
with  what  his  biographer  calls  "  his  exquisite  sense
of  propriety,"  force  himself  into  a  conspicuous
position,  t'here  is  abundant  proof,  however,  that
ne  won  the  friendship  of  his  eminent  associates.


8


PIERCE


PIERCE


In  1843  he  resigned  his  seat  in  the  senate,  with
the  intention  of  permanently  withdrawing  from
public  life.  He  again  returned  to  the  practice  of
law,  settling  in  Concord,  N.  H..  whither  he  had  re-
movetl  his  family  in  18:^8,  and  where  he  ever  after-
ward resided.  In  1845  he  wjis  tendered  by  the
governor  of  New  Hampshire,  but  declined,  an  ap-
pointment to  the  U.  8.  senate  to  fill  the  vacancy
occasioned  by  the  appointment  of  Levi  Woodbury
to  the  U.  S.  supreme  bench.  He  also  declined  the
nomination  for  governor  tendered  to  him  by  the
Democratic  state  convention.  He  declined,  too,  an
appointment  to  the  oflice  of  U.  S.  attorney-general,
offered  to  him  in  1845  by  President  Polk,  by  a  letter
in  which  he  said  that  when  he  left  the  senate  he  did
so  '*  with  the  fixed  purpose  never  again  to  be  volun-
tarily separated  from  his  family  for  any  considerable
time',  except  at  the  call  of  his  country  in  time  of
war."  But  while  thus  evincing  his  determination
to  remain  in  private  life,  he  did  not  lose  his  interest
in  political  affairs.  In  the  councils  of  his  party  in
New  Hampshire  he  exercised  a  very  great  influence.
He  zealously  advocated  the  annexation  of  Texas,
declaring  that.  whUe  he  jircferred  it  free,  he  would
take  it  with  slaverv  rather  than  not  have  it  at  all.
When  John  P.  Hafe.  in  1845,  accepted  a  Democratic
renomination  to  congress,  in  a  letter  denouncing
annexation,  the  Democratic  loaders  called  another
convention,  which  repudiated  him  and  nominated
another  candidate.  Through  the  long  struggle
that  followed.  Pierce  led  the  Democrats  of  his  state
with  great  skill  and  unfaltering  courage,  though


not  always  to  success.  He  found  in  Hale  a  rival
worthy  of  his  steel.  A  debate  between  the  two
champions,  in  the  old  Xorth  church  at  Concord,
aroused  the  keenest  interest  throughout  the  state.
Each  party  was  satisfied  with  its  own  advocate ;
but  to  contend  against  the  rising  anti-slavery  senti-
ment of  the  north  was  a  hopeless  struggle.  The
stars  in  their  courses  fought  against  slavery.  Hale
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1840  by  a  coali-
tion of  Whigs  and  Free-soilers,  and  several  advo-
cates of  free-soil  principles  were  elected  to  congress
from  New  Hampshire  before  1850.

In  1846  the  war  with  Mexico  began,  and  New
Hami)shire  was  called  on  for  a  battalion  of  troops.
Pierce's  military  ardor  was  rekindled.  He  imme-
diately enrolled  himself  as  a  private  in  a  volunteer
company  that  was  organized  at  Concord,  enthu-
siastically began  studying  tactics  and  drilling  in
the  ranks,  and  was  soon  appointed  colonel  of  the
9th  regiment  of  infantry.  On  3  March,  1847,  he
received  from  President  Polk  the  commission  of
brigadier-general  in  the  volunteer  army.  On  27
March,  1847,  he  embarked  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  in
the  bark  "  Kepler,"  with  Col.  Ransom,  three  com-
panies of  the  9th  regiment  of  infantry,  and  the
officers  of  that  detachment,  arriving  at  Vera  Cruz
on  28  June.  Much  difficulty  was  experienced  in
procuring  mules  for  transportation,  and  the  brigade


was  detained  in  that  unhealthful  locality,  exposed
to  the  ravages  of  yellow  fever,  until  14  July,  when
it  began  its  march  to  join  the  main  army  under
Gen.  Winfield  Scott  at  Puebla.  The  junction  was
effected  (after  a  toilsome  march  and  several  en-
counters with  guerillas)  on  6  Aug.,  and  the  next
day  Gen.  Scott  began  his  advance  on  the  city  of
Mexico.  On  19  Aug.  the  battle  of  Contreras  was
fought.  The  Mexican  General  Valencia,  with  7,000
troops,  occupied  a  strongly  intrenched  camp.  Gen.
Scott's  plan  was  to  divert  the  attention  of  the
enemy  by  a  feigned  attack  on  his  front,  while  his
flank  could  be  turned  and  his  retreat  cut  off.  But
the  flanking  movement  being  much  delayed,  the
attack  in  front  (in  which  Gen.  Pierce  led  his  brigade)
became  a  desperate  struggle,  in  which  4,000  raw
recruits,  who  could  not  use  their  artillery,  fought
7,000  disciplined  soldiers,  strongly  intrenched  and
raining  round  shot  and  shells  upon  their  assailants.
To  reach  the  enemy,  the  Americans  who  attacked
in  front  were  obliged  to  cross  the  pedregal,  or  lava-
bed,  the  crater  of  an  extinct  volcano,  bristling  with
sharp,  jagged,  splintered  rocks,  which  afforded
shelter  to  the  Mexican  skirmishers.  Gen.  Pierce's
horse  stepped  into  a  cleft  between  two  rocks  and
fell,  breaking  his  own  leg  and  throwing  his  rider,
whose  knee  was  seriously  injured.  Though  suffer-
ing severely,  and  urged  by  the  surgeon  to  withdraw,
Gen.  Pierce  refused  to  leave  his  troops.  Mounting
the  horse  of  an  officer  who  had  just  been  mortally
wounded,  he  rode  forward  and  remained  in  the
saddle  until  eleven  o'clock  at  night.  The  next
morning  Gen.  Pierce  was  in  the  saddle  at  daylight,
but  the  enemy's  camp  was  stormed  in  the  rear  by
the  flanking  party,  and  those  of  its  defenders  who
escaped  death  or  capture  fled  in  confusion  toward
Churubusco,  where  Santa-Anna  had  concentrated
his  forces.  Though  Gen.  Pierce's  injuries  were
intensely  painful,  and  though  Gen.  Scott  advised
him  to  leave  the  field,  he  insisted  on  remaining.
His  brigade  and  that  of  Gen.  James  Shields,  in
obeying  an  order  to  make  a  detour  and  attack  the
eneiny  in  the  rear,  struck  the  Mexican  reserves,
by  whom  they  were  largely  outnumbered,  and  a
bloody  and  obstinate  struggle  followed.  By  this
diversion  Gens.  Worth  and  Pillow  were  enabled  to
carry  the  head  of  the  bridge  at  the  front,  and
relieve  Pierce  and  Shields  from  the  pressure  of
overwhelming  numbers.  In  the  advance  of  Pierce's
brigade  his  horse  was  unable  to  cross  a  ditch  or
ravine,  and  he  was  compelled  to  dismount  and  pro-
ceed on  foot.  Overcome  by  the  pain  of  his  injured
knee,  he  sank  to  the  ground,  unable  to  proceed,  but
refused  to  be  taken  from  the  field,  and  remained
under  fire  until  the  enemy  were  routed.  After
these  defeats,  Santa-Anna,  to  gain  time,  opened
negotiations  for  peace,  and  Gen.  Scott  appointed
Gen.  Pierce  one  of  the  commissioners  to  agree
upon  terms  of  armistice.  The  truce  lasted  a  fort-
night, when  Gen.  Scott,  discovering  Santa-Anna's
insincerity,  again  began  hostilities.  The  sanguinary
battles  of  Molino  del  Rey  and  Chapultepec  soon
followed,  on  14  Sept.,  1847,  the  city  of  Mexico  ca-
pitulated, and  the  war  was  virtually  over.  Though
Gen.  Pierce  had  little  opportunity  to  distinguish
himself  as  a  general  in  this  brief  war,  he  displayed
a  personal  bravery  and  a  regard  for  the  welfare  of
his  men  that  won  him  the  highest  credit.  He  also
gained  the  ardent  friendship  of  those  with  whom
he  came  in  contact,  and  that  friendship  did  much
for  his  future  elevation.  On  the  return  of  peace  in
December,  1847,  Gen.  Pierce  returned  to  his  home
and  to  the  practice  of  his  profession.  •  Soon  after
this  the  New  Hampshire  legislature  presented  him,
in  behalf  of  the  state,  with  a  fine  sword.


PIERCE


PIERCE


9


In  1850  Gen.  Pierce  was  elected  to  represent  the
city  of  Concord  in  a  constitutional  convention,  and
when  that  Ixnly  met  he  was  chosen  its  president  l»y
a  nearly  unanimous  vote.  Duriiig  its  session  he
made  strenuous  and  successful  efforts  to  procure
the  adoption  of  an  amendment  abolishing  the  relig-
ious test  that  made  none  but  Protestants  eligible
to  office.  But  that  amendment  failed  of  adoption
by  the  people,  though  practically  and  by  common
consent  the  restriction  was  disregarded.  From
1847  till  1852  Gen.  Pierce  was  arduously  engaged
in  his  profession.  As  an  advocate  he  was  never
surpa.ssed,  if  ever  equalled,  at  the  New  Hampshire
bar.  He  had  the  external  advantages  of  an  orator,
a  handsome,  expressive  face,  an  elegant  figure,
graceful  and  impressive  gesticulation,  and  a  clear,
musical  voice,  which  kmdled  the  blood  of  his
hearers  like  the  notes  of  a  trumpet,  or  melted  them
to  tears  by  its  pathos.  His  manner  hatl  a  courtesy
that  sprang  from  the  kindness  of  his  heart  and
contributed  much  to  his  political  and  professional
success.  His  perceptions  were  keen,  and  his  mind
seized  at  once  the  vital  points  of  a  case,  while  his
rea<ly  command  of  language  enabled  him  to  present
them  to  an  audience  so  clearly  that  they  could  not
be  misunderstood.  He  had  an  intuitive  knowledge
of  human  nature,  and  the  numerous  illustrations
that  he  drew  from  the  daily  lives  of  his  strong-
minded  auditoi"s  made  his  speeches  doubly  effective.
He  was  not  a  diligent  student,  nor  a  reader  of
many  books,  yet  the  keenness  of  his  intellect  and
his  natural  capacity  for  reasoning  often  enabled
him,  with  but  little  preparation,  to  argue  success-
fully intricate  questions  of  law.

The  masses  of  the  Democratic  party  in  the  free
states  so  strongly  favored  the  exclusion  of  slavery
from  the  territory  ceded  by  Mexico  that  their  leaders
were  compelled  to  yield,  and  from  1847  till  1850  their
resolutions  and  platforms  advocated  free-soil  prin-
ciples. This  was  especially  the  case  in  New  Hamp-
shire, and  even  Gen.  Pierce's  great  popularity  could
not  stem  the  tide.  But  in  1850  the  passage  of
the  so-called  '*  compromise  measures  "  by  congress,
the  chief  of  which  were  the  fugitive-slave  law  and
the  admission  of  California  as  a  free  state,  raised  a
new  issue.  Adherence  to  those  measures  became
to  a  great  extent  a  test  of  party  fidelity  in  both
the  Whig  and  Democratic  parties.  Gen.  Pierce
zealously  championed  them  in  New  Hampshire,
and  at  a  dinner  given  to  him  and  other  personal
friends  by  Daniel  Webster  at  his  farm-house  in
Franklin.  N.  H.,  Pierce,  in  an  eloquent  speech,
assured  the  great  Whig  statesman  that  if  his  own
party  rejected  him  for  his  7th  of  March  speech,  the
Democracy  would  "  lift  him  so  high  that  his  feet
would  not  touch  the  stars."  Finally  the  masses  of
both  the  great  parties  gave  to  the  compromise  meas-
ures a  sullen  acquiescence,  on  the  ground  that  they
were  a  final  settlement  of  the  slavery  question.
The  Democratic  national  convention  met  at  Balti-
more, 12  June,  1852.  After  thirty-five  ballotings
for  a  candidate  for  president,  in  which  Gen.  Pierce's
name  did  not  appear,  the  Virginia  delegation
brought  it  forward,  and  on  the  49th  ballot  he  was
nominated  by  2H2  votes  to  11  for  all  others.  James
Buchanan,  Stephen  A.  Douglas,  Lewis  Cass,  and
William  L.  Marey  were  his  chief  rivals.  Gen.  Win-
field  Scott,  the  Whig  candidate,  was  unsatisfactory
botli  to  the  north  and  to  the  south.  Webster  and
his  friends  leaned  towanl  Pierce,  and  in  the  elec-
tion in  November,  Scott  carried  only  Mair«achu-
setts,  Vermont.  Kentucky,  and  Tennessee,  with  42
votes,  while  Pierce  carried  all  the  other  states  with
254  votes.  The  Whig  party  had  received  its  death-
stroke,  and  dissolved.


In  his  inaugural  address.  4  March,  1853,  President
Pierce  maintained  the  constitutionality  of  slavery
and  the  fugitive-slave  law,  denounced  slavery  agi-
tation, and  hoped  that  "  no  sectional  or  ambitious  or
fanatical  excitement  might  again  threaten  the
durability  of  our  institutions,  or  obscure  the  light
of  our  prosperity."  On  7  March  he  announced  as
his  cabinet  William  L.  Marcy,  of  New  York,  secre-
tary of  state ;  James  Guthrie,  of  Kentucky,  secretary
of  the  treasury ;  Jefferson  Davis,  of  Mississippi,
secretary  of  war  ;  James  C.  Dobbin,  of  North  Caro-
lina, secretary  of  the  navy ;  Robert  McClellaTid.  of
Michigan,  secretary  of  the  interior  ;  James  Camp-
bell, of  Pennsylvania,  postmaster-general ;  and
Caleb  Cushing,  of  Massacnusetts,  attorney-general.
This  cabinet  wjis  one  of  eminent  ability,  and  is  the
only  one  in  our  history  that  remained  unchanged
for  four  years.  In  1853  a  boundary  dispute  arose
between  the  United  States  and  Mexico,  which  was
settled  by  negotiation  and  resulted  in  the  acquisi-
tion of  a  part  of  the  territory,  which  was  organized
under  the  name  of  Arizona  in  1803.  Proposed
routes  for  a  railroad  to  the  Pacific  were  explored,
and  voluminous  reports  thereon  published  under
the  direction  of  the  war  department.  A  controversy
with  Great  Britain  respecting  the  fisheries  was  ad-

i'usted  by  mutual  concessions.  The  affair  of  Martin
^oszta,  a  Hungarian  refugee,  who  was  seized  at
Smyrna  by  an  Austrian  vest^el  and  given  up  on  the
demand  of  the  captain  of  an  American  shi|)-of-war.
excited  great  interest  in  Europe  and  redounded  to
the  credit  of  our  government.  (See  Inoraham,
Duncan  Nathaniel.)  In  1854  a  treaty  was  negoti-
ated at  Washington  between  the  United  States  and
Great  Britain  providing  for  commercial  reciprocity
for  ten  years  between  the  former  country  and  the
Canadian  provinces.  That  treaty  and  one  negoti-
ated by  Com.  Perry  with  Japan,  which  opened  the
ports  of  that  hitherto  unknown  country  to  com-
merce, were  ratified  at  the  same  session  of  the
senate.  In  the  sfiring  of  1854,  Greytown  in  Nicara-
gua was  bombarded  and  mostly  burned  by  the  U.  S.
frigate  "Cyane,"  in  retaliation  for  the  refusal  of
the  authorities  to  make  reparation  for  the  property
of  American  citizens  residing  there,  which  had  been
stolen.  In  the  following  year  William  Walker,
with  a  party  of  filibusters,  invaded  Nicaragua,  and
in  the  autumn  of  1856  won  an  ephemeral  success,
which  induced  President  Pierce  to  recognize  the
minister  sent  by  him  to  Washington.  In  the  win-
ter of  1854-'5,  and  in  the  spring  of  the  latter  year,
by  the  sanction  of  Mr.  Crampton,  the  British  min-
ister at  Washington,  recruits  for  the  British  army
in  the  Crimea  were  secretly  enlisted  in  this  country.
President  Pierce  demanded  Mr.  Crampton's  recall,
which  l)ein^  refused,  the  president  dismissed  not
only  the  minister,  but  also  the  British  consuls  at
New  York,  Philadelphia,  and  Cincinnati,  for  their
complicity  in  such  enlistments.  The  difficulty  was
finally  adjusted  by  negotiation,  and  a  new  British
legation  was  sent  to  Washington.  In  1855  Presi-
dent Pierce  signed  bills  to  reorganize  the  diplo-
matic and  consular  system  of  the  United  States,
to  organize  the  court  of  claims,  to  provide  a  retired
list  for  the  navy,  and  to  confer  the  title  of  lieu-
tenant-general on  Winfield  Scott.  President  Pierce
adhered  to  that  strict  construction  of  the  constitu-
tion which  Jefferson  and  Jackson  had  insisted  on.
In  1854  he  vetoed  a  bill  making  appropriations  for
public  works,  and  another  granting  10.000.000  acres
of  public  lands  to  the  states  for  relief  of  indigent
insane.  In  February.  1855,  he  vetoed  a  bill  for
payment  of  the  French  sjx)liation  claims,  and  in
the  following  month  another  increasing  the  appro-
priation for  the  Collins  line  of  steamers.


10


PIERCE


The  policy  of  Pierce's  administration  ujwn  the
question  of  slavery  evoked  an  extraordinarj-  amount
of  popular  excitement,  and  led  to  tremendous
and  lastinjr  results.  That  policy  was  based  on  the
theory  that  the  institution  of  slavery  wjis  inilx'dded
in  aiid  guaranteed  by  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  and  that  therefore  it  was  the  duty
of  the  National  government  to  protect  it.  The  two
chief  measures  in  support  of  such  a  policy,  which
originated  with  and  were  suj)iM>rted  by  Pierce's
administration,  were  the  conference  of  American
diploftiatists  that  j)romulgated  tho  "  Ostend  mani-
festo." and  the  opening  of  the  territories  of  Kansas
and  Nebraska  to  slavery.  Filibustering  expeditions
from  the  United  States  to  Cuba  under  Lopez,  in
1850  and  1851,  aroused  anxiety  in  Europe  as  to  the
attitu(ie  of  our  government  toward  such  enterprises.
In  1852  Great  Britain  and  France  proposed  to  the
Uniteil  States  a  tripartite  treaty  by  which  the  three
powers  should  disclaim  all  intention  of  accjuiring
Cuba,  and  discountenance  such  an  attempt  by  any
power.  On  1  Dec.,  1852,  Edward  Everett,  who  was
then  secretary  of  state,  declined  to  act,  declaring,
however,  that  our  government  would  never  question
Spain's  title  to  the  island.  On  1(5  Aug.,  1854,
President  Pierce  directed  James  Buchanan,  John
Y.  Mason,  and  Pierre  Soule,  the  American  ministers
to  Great  Britain,  France,  and  Spain,  to  meet  and
discuss  the  Cuban  question.  They  met  at  Ostend,
9  Oct.,  and  afterward  at  Aix  la  Cnapelle,  and  sent
to  their  government  that  famous  despatch  known
as  the  "Ostend  manifesto."  It  declared  that  if
Spain  shou!»l  obstinately  refuse  to  sell  Cuba,  self-

E reservation  would  make  it  incumbent  on  the
'nited  States  to  wrest  it  from  her  and  prevent  it
from  being  Africanized  into  a  second  Santo  Do-
mingo. But  the  hostile  attitude  of  the  great
European  jwwers,  and  the  Kansas  and  Nebraska
excitement,  shelved  the  Cuban  question  till  1858,
when  a  feeble  and  abortive  attempt  was  made  in
congress  to  authorize  its  purchase  lor  $30,000,000.
President  Pierce,  in  his  first  message  to  congress,
Decemljer,  1853,  spoke  of  the  repose  that  had  fol-
lowed the  compromises  of  1850,  and  said:  "That
this  repose  is  to  suffer  no  shock  during  my  official
term  if  I  have  power  to  prevent  it,  those  who
placed  me  here  may  be  assured."  Doubtless  such
was  then  his  hope  and  Ijelief.  In  the  following
January,  Mr.  Douglas,  chairman  of  the  senate  com-
mittee on  the  territories,  introduced  a  bill  to  or-
ganize the  territories  of  Kansas  and  Nebraska,
which  permitted  slavery  north  of  the  parallel  of
86°  30'  in  a  region  from  which  it  had  been  forever
excluded  by  the  Missouri  compromise  of  1820.
That  bill  was  Mr.  Douglas's  bid  for  the  presidency.
Southern  politicians  could  not  reject  it  and  retain
their  intluence  at  home.  Northern  politicians  who
opposed  it  gave  up  all  hope  of  national  preferment,
which  then  seemed  to  depend  on  southern  support.
The  defeat  of  the  bill  seemed  likely  to  sever  and
destroy  the  Democratic  organization,  a  result
which  many  believed  would  lead  to  civil  war  and
the  dissolution  of  the  Union.  Borne  onward  by
the  aggressive  spirit  of  slavery,  by  political  ambi-
tion, by  the  force  of  party  discipline,  and  the  dread
of  sectional  discord,  the  bill  was  passed  by  con-
gress, and  on  31  Mav  received  the  signature  of  the
president.  Slavery  }iad  won,  but  there  never  was
a  more  costly  victory.  The  remainder  of  Pierce's
term  was  embittered  by  civil  war  in  Kansas  and
the  disasters  of  his  party  in  the  free  states.  In
1854,  with  a  Democratic  majority  in  both  houses
of  the  New  Hampshire  legislature,  the  influence
of  the  national  administration  could  not  secure  the
election  of  a  Democratic  U.  S.  senator,  and  at  the


PIERCE

next  election  in  1855  the  Democracy  lost  control
of  the  state.  The  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compro-
mise was  soon  followed  by  organized  efforts  in  the
free  states  to  fill  Kansas  with  anti-slavery  settlers.
To  such  movements  the  south  responded  by  armed
invasions.  On  30  March,  1855,  a  territorial  legis-
lature was  elected  in  Kansas  by  armed  bands  from
Missouri,  who  crossed  the  border  to  vote  and  then
returned  to  their  homes.  That  initiative  gave  to
the  pro-slavery  men  a  tech-
nical advantage,  which  the
Democratic  leaders  were
swift  to  recognize.  The  pro-
slavery  legislature  thus  elect-
ed met  at  Pawnee  on  2  July,
1855,  and  enacted  an  intol-
erant and  oppressive  slave-
code,  which  was  mainly  a
transcript  of  the  laws  of
M issou n.  The  free-state  set-
tlers thereupon  called  a  con-
stitutional convention,  which
met  on  23  Oct.,  1855,  and
framed  a  state  constitution,
which  was  adopted  by  the
people  by  a  vote  of  1,731  to
46.  A  general  assembly  was
then  elected  under  such  con-
stitution, which,  after  passing  some  preliminary
acts,  appointed  a  committee  to  frame  a  code  of
laws,  and  took  measures  to  apply  to  congress  for
the  admission  of  Kansas  into  the  Union  as  a  state.
Andrew  II.  Reeder  was  elected  by  the  free-state
men  their  delegate  to  congress.  A  majority  of  the
actual  settlers  of  Kansas  were  in  favor  of  her  ad-
mission into  the  Union  as  a  free  state ;  but  all  their
efforts  to  that  end  were  treated  by  their  opponents
in  the  territory,  and  by  the  Democratic  national  ad-
ministration, as  rebellion  against  lawful  authority.
This  conflict  kept  the  territory  in  a  state  of  con-
fusion and  bloodshed,  and  excited  party  feeling
throughout  the  country  to  fever  heat.  It  remained
unsettled,  to  vex  Buchanan's  administration  and
further  develop  the  germs  of  disunion  and  civil  war.

On  2  June,  1856,  the  National  Democratic  con-
vention met  at  Cincinnati  to  nominate  a  can-
didate for  president.  On  the  first  ballot  James  Bu-
chanan had  135  votes,  Pierce  122,  Douglas  33,
Cass  6,  Pierce's  vote  gradually  diminished,  and
on  the  17th  ballot  Buchanan  was  nominated  unani-
mously. In  August  the  house  of  representa-i
tives  attached  to  the  army  appropriation  bill  a
proviso  that  no  part  of  the  armv  should  be  em-
ployed to  enforce  the  laws  of  the  I^ansas  territorial
legislature  until  congress  should  have  declared  its
validity.  The  senate  refused  to  concur,  and  con-
gress adjourned  without  passing  the  bill.  It  was
immediately  convened  by  proclamation,  and  passed
the  bill  without  the  proviso.  The  president's  mes-
sage in  December  following  was  mainly  devoted
to  Kansas  afl'airs,  and  was  intensely  hostile  to  the
free-state  party.  His  term  ended  on  4  March,  1857,
and  he  returned  to  his  'home  in  Concord.  Soon
afterward  he  visited  Madeira,  and  extended  his
travels  to  Great  Britain  and  the  continent  of  Eu-
rope. He  remained  abroad  nearly  three  years,  re-
turning to  Concord  early  in  1860.  In  the  presi-
dentialelection  of  that  year  he  took  no  active  part,
but  his  influence  was  cast  against  Douglas  and  in
favor  of  Breckinridge.

In  a  letter  addressed  to  Jefferson  Davis,  under
date  of  6  Jan.,  1860,  he  wrote ;  "  Without  discuss-
ing the  question  of  right,  of  abstract  power  to  se-
cede, I  have  never  believed  that  actual  disruption
of  the  Union  can  occur  without  bloodshed;  and


PIERCE


PIERCE


11


\


if,  through  the  madness  of  northern  Abolitionists,
that  (lire  calamity  must  come,  the  fighting  will
not  be  along  Mason  and  Dixon's  line  merely.  It
will  be  within  our  own  borders,  in  our  own  streets,
between  the  two  classes  of  citizens  to  whom  I  have
referred.  Those  who  defy  law  and  scout  constitu-
tional obligations  will,  if  we  ever  reach  the  arbitra-
ment of  arms,  find  occupation  enough  at  home.  .  .  .
I  have  tried  to  impress  upon  our  own  people,  es-
pecially in  New  Hampshire  and  Connecticut,  where
the  only  elections  are  to  take  place  during  the
coming  spring,  that,  while  our  Union  meetings  are
all  in  the  right  direction  and  well  enough  for  the
present,  they  will  not  be  worth  the  paper  upon
which  their  resolutions  are  written  unless  we  can
overthrow  abolitionism  at  the  polls  and  repeal  the
unconstitutional  and  obnoxious  laws  which  in  the
cause  of  '  personal  liberty  '  have  been  placed  upon
our  statute-books."

On  21  April,  1861,  nine  days  after  the  disunion-
ists  had  begun  civil  war  by  firing  on  Fort  Sumter,
he  atldressed  a  Union  mass-meeting  at  Concord,
and  urged  the  people  to  sustain  the  government
against  the  southern  Confederacy.  Prom  that  time
until  his  death  he  lived  in  retirement  at  Concord.
To  the  last  he  retained  his  hold  upon  the  hearts
of  his  personal  friends,  and  the  exquisite  urbanity
of  his  earlier  days.  His  wife  and  his  three  chil-
dren had  preceded  him  to  the  tomb.

Some  years  after  Pierce's  death  the  legislature
of  New  riampshire,  in  behalf  of  the  state,  placed
his  portrait  beside  the  speaker's  desk  in  the  hall  of
the  house  of  representatives  at  Concord.  Time
has  softened  the  harsh  judgment  that  his  political
foes  passed  upon  him  in  the  heat  of  party  strife
and  civil  war.  His  generosity  and  kindness  of
heart  are  gratefully  remembered  by  those  who
knew  him,  and  particularly  by  the  younger  mem-
bers of  his  profession,  whom  he  was  always  ready
to  aid  and  advise.  It  is  remembered  that  in  his
professional  career  he  was  ever  willing,  at  what-
ever risk  to  his  fortune  or  popularity,  to  shield  the
poor  and  obscure  from  oppression  and  injustice.
It  is  remembered,  too,  that  he  sought  in  public  life
no  opportunities  for  personal  gain.  His  integrity
was  above  suspicion.  After  nine  years'  service  in
congress  and  in  the  senate  of  the  United  States.
after  a  brilliant  and  successful  professional  career
and  four  years  in  the  presidency,  his  estate  hardly
amounted  to  $72,000.  In  his  whole  political  ca-
reer he  alway^s  stood  for  a  strict  construction  of
the  constitution,  for  economy  and  frugality  in  pub-
lic affairs,  and  for  a  strict  accountability^  of  public
officials  to  their  constituents.  No  political  or  per-
sonal influence  could  induce  him  to  shield  those
whom  he  believed  to  have  defrauded  the  govern-
ment. Pierce  had  ambition,  but  greed  for  public
office  was  foreign  to  his  nature.  Few,  if  any,  in-
stances can  be  found  in  our  history  where  a  man
of  thirty-eight,  in  the  full  vigor  of  health,  volun-
tarily gave  up  a  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  which  he
was  apjiarently  sure  to  retain  as  long  jis  he  wished.
His  refusal  at  the  age  of  forty-one  to  leave  his  law-
practice  for  the  place  of  attorney-general  in  Polk's
cabinet  is  almost  without  a  parallel.  Franklin
Pierce,  too,  was  a  true  patriot  and  a  sincere  lover
of  his  country.  The  Revolutionary  services  of  a
father  whom  he  revered  were  constantly  in  his
thoughts.  Two  of  his  brothers,  with  that  father's
consent,  took  an  honorable  part  in  the  war  of  1812.
His  only  sister  was  the  wife  of  Gen.  John  H.  Mc-
Neil, as  gallant  an  officer  as  ever  fought  for  his
country.  To  decline  a  cabinet  appointment  and
enlist  jis  a  private  soldier  in  the  army  of  his  coun-
try were  acts  which  one  who  knew  his  early  train-


ing and  his  chivalrous  character  might  reasonably
expect  of  him.  But  for  slavery  and  the  (juestions
growing  out  of  it,  his  administration  would  have
passed  into  history  as  one  of  the  most  successful
in  our  national  life.  To  judge  him  justly,  his  po-
litical training  and  the  circumstances  that  envi-
roned him  must  be  taken  into  account.  Like  his
honored  father,  he  believed  that  the  statesmen  of
the  Revolution  had  agreed  to  maintain  the  legal
rights  of  the  slave-holders,  and  that  without  such
agreement  we  should  have  ha<l  no  Federal  qonsti-
tution  or  Union.  He  believed  that  good  faith  re-
quired that  agreement  to  be  performed.  In  that
belief  all  or  nearly  all  the  leaders  of  both  the  great
parties  concurred.  However  divided  on  other
questions,  on  that  the  south  was  a  unit.  The  price
of  its  political  support  was  compliance  with  its  de-
mands, and  both  the  old  parties  (however  reluct-
antly) paid  the  price.  Political  leaders  believed
that,  unless  it  was  paid,  civil  war  and  disunion
would  result,  and  their  patriotism  re-enforced  their
party  spirit  and  personal  anibition.  Among  them
all  there  were  probably  few  whose  conduct  would
have  been  essentially  different  from  that  of  Pierce
had  they  been  in  the  same  situation.  He  gave  his
support  to  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise
with  great  reluctance,  and  in  the  belief  that  the
measure  would  satisfy  the  south  and  thus  avert
from  the  country  the  doom  of  civil  war  and  disunion.
See  the  lives  by  Nathaniel  Hawthorne  (Boston,
1852)  and  D.  W.'Bartlett  (Auburn,  1852),  and  "  Re-
view of  Pierce's  Administration,"  by  A.  E.  Carroll
(Boston,  1856).  The  steel  plate  is  from  a  portrait
by  George  P.  A.  Healey.  The  vignette  on  page  8
is  a  view  of  President  Pierce's  birthplace,  and
that  on  page  10  represents  his  grave,  which  is  in
the  cemetery  at  Concord,  N.  H. — His  wife,  Jane
Means  Appleton,  b.  in  Hampton,  N,  II,,  12  March,
1806 ;  d.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  2  Dec,  1863,  was  a
daughter  of  the  Rev.
Jesse  Appleton,  D.  D.
{q.  v.),  president  of
Bowdoin  college.  She
was  brought  up  in  an
atmosphere  of  culti-
vated and  refined
Christian  influences,
was  thoroughly  edu-
cated, and  grew  to
womanhood  sur-
rounded by  most  con-
genial circumstances.
She  was  married  in
1834.  Public  obser-
vation was  extremely
painful  to  her,  and  O
she  always  preferred

the  quiet  of  her  New  England  home  to  the  glare
and  glitter  of  fashionable  life  in  Washington.  A
friend  said  of  her :  "  How  well  she  filled  her  station
as  wife,  mother,  daughter,  sister,  and  friend,  those
only  can  tell  who  knew  her  in  these  private  rela-
tions. In  this  quiet  sphere  she  found  her  jov,  and
here  her  gentle  nut  powerful  influence  was  deeply
and  constantly  felt,  through  wise  counsels  and
delicate  suggestions,  the  purest,  finest  tastes,  and
a  devoted  life."  She  was  the  mother  of  three
children,  all  boys,  but  none  survived  her.  Two
died  in  early  youth,  and  the  youngest,  Benjamin,
was  killed  iii  an  accident  on  the  Boston  and  Maine
railroad  while  travelling  from  Andover  to  Law-
rence, Mass.,  on  6  Jan.,  1853,  only  two  months  be-
fore his  father's  inauguration  as  president.  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Pierce  were  with  him  at  the  time,  and  the
boy,  a  bright  lad  of  thirteen  years,  had  been  amus-


y^  ^Z^^-*


^-tt^e^


12


PIERCE


PIERCE


ing  them  with  his  conversation  just  before  the  acci-
dent. The  car  was  thrown  from  the  tracit  and
dajshed  against  the  rocks,  and  the  lad  met  his
death  instantly.  Both  parents  were  long  dconly
affecte<l  by  the  shock  of  the  accident,  and  Mrs.
Pierce  never  recovered  from  it.  The  sudden  U'-
reavement  shattered  the  small  remnant  of  her
remaining  health,  yet  she  pi-rformed  her  task
at  the  White  House  nobly,  and  sustained  the  dig-
nity of  her  husband's  office.  Mrs.  Robert  E.  lice
wrote  in  a  private  letter:  "I  have  known  many
of  the  ladies  of  the  White  House,  none  more  truly
excellent  than  the  afflictetl  wife  of  President
Pierce.  Her  health  was  a  bar  to  any  great  effort
on  her  part  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  pub-
lic in  ht-r  high  position,  but  slie  was  a  refined,
extrenu-lv  religious,  and  well-educated  lady."  She
was  buried  bv  the  side  of  her  children,  in  the
cemetery  at  ("'oncord,  N.  H.,  where  also  the  re-
mains of  Gen.  Pierce  now  rest.

PIERCE,  Frederick  CUfton  (purse),  author,
b.  in  Worcester  county,  Mass.,  :}()  July,  185(5.  He
receive<l  an  academic  education,  was  connected
with  the  press  in  Massjuhus<'tts.  and  in  IHHO  re-
moved to  Illinois.  He  has  starved  in  the  Illinois
militia,  and  now  (1888)  holds  the  rank  of  colonel
on  the  staff  of  (Jov.  Kichiird  J.  Oglesby.  Mr.  Pierce
is  a  meinl)er  of  the  princif)al  historical  societies  in
this  country,  and  is  the  author  of  "  I'ierce  History
and  Genealogy"  (Boston,  1879);  "The  Hurwood
Genealogv"  (1879);  "History  of  Harre,  Mass."
(1880);  ""Historv  of  Grafton,'  Mass."  (Worcester,
1880);  "Peirce  "Historv  and  Genealogv"  (1880);
"  History  of  Uockford,  111."  (Rockford,  1886) ;  and
"  Pearce  and  Pearse  Genealogy  "  (1888).

PIERCE,  (ieorge  Edmond,  educator,  b.  in
Southbury,  Conn.,  U  Sept.,  1794;  d.  in  Hudson,
Ohio.  28  ^Iay,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
181(5  an<l  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1821,
was  principal  of  Fairfield  academy  in  1816-'18,  and
ordamed  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at
Ilarwinton  in  1822.  He  was  president  of  Western
Reserve  college  in  1834-'55.  Under  his  adminis-
tration- were  erected  an  observatory  and  three  col-
lege buildings.  In  18138  Middlcbury  college  gave
him  the  degree  of  I).  I).

PIERCE,  Henry  LHlie,  member  of  congress,
b.  in  Stoughton,  Mass.,  2:5  Aug.,  1825.  He  received
a  go(Kl  education,  engaged  in  manufacturing,  and
as  earlv  as  1848  took  an  active  part  in  organizing
the  "  I^'ree-soil"  party  in  Massachusetts.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  in  1860-'6,
and  in  18(50  was  instrumental  in  setting  a  bill
passed  by  both  branches  of  the  legislature  remov-
mg  the  statutory  prohibition  upon  the  formation
of  militia  companies  composed  of  colored  men.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican  to  fill  the
vacancy  caused  by  the  death  of  William  Whiting,
was  re-elected  for  the  next  congressional  term,  and
served  from  1  Dec,  1878,  till  3  March,  1877,  when
he  declined  a  renomination  In  the  presidential
election  of  1884  he  was  prominent  in  organizing  an
independent  movement  in  support  of  Cleveland,
and  has  since  taken  a  leading  part  in  the  effort  to
revise  the  tariff  legislation  and  reduce  the  taxes
on  imfx)rts.  He  was  mayor  of  Boston  in  1873,
and  again  in  1878.— His  brother,  Edward  Lillie,
author,  b.  in  Stoughton,  Mass.,  29  March,  1829,
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1850,  and  at  Harvard
law-school  in  1852,  receiving  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Brown  in  1882.  After  leaving  the  law-
school.  Mr.  Pierce  was  for  some  time  in  the  of-
fice of  Salmon  P.  Chase  at  Cincinnati.  He  after-
ward practised  law  in  his  native  state,  and  was  a
delegate  to  the  National  Republican  convention  in


1860.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted
as  a  private  in  the  3d  Massachusetts  regiment,  and
served  till  July,  18(51,  when  he  was  detailed  to  col-
lect the  negroes  at  Hampton  and  set  them  to  work
on  the  intrenchments  of  that  town.  This  was  the
beginning  of  the  employment  of  negroes  on  U.  S.
military  works.  In  December,  1861,  the  secretary
of  the"  treasury  despatched  Mr.  Pierce  to  Port
Royal  to  examine  into  the  condition  of  the  negroes
on  the  sea  islands.  In  February,  1862,  he  returned
to  Washington  and  reported  to  the  government,
and  in  March  was  given  charge  of  the  freedraen
and  plantations  on  those  islands.  He  took  with
him  nearly  sixtv  teachers  and  superintendents,  es-
tablished schools,  and  suggested  the  formation  of
freed  men's  aid  societies,  by  means  of  which  great
good  was  accomplished.  In  June,  1862,  Mr.  Pierce
made  his  second  rerx)rt  to  the  government  setting
forth  what  he  had  done.  These  reports  were  after-
ward reprinted  in  the  "  Rebellion  Record,"  and
were  favorably  reviewed  both  in  Europe  and  the
United  States.  The  care  of  the  negroes  on  the
islands  having  been  transferred  to  the  war  depart-
ment, he  was  asked  to  continue  in  charge  under  its
authority,  but  declined.  He  was  offered  the  mili-
tary governorship  of  South  Carolina,  but  was  not
confirmed.  He  was  collector  of  internal  revenue
for  the  3d  Massachusetts  district  from  October,
1863.  till  May,  1866,  district  attorney  in  186(>-'9,
secretary  of  the  board  of  state  charities  in  1869-'74,
and  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1875-'6.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Republican  national  conven-
tions of  1876  and  1884,  and  in  December,  1878,  was
appointed  by  President  Hayes  assistant  treasurer
of  the  United  States,  but  declined.  In  1883  he
gave  to  the  white  and  colored  people  of  St.  Helena
island,  the  scene  of  his  former  labors,  a  library  of
800  volumes.  He  also  originated  the  public  library
of  Milton,  Mass.,  where  he  has  resided,  and  has
been  a  trustee  since  its  organization.  He  has  been
a  lecturer  at  the  Boston  law-school  since  its  foun-
dation. Mr.  Pierce  has  visited  Europe  several
times.  His  second  visit  was  for  the  inspection  of
European  prisons,  reformatories  and  asylums,  and
the  result  is  given  in  his  report  for  1873  as  secre-
tary of  the  board  of  state  charities.  He  has  been  a
frequent  contributor  to  newspapers  and  periodicals,
and  has  published  numerous  articles  and  addresses,
and  "American  Railroad  Law"  (New  York,  1857);
"  Memoir  and  Letters  of  Charles  Sumner  "  (2  vols.,
Boston,  1877,  unfinished),  and  "  The  Law  of  Rail-
roads" (Boston,  1881).  He  also  edited  "Walter's
American  Law  "  (1860),  and  compiled  "  Index  of  the
Special  RailroM  Laws  of  Massachusetts  "  (1874).

PIERCE,  Henry  Niles,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Paw-
tucket,  R.  I.,  19  Oct.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1842,  was  ordained  deacon  in  Christ
church,  Matagorda,  Tex.,  23  April,  1843,  by  Bishop
Freeman,  and  priest,  in  the  same  church,  8  Jan.,
1849,  by  the  same  bishop.  He  spent  the  early  years
of  his  ministry  in  missionary  work  in  Washington
county,  Tex.,  held  charges  in  New  Orleans  and  in
Rahway,  N.  J.,  in  1854-'7,  and  became  rector  of  St.
John's  church.  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  1857.  He  removed
to  Illinois  in  1868  and  accepted  the  rectorship  of
St.  Paul's  church,  Springfield.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Alabama  in
1862,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  William  and  Mary
in  1869.  He  was  elected  missionary  bishop  of
Arkansas  and  Indian  territory,  and  was  consecrated
in  Christ  church.  Mobile,  25  ^an.,  1870.  The  next
year  Arkansas  was  erected  into  a  diocese,  of  which
Bishop  Pierce  became  diocesan,  still  retaining
charge  of  the  Indian  territory  mission.  Bishop
Pierce  has  published  numerous  occasional  sermons.


PIERCE


PIEROLA


13


essays,  and  addresses,  and  is  author  of  "  The  Ag-
nostic, and  other  Poems"  (New  York,  1884).

PIERCE,  John,  antiquary,  b.  in  Dorc^hester
(now  part  of  Boston).  Mass.,  14  July,  1778;  d.  in
Brooliline.  Mass.,  24  Aug.,  1849.  Ho  was  a  descend-
ant in  the  sixth  jjeneration  from  Robert  and  Anne
(Greenway)  Pierce,  who  were  among  the  fij-st  settlers
of  Dorchester.  lie  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1793.  He  taught  two  years  at  Leicester  academy,
then  studied  theology  with  Rev.  Thaddeus  Mason
Harris,  of  Dorchester,  on  3  Dec,  1796,  f^ettled  at
Brookline,  Mass.,  and  was  ordained  pastor  there,  15
March,  1797.  In  1822  Harvard  conferred  on  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  He  continued  the  sole  pastor  of  the
church  in  Bnwkline  for  fifty  years.  On  his  semi-
centennial, 15  March,  1847.  he  preached  a  jubilee
sermon  in  which  he  gave  much  nistorieal  and  sta-
tistical information  relating  to  the  church  and
town.  In  October,  1848,  Rev.  Frederick  N.  Knapp
was  settled  as  his  colleague.  Dr.  Pierce  was  well
known  for  his  genealogical  and  historical  researches,
and  he  was  an  authority  on  these  subjects.  He  was
a  member  of  various  historical  societies,  for  nine-
teen years  secretary  and  twenty-one  years  president
of  the  Massachusetts  Bible  society,  of  which  he  was
one  of  the  founders,  and  was  an  earnest  worker  in
the  cause  of  temperance  and  all  other  social  re-
forms. He  was  devoted  to  the  interests  of  Harvard,
of  whose  board  of  overseers  he  was  secretary  for
thirty-three  years.  He  was  present  at  sixty-three
commencements,  and  for  fifty-four  vears  led  the
singing  of  the  tune  of  "  St.  Martin's  ^'  at  the  com-
mencement dinner.  In  the  contest  that  divided
the  Congregational  church  of  Massachusetts  he
would  willingly  have  avoided  taking  sides,  and
preferred  being  called  simply  a  Christian,  although
nis  feelings  and  affiliations  were  with  the  Unita-
rians, with  which  body  his  church  finally  united.
His  published  works  consist  chiefly  of  sermons  and
addresses,  but  his  memoirs,  in  eighteen  quarto
manuscript  volumes,  were  bequeathed  by  him  to
the  Massachusetts  historical  society,  and  give  a  full
and  faithful  account  of  the  theological  history  of
his  times,  which,  from  his  habits  of  research,  exact-
ness, and  absolute  and  unquestioned  truthfulness,
may  be  relied  upon  as  the  best  authority.  They
can  be  consulted  at  the  society's  library,  but  restric-
tions have  been  placed  upon  their  publication.

PIERCE,  John  Davis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Chester-
field, X.  H.,  18  Feb.,  1797 ;  d.  in  Medford,  Mass.,  5
April,  1882.  He  was  brought  up  in  Massachusetts,
where  he  remained  till  1817,  and  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1822.  He  then  became  principal  of  an
academy  in  New  England,  entered  the  theological
seminary  at  Princeton,  and  in  1824  became  pastor
of  a  Congregational  church  in  Oneida  county,
X.  Y.,  where  he  remained  till  1830.  In  that  year
he  was  principal  of  Goshen  academy.  Conn.,  and  in
1831  he  went  to  reside  in  Michigan.*  In  1847-'8  he
was  a  meml>er  of  the  legislature,  and  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1850.  While  in  the
legislature  he  secured  the  passage  of  the  bill  for
the  protection  of  women  in  their  rights  of  prop-
erty, the  first  of  the  kind  that  was  passed  in  any
state.  He  was  superintendent  of  public  instruction
for  two  years,  during  that  time  edited  and  pub-
lished the  "  Journal  of  Education,"  and  also  edited
at  one  time  the  "  Democratic  Expounder  "  at  Mar-
shall. He  is  credited  with  being  the  author  of  the
Michigan  free-school  system.

PIERCE,  Lorick,  clergyman,  b.  in  Halifax
county,  N.  C,  17  March,  1785;  d.  in  Sparta,  Ga.,
9  Nov.,  1879.  Early  in  life  his  parerits  moved  to
Barnwell  county,  N.  C,  where,  after  six  months'
schooling,  he  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist


church  in  1804.  In  1809  he  moved  to  Greene
county,  Ga.,  and  during  the  war  of  1812  he  was  a
chaplain  in  the  army.  He  then  studied  medicine,
was  graduated  at  Philadelphia,  and  removing  to
Greensborough,  practised  and  j)reafched  there  for
several  years,  lie  was  a  delegate  to  the  general
conferences  of  his  church  in  1836,  1840,  and  1844,
and  after  the  organization  of  the  southern  church
in  1846  sat  in  its  highest  court.  He  took  part  in
the  Louisville  conference  of  1874,  where  he  had  a
son  and  a  grandson,  and,  notwithstanding  his  great
age,  he  preached  occasionally  until  within  a  few
months  of  his  death.  In  1878  he  published  a  series
of  theological  essays. — His  son,  Georgre  Foster,
M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Greene  county,  Ga.,  3  Feb.,
1811 ;  d.  near  Sparta,  Ga.,  3  Sept.,  1884,  was  gradu-
ated at  Franklin  college,  Athens,  in  1829,  and
afterward  studied  law,  but,  abandoning  it  for  the-
ology, was  received  in  1831  into  the  Georgia  con-
ference of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  churcn.  For
one  year  he  was  a  member  of  the  South  (Carolina
conference.  He  soon  attained  great  popularity  as
a  public  speaker,  and  was  appointed  to  Augusta,
Savannah,  and  Charleston  before  he  had  been  in
the  ministry  five  years.  In  his  fifth  year  he  was
returned  to  Augusta,  and  in  his  sixth,  seventh,  and
eighth  he  was  presiding  elder  of  that  district.  He
filled  various  important  pastoral  and  collegiate
posts,  the  last  of  which  was  the  presidency  of
Emory  college,  Oxford,  Ga.  While  he  was  there  he
was  elected  and  ordained  bishop  at  Columbus,  Ga.,
in  1854.  Bishop  Pierce  was  a  man  of  great  elo-
quence, and  hatl  many  friends  in  all  parts  of  the
country.  Notwithstanding  the  alienation  of  the
two  branches  of  his  church,  he  was  frequently  in-
vited to  deliver  addresses  in  the  north.  Ilis  con-
versational powers  were  remarkable,  and  in  wit  he
had  few  superiors.  On  one  occasion  a  young  man,
trying  on  his  hat,  rather  presumptuously  said :
"bishop,  our  heads  are  the  same  size."  "Yes,"
said  the  bishop,  "  outside."  The  degree  of  D.  D.
was  conferred  upon  him  by  Transylvania  univer-
sity, and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Randolph  Macon  college.
He  was  personally  the  most  popular  of  the  bishops
of  his  church ;  somewhat  autocratic  and  self-com-
placent, but  very  kind  and  persuasive ;  an  admirer
of  the  south  and  devoted  to  the  church.  For  sev-
eral years  he  was  in  infirm  health,  but  he  often
made  great  oratorical  efforts  at  a  time  when  most
men  would  have  considered  themseves  too  ill  to
venture  abroad.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Incidents
of  Western  Travel  "  (Nashville,  1857).

PIERCE,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  Georgia
about  1740;  d.  about  1806.  He  entered  the  army
at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  was  aide-de-
camp to  Gen.  Xathanael  Greene,  and  was  presented
with  a  sword  by  congress  in  recognition  of  his  gal-
lant services.  He  was  a  delegate  from  Georgia  to
the  Continental  congress  in  1786-'7,  and  to  the
convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of  the
United  States,  but,  being  opposed  to  the  plan  that
was  adopted,  withdrew  without  signing  the  docu-
ment, lie  published  his  impressions  of  the  mem-
bers of  the  convention  in  a  Savannah  newspaper
long  afterward,  and  they  are  now  in  the  Force  col-
lection in  the  library  of  congress.

PIEROLA,  Nicolas  de  (pe-ay-ro'-lah),  Peruvian
naturalist,  b.  in  Camana,  department  of  Arequipa,
in  1798;  d.  in  Lima,  24  Jan.,  1857.  He  began  the
study  of  law  in  the  University  of  Lima,  and  went
in  1814  to  Madrid,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1817,  and  began  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion. He  was  elected  deputy  to  the  cortes  for  his
native  province  in  1820,  appointed  professor  of
jurisprudence  in  the  Central  university  of  Madrid,


14


PIERPONT


and  began  the  study  of  natural  history.  After  the
independence  of  his  country  was  established  he
resigned  his  |)08t,  retumiKl  to  Peru,  and  was  elected
in  1827  deputy  to  the  national  con{;ress.  In  1828
he  was  ap()ointwl  direclor-general  of  mines,  but  he
resigned  in  183:1  to  become  the  founder  of  the  sci-
entific weekly  "  Kl  Telografo."  He  was  elected
director  of  the  National  museum  of  Lima  in  184.'),
and  founded  in  1847  another  scientific  and  literary
|)aper,  "  Kl  Ateneo."  He  was  ajjpointed  a  memlx?r
of  the  committee  on  public  instruction,  and  in  1H52
called  bv  President  Castilla  to  his  cabinet  as  secre-
tary of  the  treasury ;  but  in  1854  he  resiffned,  and
lived  thenceforth  entirely  for  science.  He  wrote,
in  conjunction  with  his  friend  and  colleague,  Ma-
riano Kduardo  Rivera,  who  contributed  the  matter
on  the  minenil  kingdom,  "  Memorial  de  ciencias
naturales"  (Lima,  1850).  His  name  has  been  given
to  a  new  species  of  violet  foimd  in  the  Amazon
vallev,  the  Viola  Pierolana.— His  son,  Nicolas,  b.
in  Camana.  5  Jan..  1889,  was  educated  in  the  Col-
lege of  Santo  Toribio,  in  Lima,  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1860,  and  founded  a  review,  "  El  Progreso  Cato-
lico."  In  1864  he  became  editor  of  "  El  Tiempo,"
in  which  he  defended  the  administration  of  Gen.
Juan  A.  Pezet.  When  Priulo's  revolution  was  suc-
cessful, he  went  to  Europe,  where  he  travelled  ex-
tensively, but  in  January,  1869,  he  was  appointed
by  President  Balta  to  the  ministry  of  finance,  and
shared  with  his  chief  the  credit  of  the  great  public
works  that  were  executed  by  tiie  latter,  and  the
dis(;redit  of  the  ruinous  loans  that  were  contracted
to  [)erform  them.  After  the  death  of  Balta,  Pie-
rola  was  impeached  under  Pardo's  administration
for  misiippropriation  of  public  funds,  and,  although
he  wjus  honorably  acquitted  of  dishonest  practice.
he  came  to  the  Ignited  States.  In  1874  he  prepared
an  expedition  to  Peru,  but  was  defeated  by  Admi-
ral Lizardo  Montero  at  Cuesta  de  los  Angeles.  He
continued  to  consnire,  and  in  1877  invaded  Peru
again,  but  was  taVen  prisoner  and  banished  to
Chili.  At  the  lx»ginning  of  the  war  between  Peru
and  Chili  he  offered  his  services  to  his  country,
and  he  was  allowed  by  President  Prado  to  return
to  liima  in  1879.  After  the  flight  of  Prado  several
battalions  of  the  garrison  revolted,  and  Pierola,  at
the  head  of  one  of  them,  marched  against  the  gov-
ernment palace,  but  was  defejited  by  the  minister
of  war,  and  took  possession  of  Callao  on  22  Dec.
The  archbishop  of  Lima  intervened,  and  on  the
next  day  Pierola  made  his  entry  into  the  capital,
and  was  proclaimed  by  the  masses  supreme  chief
of  the  republic.  Ho  made  strenuous  efforts  to
hurry  re-enforcements  and  arms  to  the  front,  and
when  the  Chilian  army  appeared  before  Lima  he
organized  the  defence,  and,  assuming  the  com-
mand-in-chief, fought  at  Chorrillos  and  Miraflores
in  January,  1881.  When  all  was  lost,  Pierola  retired
to  the  town  of  Canta,  in  the  mountains,  sending
Montero  to  organize  the  resistance  in  the  northern
departments.  He  afterward  established  his  head-
quarters at  Ayacucho,  summoned  a  national  assem-
IJly  on  23  July,  and  was  elected  provisional  presi-
dent: but,  as  Chili  refused  to  treat  with  him,  he  re-
signed on  28  Nov.,  1881,  and  embarked  for  the
United  .States,  where  he  has  since  resided.  He  mar-
ried a  granddaughter  of  the  Emperor  Iturbide.

riERPONT,  John,  poet.  b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,
6  April.  1785;  d.  in  Medford,  Mass.,  26  Aug.,  1866.
He  was  a  great-grandson  of  James,  who  is  noticed
below.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1804.  and  after
assisting  for  a  short  time  in  the  acatlemy  at  Beth-
lehem, Conn.,  in  the  autuum  of  1805  went  to  South
Carolina,  and  passed  nearly  four  yeai*s  as  a  private
tutor  in  the  family  of  Col.  William  Allston. After


&2^<7W^


PIERRE

his  return  in  1809  he  studied  law  at  Litchfield,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1812.  and  practised  for  a  time
in  Newburyuort,  Mass.  The  profession  proving
injurious  to  his  health,  he  relinquished  it,  and  en-
gaged in  business  as
a  merchant,  first  in
Boston,  and  afterward
in  Baltimore.  In  1816
he  abandoned  com-
merce for  theology,
which  he  studied,  first
at  Baltimore,  and  af-
terward at  Cambridge
divinity  -  school.  In
April,  1819,  he  was  or-
dained pastor  of  the
Hollis  street  church,
Boston.  In  1835  he
mmle  a  tour  through
Europe  and  Asia  Mi-
nor, and  on  his  return
he  resumed  his  pas-
toral charge  in  Boston,
where  he  continued  till
10  May.  1845.  The  freedom  with  which  he  ex-
pressed his  opinions,  especially  in  regard  to  the
temperance  cause,  had  given  rise  to  some  feel-
ing before  his  departure  for  Europe ;  and  in  1838
there  sprung  up  between  himself  and  a  part  of
his  parish  a  controversy  which  lasted  seven  years,
when,  after  tri  u  m  phantly  sustaining  himself  against
the  charges  of  his  adversaries,  he  requested  a  dis-
missjd.  He  then  became  for  four  years  pastor  of  a
Unitarian  church  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  on  1  Aug.,  1849,
was  settled  over  the  Congregational  church  in
Medford,  and  resigned,  6  April,  1856.  He  was  a
zealous  reformer,  powerfully  advocated  the  temper-
ance and  anti-slavery  movements,  was  the  candidate
of  the  Liberty  party  for  governor,  and  in  1850  of
the  Free-soil  party  for  congress.  After  the  civil
war  began,  though  seventy-six  years  of  age,  he  went
into  the  field  as  chaplain  of  a  Massachusetts  regi-
ment, but,  finding  his  strength  unequal  to  the  dis-
charge of  his  duties,  he  soon  afterward  resigned,
and  was  appointed  to  a  clerkship  in  the  treasury
department  at  Washington,  which  he  held  till  his
death.  Mr.  Pierpont  was  a  thorough  scholar,  a
graceful  and  facile  speaker,  and  ranked  deservedly
high  as  a  poet.  He  published  "  Airs  of  Palestine  ''
(Baltimore,  1816);  re-issued,  with  additions,  under
the  title  "Airs  of  Palestine,  and  other  Poems"
(Boston,  1840).  One  of  his  best-known  poems  is
"  Warren's  Address  at  the  Battle  of  Bunker  Hill.'*"
His  long  poem  that  he  read  at  the  Litchfield  county
centennial  in  1851  contains  a  description  of  the
'•  Yankee  boy  "  and  his  ingenuity,  which  has  often
been  qiioted.  He  also  published  several  sermons
and  addresses.  See  Wilson's  "Bryant  and  his
Friends"  (New  York,  1886).— His  cousin,  John,
jurist,  b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  10  Sept.,  1805 ;  d.  in
Vergennes,  Vt.,  6  Jan.,  1882,  received  a  common-
school  education,  studied  law  in  Litchfield  law-
school,  and  was  graduated  in  1827.  He  began
practice  at  Pittsford,  Vt^  and  in  1832  removed  to
Vergennes.  He  was  representative  of  his  town  in
the  legislature  in  1841,  and  state  senator  in  1855-'7.
In  1857  he  was  elected  associate  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  of  the  state.  In  1865  he  became  chief
justice  of  Vermont,  which  office  he  held  by  con-
tinuous elections  till  his  death.

PIERRE,  surnamed  le  Picard  (pe-air),  French
buccaneer,  b.  in  Abbeville,  France,  about  the  year
1624;  d.  in  Costa  Rica,  Central  America,  in  1679.
He  followed  the  sea  for  several  years,  but  in  1652,
his  vessel  stopping  at  the  island  of  Tortuga,  he  was


PIERREPONT


PIERREPOXT


16


inducwl  to  desert  and  to  join  the  buccaneers.  lie
attached  himself  to  the  fortune  of  Jatjuos  Nau,
called  L'Olonnais  (q.  »■.),  in  1(M52,  became  his  most
trusted  lieutenant,  participated  in  the  expeditions
apiinst  the  Spanish  main,  and  conunanded  also  a
division  of  the  fleet  under  Sir  llenrv  Morgan  that
pillaged  the  Isthmus  of  Panama.  When  L'Olon-
nais proposed  to  attack  Guatemala,  Pierre  refused
to  accompany  him,  and.  going  to  the  coast  of
Costa  Rica,  ravaged  the  Spanish  establishments  on
Chagres  river,  took  and  burned  the  city  of  Veragua.
but  in  the  interior  he  wf^s  defeated  and  compelled
to  re-emh)ark  with  little  booty.  In  the  following
year  he  attacked  the  coast  of  Campeche,  and  in
1672  landed  at  Leogone,  pillaging  the  surrounding
country.  In  1674,  with  Moyse  Van  Vin,  he  at-
tacked Maracailx),  but  without  success,  and  during
the  following  years,  either  alone  or  in  association
with  other  chiefs,  he  pillaged  the  Bay  of  Honduras
and  the  coasts  of  Venezuela  and  Santo  Domingo,
and  amassed  enormous  riches.  He  purposed  to  re-
turn to  France,  when  in  a  last  cruise  he  was  ship-
wrecked off  the  coast  of  ('osta  Rica  and  perished
with  all  his  crew.

PIERREPONT,  or  PIERPONT,  James,  cler-
gvman,  b.  in  Ro^bury,  Mass.,  in  1659 ;  d.  in  New
riaven.  Conn.,  14  Nov.,  1714. He  was  the  grandson
of  James  Pierrepont,  of  London,  who  died  in  Massa-
chusetts while  on  a
visit  to  his  son  John,
who came  to this
country  before  the
Revolution  and  set-
tled in  Roxbury,was
a  representative  to
the  general  court  in
1672,  and  died,  30
Dec, 1690, leav-
ing James  his  son.
James was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in
1681, and  in  July,
1685, became pas-
0,  /p_  tor  of the  church

^a/^Yyyi4 *^t -fc^^^txvH/^ at  New  Haven. In

1698  he  was  one  of
three  ministers  that  concerted  the  plan  of  founding
a  college,  which  took  effect  in  the  establishment  of
Yale  in  1700.  He  was  one  of  the  original  trustees
of  that  institution,  and  it  was  principally  through
his  influence  that  p]lihu  Yale  was  induced  to  make
the  college  the  object  of  his  liberal  benefactions.  He
was  a  member  of  the  synod  at  Saybrook  in  1708,  for
the  purrKJse  of  forming  a  system  that  would  l)etter
secure  the  ends  of  church  discipline  and  the  Iwneflts
of  communion  among  the  churches,  and  is  reputed
to  have  drawn  up  the  articles  that  were  adopted  as
the  result  of  the  synod  which  constitute  the  "  Say-
brook  platform."  He  was  thrice  married,  and  his
daughter  by  the  third  wife  married  Jonathan  Ed-
wards. Among  the  clergymen  whose  names  be-
long to  the  early  history  of  New  England  he  was
the  most  distinguished  for  nobility  of  character,  the
purity  of  his  aspirations,  and  the  spirituality  of  his
temper,  Sereno  Edwards  Dwight.  in  his  life  of
Jonathan  Edwards,  says  that  Mr.  Pierrepont  reatl
lectures  to  the  students  in  Yale  college,  as  profes-
sor of  moral  philosophy;  but  this  statement  is
doubted  by  other  authorities.  His  only  publica-
tion was  a  sermon  that  he  preached  at  "bo.^ton.  in
Cotton  Mather's  pulpit,  in  1712,  entitled  "Sundry
False  Hopes  of  Heaven  Discovered  and  Decryed.''
In  18H7  his  portrait,  which  is  shown  in  the  illustra-
tion, was  presented  to  Yale  by  his  descendant,
Edwards Pierrepont. — His  grandson, Hozckiah


Beers  (Pierrepont),  merchant,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  in  1768;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1838,
was  educated  for  commercial  pursuits  by  his  un-
cle, Isaac  Beers,  sjxjnt  several  years  in  the  New
York  custom-house,  and  then  Ix'came  agent  for
Mes.srs.  Watson  and  Greenleaf.  of  Philadelphia,  in
the  purchase  of  the  National  debt,  realizing  a  for-
tune thereby.  In  1793  he  established  the  commer-
cial house  of  Leffingwell  and  Pierrepont,  in  New
York  city,  and  did  a  large  business  in  shipping
provisions  to  France  during  the  Revolution.  The
seizure  of  American  vessels  by  England  led  him  to
abandon  the  shi[)ment  of  fotnl.  In  1802  he  mar-
ried Anna,  daughter  of  William  Constable,  a  mer-
chant of  N^ew  York  city,  who  had  l)een  as.sociated
with  Gen.  Alexander  Macomb  in  the  purchase  of
over  1,000,000  acres  of  wild  land  in  the  northern
part  of  New  York  from  the  state  in  1787.  Through
this  marriage  he  came  into  possession  of  about
500,000  acres  of  these  lands.  In  1804  he  bought
the  Benson  farm  of  sixty  acres  on  Brooklyn  heights,
with  the  house  that  had  been  Washington's  head-
quarters during  the  campaign  on  Long  Island.  In
1819  he  gave  up  all  other  business  and  thereafter
devoted  himself  wholly  to  the  improvement  of  his
vast  estate.  The  city-hall,  academy  of  music,
Brooklyn  library,  ftve  churches,  and  many  {)ublic
buildings  and  residences,  now  cover  his  old  farm.
— Hezekiah's  eldest  son,  William  Constable,  b.
in  New  York  city,  3  Oct.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Pierrepont
Manor.  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  Dec,  1885,  was
educated  in  mathematics,  surveying,  and  convey-
ancing, with  a  special  view  to  taking  the  manage-
ment of  his  father's  property  in  the  northern  coun-
ties. In  1820  he  was  appointed  superintendent  and
director  of  the  agents  that  were  employed  in  set-
tling the  lands,  and  opened  an  office  in  Jefferson
county  on  the  site  of  the  present  Pierrepont  Manor.
On  the  death  of  his  father  he  was  given  charge  by
will  of  the  lands  in  Jefferson  and  Oswego  counties,
and  to  the  day  of  his  death  was  employed  solely  in
their  development.  He  was  a  profound  mathema-
tician, and  numbered  among  his  friends  and  corre-
spondents several  of  the  most  distinguished  schol-
ars of  Europe,  including  Prof.  Piazzi  Smyth,  as-
tronomer royal  of  Scotland,  who  acknowledged  the
high  value  of  his  calculations  concerning  the  great
pyramid  in  Egypt.  In  1840  Mr.  Pierrepont  was
elected  a  member  of  the  legislature,  but  he  declined
all  other  political  offices.  He  was  a  liberal  adher-
ent of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  building
and  endowing  a  church  edifice  near  his  residence,
endowing  scholarships  in  the  General  theological
seminary.  New  York  city,  and  Hobart  college,
Geneva,  N.  Y.,  building  and  endowing  a  church  at
Canaseraga,  N.  Y.,  as  a  memorial  to  a  son,  and  aid-
ing the  interests  of  the  church  in  Minnesota.  He
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Hobart  college  in
1871. — Another  son,  Henry  Evelyn,  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  8  Aug.,  1808;  d.  there.  28  Marc-h,  1888,
after  receiving  an  academic  education,  spent  several

fears  in  assisting  in  the  management  of  the  estates,
n  1833  he  went  to  Europe.  During  his  absence  the
village  of  Brooklyn  was  incorporated  as  a  city,  and
he  was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners  to  pre-
pare plans  for  laying  out  public  grounds  and  streets.
He  made  a  thorough  study  of  the  topography  of
all  the  large  cities  of  Europe,  and  prepareti  plans
that  were  in  substance  adopted  by  the  legislative
commission  in  1835.  He  also  submitted  plans  for
converting  the  Gowanus  hills  into  a  rural  cemetery.
On  his  return  he  employed  Major  David  B.  Doug-
las to  work  out  the  details  of  his  cemetery  scheme,
and  in  1838  obtainetl  a  charter  from  the  legislature
for  the  Greenwood  cemetery  company,  with  which


16


PIERREPONT


PIERRON


CS)d[XMS(ih0W(5liJhe'n^y


he  has  since  been  actively  identified.  By  his
father's  will  he  was  charged  with  the  care  and  de-
velopment of  all  the  Brooklyn  property  and  the
wild  lands  in  Franklin.  St.  Lawrence,  and  licwis
counties.  On  the  Brooklyn  estate  he  excavated
Furman  street,  built  a  retaining  wall  775  feet  in
length  to  sustain  the  heights,  and  created  five  acres
of  wharf  property  bv  erecting  a  new  bulkhead  on
the  water-front.  '  >fr.  PierrejK)nt  was  the  first
pre.«ident  of  the  Brooklyn  academy  of  music,  and
for  many  yeai*s  has  been  active  in  various  Bn>oklyn
societiesand  financial  institutions,  also  in  organiza-
tions of  the  Prt)te.«itant  Episcopal  fhurch.— James's
great-grundson,  Edwards  (Pierre[>ont).  jurist,  b.  in
North  Haven.  Conn.,  4  March.  1817,  was  graduated
at  Vale  in  1H:{7  and  at  the  law-school  in  1840.  and
began  practice  at  Columbus,  Ohio.  In  1845  he  re-
moved to  New  York
city,  where  he  l)e-
cnme  eminent  at  the
bar.  In  1857  he  was
elected  a  judge  of
the  superior  court  of
the  city  of  New  York,
in  place  of  Chief-Jus-
tice Thomas  J.  Oak-
ley. A  speech  that
he  made  a  year  and
a  half  before  the  fall
of  Fort  Sumter,  in
wiiich  he  predicted
the  civil  war.  attract-
ed much  attention.
In  October.  1860,  he
resigned  his  seat  on
the  bench  and  re-
turned to  the  practice  of  law,  and  in  18(53  he
was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln,  in  conjunc-
tion with  (ron.  John  A.  Dix.  to  try  the  [)rlson-
ers of state that were confined in the various

Crisons  and  forts  of  tlie  United  States.  In  1864
e  was  active  in  organizing  the  War  Democrats
in  favor  of  the  re-election  of  Abraham  Lincoln.
In  April.  1867,  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the
convention  for  forming  a  new  constitution  for  the
state  of  New  York,  and  one  of  its  judiciary  com-
mittee. He  was  emi>loyed  to  conduct  the  prose-
cution on  the  part  of  the  government  of  John
II.  .Surnitt,  indicted  for  aiding  in  the  murder  of
President  Lint-oln.  Judge  Pierrepont  has  been  en-
gaged in  many  celebrated  causes,  and  he  was  much
employed  i>y  railroads  aiul  other  corporations.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  an  active
memln-rof  the  Union  defence  committee,  and  one  of
the  three  that  were  appointed  to  proceed  to  Wash-
ington to  confer  with  the  government  when  all  com-
munication was  cut  off  by  way  of  Baltimore  after
the  attack  upon  the  Massachusetts  troops.  In  the
presidential  contests  of  1868  and  1872  he  was  an
ardent  supiM)rter  of  Gen.  Grant,  by  whom  he  was
api)ointed  in  1869  U.  S.  attorney  for  the  southern
district  of  New  York,  which  oflice  he  resigned  in
July,  1870.  In  the  autumn  of  that  year  he  was
one  of  the  most  active  members  of  the  committee
of  seventy  in  opposition  to  the  Tweed  ring.  In
May,  187;i,  Judge  Pierrepont  was  appointed  U.  S.
minister  to  Russia,  but  declined,  and  in  April,
1875,  he  became  attorney-general  of  the  United
States,  remaining  in  the  cabinet  of  President  Grant
until  May,  1876,  when  he  was  sent  as  U.  S.  minister
to  Great  Britain.  During  his  term  of  oflice  as  at-
torney-general he  was  called  upon  by  the  secretary
of  state  to  give  an  opinion  upon  a  question  of  inter-
national law,  in  which  were  discussed  the  questions
of  natural  and  acquired  nationality. This  opinion


gave  him  a  wide  reputation.  During  Gen.  Grant's
visit  to  London,  Judge  Pierrepont  urged  upon  the
queen's  ministers  the  propriety  of  according  the
same  precedence  to  him  as  had  been  given  to  the
ex-ruler  of  France.  This  was  done,  and  other  gov-
ernments followed  the  example  of  Great  Britain.
Judge  Pierrepont  devoted  large  attention  to  the
financial  system  of  England.  On  his  return  in  1878
he  engaged  actively  in  nis  profession,  but  afterward
retired  and  has  tafcen  especial  interest  in  the  finan-
cial policy  of  the  country,  writing  several  pam-
phlets upon  the  subject.  In  one,  issued  in  1887,  he
atlvocated  an  international  treaty  and  claimed  that
l)v  convention  the  commercial  value  of  the  silver
dollar  might  be  restored.  He  has  published  various
orations,  including  one  before  the  alumni  of  Yale,
(1874).  Judge  Pierrepont  received  the  honoraiy
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Columbian  college,  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  in  1871.  In  1873  the  same  degree  was
conferred  upon  him  by  Yale.  While  he  was  in
England  Oxford  gave  him  that  of  D.  C.  L. — His
son,  Edward,  b.  in  New  York  city,  30  June,  1860;
d.  in  Rome.  Italy,  16  April,  1885,  entered  Christ
church,  Oxford,  while  his  father  was  minister  to
(ireat  Britain,  and  was  graduated  in  June,  1882.
After  spending  a  summer  in  travel  upon  the  con-
tinent lie  returned  to  the  United  States  and  en-
tered Columbia  law-school.  In  May,  1883,  accom-
panied by  his  father,  he  journeyed  to  the  Pacific
coast,  anil  travelled  far  into  Alaska,  publishing
on  his  return  "  Prom  Fifth  Avenue  to  Alaska
(New  York,  1884),  for  which  he  was  made  a  fellow
of  the  Royal  geographical  society  of  England.  In
the  sfiring  of  1884  he  was  appointed  secretary  of
legation  at  Rome,  and  upon  the  resignation  of  the
minister,  William  W.  Astor,  he  was  made  charge
d'affaires,  and  died  while  holding  this  position.

PIERRON,  Jean,  French  missionary,  b.  in
France:  d.  there  toward  the  end  of  the  17th  cen-
tury. He  belonged  to  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and
arriving  in  Canada  on  27  June,  1667,  devoted  him-
self to  the  study  of  the  Mohawk  language,  and  was
soon  able  to  preach  in  that  dialect.  He  preached
constantly  in  the  seven  Mohawk  towns,  and  his
success,  though  temporary,  was  remarkable.  He
was  a  skilful  artist,  and  effected  more  conversions
by  exhibiting  vivid  pictures,  symbolizing  the  deaths
and  destinies  of  a  Christian  and  pagan  Indian,
than  l)y  his  sermons.  In  his  efforts  to  gain  con-
verts he  followed  the  jMohawks  everywhere,  even
to  battle.  He  drew  pictures  on  cards  symbolizing
the  Christian  life  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  an5
formed  with  them  games  which  the  Indians  learned
by  their  camp  fires.  Once  he  was  ordered  from
the  council  by  a  chief  who  wished  to  perform  a
superstitious  ceremony  which  he  knew  the  mis-
sionary would  not  sanction ;  but  Pierron  turned
the  insult  to  his  advantage,  and,  by  hints  of  what
might  happen  if  he  left  the  Mohawk  valley,  excited
the  fears  of  the  chiefs,  who  dreaded  a  rupture  with
the  French.  On  26  March,  1670,  they  assembled
in  the  chapel,  promised  to  renounce  their  god,
Aireskoi.  and  to  abandon  their  worship  of  evil
spirits  and  their  superstitious  dances.  The  medi-
cine-men burned  their  turtle-shell  rattles  and  the
other  badges  of  their  office.  There  were  eighty-
four  baptisms  during  the  year.  Christianity  made
rapid  progress  among  the  tribes.  These  results
were  not  lasting,  however,  and  when  Pierron  was
recalled  to  govern  the  mission  of  St.  Francis  Xavier
at  La  Prairie,  most  of  the  Mohawks  relapsed  into
paganism.  He  continued  his  missionary  labors  up
to  1679  and  perhaps  later.  He  returned  to  France,
but  nothing  is  known  of  his  life  afterward,  or  of
the  time  of  his  death.


PIRRSON


PIGOT


17


PIERSON,  Abrtthum,  clerfcyinan.  b,  in  York-
shire. Kiij;laii(i,  ill  1(R)H;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J„  9
Aug.,  IMTbt.  He  was  graduated  at  Cainliridgc  in
1632,  and  ordainetl  tt)  the  ministry  of  the  estab-
lished ehuri'h,  but.  becoming  a  non-con fonnist,
emigrated  to  this  country  in  1(539,  and  united  with
the  church  in  lioston.  He  aticompanied  a  party  of
emigrants  to  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  a  short  time  after-
ward, and  in  1040  liecame  ptistor  of  the  church  at
South  Hampton.  He  removed  with  a  small  part  of
his  congregation  to  Hranford,  Conn.,  in  1047,  or-
^nizcd  a  church  there,  and  was  its  pastor  for
twenty-three  years.  His  ministry  was  eminently
successful,  especially  in  his  efforts  to  evangelize
the  Indians,  to  whom  he  preached  in  their  own
language,  also  preparing  a  catechism  (1600).  He
served  as  clianlain  to  the  forces  that  were  raised
against  the  Dutch  in  1654.  In  the  contentions
between  the  colonies  of  Connecticut  and  New
Haven  in  1002-'5  he  opposed  their  union,  antl,
when  it  t<H)k  place,  resolved  to  remove  with  his

g;oplo  out  of  the  colony.  He  accordingly  left
ran  ford  in  June,  1667,  and  settled  in  Newark,
N.  J.,  carrying  away  the  church  records,  and  leav-
ing the  town  with  scarcely  an  inhabitant.  Mr.
Pierson  exercised  a  commanding  influence  in  the
colony.  Gov.  John  Winthrop,  who  was  his  per-
sonal friend,  pronounced  him  a  "godly  man,"  and
Cotton  Mather  said  of  him  :  "  Wherever  he  came,
he  shone."  He  published  "Some  Helps  for  the
Indians  in  New  Haven  Colony,  to  a  Further  Ac-
count of  the  Progress  of  the  Gospel  in  New  Eng-
land" (1659). — His  son,  Abraham,  educator,  b.  in
Lj'nn,  Mass.,  in  1(541 ;  d.  in  Killingworth,  Conn.,  7
March,  1707,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  16(J8,
ordained  to  the  ministry  the  next  year,  and  was
successively  pastor  in  South  Hampton,  L.  I.,  Bran-
ford,  Conn.,  Newark,  N.  J.,  and  Killingworth,
Conn.  He  was  one  of  the  ten  principal  clergymen
who  were  elected  to  *'  found,  form,  and  govern  a
college  in  Connecticut"  in  1700, and  the  next  year
was  chosen  its  first  president,  under  the  title  of
"rector  of  Yale,"  holding  office  until  his  death.
He  composed  a  system  of  natural  philosophy,  whicli
was  usea  as  a  manual  in  that  college  for  years,  and
published  an  "  Election  Sermon  (New  Haven,
1700).  A  bronze  statue  of  him,  by  Launt  Thomp-
son, was  erected  in  the  grounds  of  Yale  in  1874. —
The  first  Abraham's  descendant,  Hamilton  Wil-
cox, clergyman,  b.  in  Bergen,  N.  Y.,  22  Sept.,  1817,
was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  184;^,  and  at
Union  theological  seminary,  New  York  city,  in
1848.  and  became  an  agent  of  the  American  Bible
society  in  the  West  Indies.  He  labored  in  Ken-
tucky in  1853-'8,  then  became  president  of  Cum-
berland college,  Ky.,  and  in  1863-'5  taught  freed-
men  and  colored  troops,  and  was  a  .secretary  of
the  Christian  commission.  Union  college  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1860.  He  has  published
**  Thomas  Jefferson  at  Monticello,  or  the  Private
Life  of  Thomas  Jefferson  "  (New  York,  1862) ;  "  In
the  Brush,  or  Old-time  Social,  Political,  and  Re-
ligious Life  in  the  Southwest"  (1881):  edited  the
*'  American  Missionary  Memorial "  (1853) ;  and  con-
tributed to  the  religious  press.

PIOAFETTA.  Francesco  Antonio  (jie-gah-
fet'-Uih),  Italian  navigator,  b.  in  Vicenza  in  1491 ;
<1.  there  in  1535.  After  receiving  a  good  education,
he  was  about  to  enter  diplomacy,  when  he  read  of
the  e.\j>editions  to  the  New  World  that  had  been
mmle  by  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese,  and  deter-
mined to  Ijecome  their  historian.  In  1518  he  went
to  Mmlrid  andol)tained  leave  to  serve  as  volunteer
under  Magellan  {<j.  v.).  While  awaiting  the  arrival
of  the  navigator  in  Seville,  Pigafetta  occupied
TOL.  r. — 2


his  time  in  studying  the  exact  sciences  and  the
theory  of  navigation.  He  emlmrked  on  the  ad-
mirals ship,  and  kept  a  diary  of  events  and  of  his
i)ersonal  observations.  He  name<l  the  Pehnelche
Indians.  Patagonians,  and  is  resfwnsible  for  the
story  that  they  were  a  race  of  giants.  On  the  re-
turn of  the  exj)edition  in  1522  Pigafetta  went  im-
metliately  to  Valladolid.  presented  Charles  V.  with
a  copy  of  his  journal,  and  received  tokens  of  the
monarch's  satisfaction.  He  passed  afterward  to
Rome,  where  Pope  Clement  Vll.  appointed  him
an  honorary  officer  in  his  guanl,  and  through
the  pontiff's  intercession  the  grand  master  of
Rhodes  received  Pigafetta  into  the  onler  on  30
Oct.,  1524.  At  requests  of  Clement  VII.  and  the
grand  master,  Pigafetta  wrote  a  circumstantial
relation  of  Magellan's  exjK'dition,  of  which  only
three  copies  were  made,  one  for  the  grand  master,
one  for  the  Lateran  library,  and  one  for  Louisa  of
Savoy,  but  this  last  found  its  way  into  the  Milan
library,  while  the  princes  received  only  an  abridged
copy.  Pigafetta's  narrative  is  the  only  account  of
Magellan's  expedition,  as  the  history  that  was
written  by  D'Anghiera  by  order  of  Charles  V.  was
destroyed  during  the  storming  of  Rome  by  the
army  of  the  Constable  de  Bourbon  in  1527.  Until
the  beginning  of  the  19th  century  Pigafetta's  re-
lation was  only  known  by  the  abridged  copy  of
Louisa  of  Savoy,  which  was  published  by  Antoine
Fabre  under  the  title  "  Le  voyage  et  navigation
faiets  par  les  Espagnols  es  iles  Moluques,  des  iles

au'ils  ont  trouve  audict  voyage,  des  roys  d'icelles,
e  leur  gouvernement  et  maniere  de  vivre,  avec
plusieurs  autres  choses  "  (Paris,  about  1540).  Ran-
uesio  translated  it  into  Italian,  and  published  it  in
his  "  Voyages  "  (1563).  For  nearly  three  centuries
the  opinion  prevailed  that  the  original  manuscript
was  written  in  French,  when,  in  1798,  Araaretti
discovered  in  Milan  t>ne  of  the  three  original  copies
written  in  a  mixture  of  French,  Italian,  and  Span-
ish, which  he  translated  into  French  as  "Relation
du  premier  voyage  autour  du  monde,  fait  par  le
Chevalier  Pigafetta  sur  I'escadre  de  Magellan  jDen-
dant  les  annees  1519-1520,  1521,  1522"  (Paris,
1801).  The  work  ends  with  a  dictionary  of  the
dialects  of  the  nations  that  were  visited  by  Piga-
fetta, and  in  particular  of  the  inhabitants  of
Philippine  and  Molucca  islands.  The  remainder
of  Pigafetta's  life  is  unknown,  but  the  date  of  his
death  is  recorded  in  the  archives  of  Vicenza.  He
left  also  a  treatise  on  navigation.

PIGCiOT,  Robert,  engraver,  b.  in  New  York
city,  20  May,  1795;  d.  in  Sykesville,  Md.,  23  July,
1887.  An  early  inclination  to  drawing  determined
him  to  study  engraving,  and  with  that  object  he
went  to  Philadelnhia  and  became  a  student  under
David  Edwin,  whose  manner  he  closely  followed.
Upon  reaching  his  majority,  he  entered  into  a
business  arrangement  with  a  fellow-student, Charles
Goodman,  witli  whom  he  was  associated  for  sev-
eral vears,  and  all  the  plates  he  worked  uiK)n  bear
the  drm-name  of  Goodman  and  Piggot.  Although
an  engraver  of  no  mean  ability,  and  ardent  in  his
love  for  his  art,  he  .soon  abandoned  it  for  holy
orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and
was  ordained  by  Bishop  White,  30  Nov.,  1823.  He
held  several  charges  in  Pennsylvania  and  Mary-
land, and  was  called  to  Sykesville.  in  the  latter
state,  in  1869,  as  rector  of  Holy  Trinity  parish,
where  he  remained  until  his  death,  attending  to
his  parochial  duties  until  within  four  years  of  his
decease,  and  retaining  all  of  his  faculties  unim-
paired. He  received  the  degree  of  I),  D.

PIOOT,  Sir  Robert,  bart.,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Stafford,  England,  in  1720;  d.  there,  1  Aug.,  1796.


18


PIKE


{!2^i^^^.u:  fL4c£.


He  was  major  of  the  10th  foot  in  1758.  and  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  1764.  He  commanded  the  left
wing  of  the  Hrilish  force  in  the  battle  of  Bunker
Hill,  and  much  of  their  success  in  that  action  was
due  to  his  braverv  and  activity.  He  was  promotcil
colonel  of  the  88th  foot  for*  that  battle,  U'cume
major-pcneral  in  1777,  hatl  a  command  in  llhmle
Island  in  1778,  and  was  commissioned  lieutcnant-
eeneral  the  same  year.  He  succeeded  to  the
baronetcy  in  178)1

PIKE.  Albert,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,  Ma.ss.,  29
Dec.,  18()9:  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  2  April,
1891.  After  a  course  at  Harvard  he  l)ecamo  prin-
cipal of  New-
buryport  grain-
riiar-school.  In
18:n  he  set  out
f<ir  the  i)artially
explored  re;;ions
of  the  west,  trav-
el linsj  by  stage
toCincinuuti,  by
steamer  to  Nash-
ville, thence  on
foot  to  Puducah,
then  by  keel-boat
down  tiie  Ohio,
and  by  steamer
up  the  Mississip-
pi. In  August,
18;n.  he  accom-
panied a  caravan
of  ten  wagons  as
one  of  a  party  of  forty  men.  under  ('apt.  (Jharles
Bent,  from  St.  Louis  to  Santa  Fe.  He  arrived  at
Taos  on  10  Nov..  having  walked  five  hundred
miles  from  ("imarrou  river,  where  his  horse  ran  off
in  a  storm.  After  resting  a  few  days,  he  went  on
foot  from  Taos  to  Santa  Fe,  and  remained  there
as  clerk  until  Septend)er,  18;12,  then  joining  a
party  of  forty-flve,  with  which  he  went  down  the
Pectis  river  and  into  the  Staked  plain,  then  to
the  head- waters  of  the  Brazos,  part  of  the  time
without  food  or  water.  Finally  Pike,  with  four
others,  left  the  company,  and  reached  Fort  Smith,
Ark.,  in  I)eceinl)er.  The  following  spring  he
turned  his  attention  to  teaching,  and  in  1883  he
became  associate  editor  of  the  "  Arkansas  Advo-
cate." In  18)34  he  j)urchased  entire  control,  but
dis[>osed  of  the  pa[)er  two  years  later  to  engage  in
the  priu-tice  of  law,  for  which  he  had  fitted  himself
during  his  editorial  career.  In  18)39  he  contributed
to  "  Biackwo(xrs  Magazine  "  the  unique  produc-
tions entitled  "  Hymns  to  the  Gods,"  which  he  had
written  several  years  before  while  teaching  in  New
England,  and  which  at  once  gave  him  an  honored
place  among  American  poets.  As  a  lawyer  he  at-
tained a  high  reputation  in  the  southwest,  though
he  still  devoted  part  of  his  time  to  literary  pur-
suits. During  the  Mexican  war  he  commanded  a
squadron  in  the  regiment  of  Arkansas  mounted
volunteers  in  184(>-'7,  was  at  Buena  Vista,  and  in
1847,  nxle  with  fortv-one  men  from  Saltillo  to  Chi-
huahua, receiving  the  surrender  of  the  city  of  Ma-
pimi  on  the  way.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  became  Confederate  commissioner,  negotiat-
ing treaties  of  amity  and  alliance  with  several
Indian  tril)es.  While  thus  engaged  he  was  ap-
iHiinted  brigadier-general,  and  organized  bodies  of
Indians,  with  which  he  took  part  in  the  battles  of
Pea  Ridge  and  Klkhorn.  In  180(5  he  engaged  in
the  prac-tice  of  law  at  Memphis.  During  1867  he
Vjecame  etlitor  of  the  "  Memphis  Appeal,"  but  in
1868  he  sold  his  interest  in  the  paper  and  removed
to  Washington,  D.  C,  where  he  practised  his  pro-


Pi  KE

fession  in  the  supreme  and  district  courts.  He
retired  in  1880,  and  afterward  devoted  his  atten-
tion to  liteniture  and  Freemasonry.  His  works
incliule  "Prose  Sketches  and  Poems"  (Boston,
18)34);  "Re[)orts  of  Cases  in  the  Supreme  Court
of  Arkansas"  (3  vols..  Little  Rock,  1840-'5) ;
••Nuga>."  a  collection  of  poems,  including  the
"  Hynms  to  the  Gods"  (printed  privately,  Phila-
delphia, 1854),  and  two  other  similar  collections
(187)3  and  1882).  He  held  high  office  as  a  Free-
mason, and  prepared  for  that  order  about  twenty-
five  volumes  of  ritualistic  and  other  works.

PIKE,  Austin  FrankUn,  senator,  b.  in  He-
bron, N.  H.,  14  Oct.,  1819;  d.  in  Franklin,  N.  H.,
8  Oct ,  1886.  He  was  educated  in  the  academies
of  Plymouth,  N.  H..  and  Newbury,  Vt.,  studied
law  under  George  W,  Nesmith  in  Franklin,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1848,  and  established  a-
large  practice.  Five  years  afterward  he  began
his  political  career  by  a  successful  candidacy  for
the  legislature,  was  re-elected  in  1851-'2,  served  in
the  state  senate  in  1857-8,  and  as  its  presiding
officer  the  latter  year,  and  in  1865-6  was  speaker
of  the  house.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National
Republican  conventions  in  1856  and  1860,  and
from  the  former  year  until  his  death  was  an  active
mendier  of  that  party,  being  chairman  of  the  Re-
publican state  committee  in  1858-'60.  He  was
elected  to  congress  in  1872,  served  one  term,  and
was  defeated  as  a  candidate  for  the  next  canvass,
as  he  alleged,  by  frauds.  He  subsequently  devoted
himself  to  his  profession  for  many  years,  and  took
high  rank  at  the  state  bar.  In  1883  the  contest
for  the  U.  S.  senatorship  in  the  New  Hampshire
legislature,  which  continued  during  more  than  a
month's  balloting,  ended  in  the  election  of  Mr.
Pike  as  a  compromise  candidate.  Dartmouth
gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1858.

PIKE,  Frances  West  Atherton,  author,  b.  in
Prospect,  Me.,  17  March,  1819.  She  was  graduated
at  Free  street  seminary  in  Portland.  Me.,  in  1837,
and  married  the  Rev.  Richard  Pike  in  1843.  She
has  published  '"Step  by  Step"  (Bo.ston,  1857);
"Here  and  Hereafter " (1858) ;  "Katherine  Mor-
ris" (1864);  "Sunset  Stories"  (6  vols.,  1863-'6);
"Climbing  and  Sliding"  (1866);  and  "Striving-
and  Gaining  "  (1868).

PIKE,  James  Shepherd,  journalist,  b.  in
Calais,  Me.,  8  Sept.,  1811 ;  d.  there,  24  Nov.,  1882.
He  was  educated  in  the  schools  of  his  native  town,
entered  mercantile  life  in  his  fifteenth  year,  and
subsequently  became  a  journalist.  He  was  the
Washington  correspondent  and  associate  editor  bf
the  New  York  "Tribune"  in  1850-'60,  and  was
an  able  and  aggressive  writer.  He  was  several
times  a  candidate  for  important  offices  in  Maine,
and  a  potent  influence  in  uniting  the  anti-slavery
sentiment  in  that  state.  In  1861-6  he  was  U.  S.
minister  to  the  Netherlands.  He  supported  Hor-
ace Greeley  for  the  presidency  in  1872,  and  about
that  time  visited  South  Carolina  and  collected
materials  for  his  principal  work,  "  A  Prostrate
State"  (New  York,  1876).  He  also  published
"  The  Restoration  of  the  Currency  "  (1868) ;  "  The
Financial  Crisis,  its  Evils,  and  their  Ptemedv"
(1869);  "Horace  Greelev  in  1872"  (1873);  "The
New  Puritan  "  (1878) ;  and  "  The  First  Blows  of
the  Civil  War"  (1879).— His  brother,  Frederick
Augnstns,  congressman,  b.  in  Calais,  Me.,  9  Dec,
1817;  d.  there,  2  Dec,  1886,  spent  two  years  at
Bowdoin,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1840.  He  served  eight  terms  in  the  Maine  legis-
lature, was  its  speaker  in  1860,  and  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Republican,  retainiug  his  seat  in
1861-9,  and  serving  for  six  years  as  chairman  of


PIKE


PILE


19


the  naval  committee.  He  was  active  in  his  efforts  '
for  emancipation  and  for  necessary  taxation,  and
the  olosinp  si'iitence  of  his  spei-ch  in  congress  in
1861 — "Tax,  fijjht,  emancipate" — became  a  watch-
word of  his  imrty.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in
18T0-'l.  and  was  defeated  as  a  candidate  of  the
Lilwral  Kepuhlican  party  in  1872.  In  1875  he  was
a  njeml)er  of  the  Maine  constitutional  convention.
He  retired  fn)m  the  practice  of  law  after  his  con-
jjn^ssional  service.  Mr.  Pike  was  an  early  and  active
Abolitionist,  a  friend  of  education,  and  for  many
years  an  eminent  mendnT  of  the  bar. — Frederick's
wife,  Mary  Haydeii  <«reeii,  b.  in  P^astport,  Me..
30  Nov.,  18*25,  was  |rnuluate<l  at  Charlestown  female
seminary  in  184^^.  and  married  Mr.  Pike  in  184(5.
She  published  her  first  lK)ok — "  Ida  May,"  a  novel,
dealmg  with  slavery  and  southern  life  among  the
wealthier  classes  (ftoston,  1854) — under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Mary  Langdon,"  and  00.000  copies  of
the  l)ook  were  sold  in  eighteen  months.  She  must
not  be  confounded  with  the  writer  of  a  song  enti-
tled "Ida  May,"  published  simultaneously  with
the  novel,  who  subsequently  issued  numerous
books  as  the  "  author  of  Ida  May."  Mrs.  Pike's
other  works  are  "  Caste,"  under  the  pen-name  of
"  Sidnev  A.  Storv,  Jr."  (1856).  and  "  Agnes  "  (1858).
PIKfe,  Zebulou  Montgoinerv,  soldier,  b,  in
Lamberton,  N,  J.,  5  Jan.,  1779 ;  d.  in  York  (now
Toronto),  Canada,  27  April,  1813.  His  father,
Zebulon  (b.  in  New  Jersey  in  1751 ;  d.  in  Lawrence-
burg,  Ind..  27  July,  1834),  was  a  captain  in  the
lievolutionary  army,  was  in  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair's
defeat  in  1791,  and  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colcmel
in  the  regular  army,  10  July,  1812.  While  the  son
was  a  child  his  father  removed  with  his  family  to
Bucks  county.  Pa.,  and  thence  in  a  few  years  to

Easton.where  the
boy  was  educat-
ed, lie  was  ap-
pointed an  en-
sign in  his  fa-
ther's regiment,
8  March,  1799, 1st
lieutenant  in  No-
vember, and  cap-
tain in  August,
1806.  While  ad-
vancing through
the  lower  grades
of  his  profession
he  supplemented
the  deficiencies
of  his  education
by  the  study  of
Latin.  French,
and  mathemat-
ics. After  the
purchase  of  Louisiana  from  the  French,  Lieut.  Pike
was  apf)ointed  to  conduct  an  expedition  to  trace  the
Mississippi  to  its  source,  and,  leaving  St.  Louis.  9
Aug.,  1805,  he  returned  after  nearly  nine  months'  ex-
ploration and  constant  exposure  to  hardship,  having
satisfactorily  performed  this  service.  In  1806-'7
he  was  engaged  in  geographical  explorations  in
Louisiana  territory,  in  the  course  of  which  he  dis-
covered "  Pike's  peak  "  in  the  Rocky  mountains,
and  reached  Rio  (Jrande  river.  Having  been  foimd
on  Spanish  territory,  he  and  his  party  were  taken
to  Santa  Fe;  but.  after  a  long  examination  and  the
seizure  of  his  papers,  thev  were  released.  He  ar-
rived at  Natchitoches,  1  July,  1807,  received  the
thanks  of  the  government,  and  in  1810  published  a
narrative  of  his  two  expeditions.  He  was  made
major  in  1808,  lieutenant-colonel  in  1809,  deputy
quartermaster-general,  8  April,  1812,  colonel  of  the


15th  infantry,  3  July.  1812,  and  brigadier-general,
12  March,  1813.  Jla'rly  in  1813  he  was  assigned  to
the  i)rincipal  anny  as  adjutant-  and  ins|>ector-gen-
eral.  and  selected  tf>  command  an  exiMidition  against
York  (now  Toronto),  rpjK'r  Canada.  On  27  Af>ril
the  fleet  conveying  the  troops  for  the  attack  on
York  reached  the  harlHjr  of  that  town,  and  measures
were  taken  to  land  them  at  once.  Gen.  Pike  landed
with  the  main  lK)dy  a-s  s<M)n  as  practicable,  and,
the  enemy's  mlvanced  parties  falling  l)ack  Ix'fore
him,  he  tor)k  one  of  the  redoubts  that  had  l>een
constructed  for  the  main  defence  of  the  place.
The  column  was  then  halted  until  arrangements
were  made  for  the  attack  on  another  redoubt.
While  Gen.  Pike  and  many  of  his  soldiers  were
seated  on  the  ground,  the  magazine  of  the  fort
exploded,  a  mass  of  stone  fell  u{X)n  him,  and  he
was  fatally  injured,  surviving  but  a  few  hours.

PILAT.  Ignatz  Anton,  landscape-gardener,  b.
in  St.  Agatha.  Austria.  27  June,  1820;  d.  in  New
York  city,  17  Sept.,  1870.  He  received  a  collegiate
education  at  Vienna,  and  studied  at  the  botanical
gardens  in  that  city  and  Schonbrunn.  His  first
work  of  magnitude  was  laving  out  Prince  Metter-
nich's  grounds.  He  remained  attached  to  the  im-
perial botanical  gardens  in  SchOnbrunn  from  1843
till  1853,  when  he  came  to  this  country  and  became
chief  gardener  on  Thomas  Metcalf's  estate  near
Augusta,  Ga.  He  held  this  post  till  1856,  when  he
returned  to  Vienna,  and  was  made  director  of  the
botanical  gardens;  but  after  a  short  stay  in  his  na-
tive land  he  returned  to  New  York,  and  in  1857
was  appointed  chief  landscape-gardener  in  Central
park.  In  addition  to  his  personal  superintendence
of  the  entire  park,  which  continued  till  his  death,
he  planned  and  superintendetl  many  improvements
in  the  public  squares  of  the  city  of  New  York.  He
wrote  a  work  on  botany  (Vienna),  and  a  small  one
on  landscape-gardening  (Linz,  Austria).

PILCH  ER,  EHjah  Homes,  clergyman,  b.  in
Athens.  Ohio,  2  June,  1810 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,
7  April,  1887.  He  was  educated  at  Ohio  univer-
sity, and,  entering  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church,  held  pastorates  both  in  this
country  and  in  Canada.  He  represented  his  de-
nomination in  Michigan  four  times  in  the  general
conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  was
for  four  years  a  meml>er  of  its  book  committee,  and
aided  in  establishing  the  Michigan  "Christian  Ad-
vocate," and  in  founding  Albion  college,  in  which
he  was  professor  of  history  and  belles-Tattres.  He
was  a  regent  of  Michigan  university  five  years,  one
of  the  originators  of  the  Agricultural  college  at
Lansing,  and  was  secretary  of  the  Detroit  confer-
ence nine  years.  He  was  the  author  of  "  History  of
Protestantism  in  Michigan  "  (Detroit,  1878).

PILE,  William  A.,  soldier,  b.  near  Indian-
apolis, Ind.,  11  Feb.,  1829;  d.  in  Monrovia,  Cal.,
7  July,  1889.  He  studied  theology,  and  became  a
clergyman  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  and
a  member  of  the  Mis.souri  conference.  He  joined
the  National  army  as  chaplain  of  a  regiment  of
Missouri  volunteers  in  1861,  and  took  command  of
a  light  battery  in  1862.  He  was  subsequently
placed  at  the  head  of  a  regiment  of  infantry,  pro-
moted brigadier- general  of  volunteers,  26  Dec.,
1863,  and  served  till  the  close  of  the  war,  being
mustered  out,  24  Aug.,  1865.  He  was  elected  to
congress  from  Missouri,  and  served  from  4  March.
1867,  till  3  March,  1869,  but  was  defeated  as  the
Republican  candidate  for  the  next  congress.  Mr.
Pile  was  appointed  by  President  Grant  governor  of
New  Mexico,  served  in  1869-70,  and  was  minister
resident  at  Venezuela  from  23  May,  1871,  till  his
resignation  in  1874.


20


PILLING


PILMORE


PILMNU,  James  Constantine,  philologist,  b.
in  WushiriKton,  I).  C'..  16  Nov.,  184«.  He  was  edu-
catod  nt  (lonzaga  college,  in  Washington,  and  in
1H72  iKH-ariie  connected  with  the  geologicuil  survey
of  the  K<K-ky  mountain  region  under  Maj.  John
W.  Powell.  "  In  this  relation  he  continued  until
1879,  and  was  constantly  among  the  Indian  triU>s
of  the  west,  engaged  in  tabulating  the  vocabularies
of  their  various  dialects.  He  tnen  became  chief
clerk  of  the  bureau  of  ethnology,  and  in  1881  was
ap|M)inted  to  a  similar  office  in  the  U.  S.  geological
survey.  Mr.  Pilling  is  a  memlK>r  of  numerous
scientific  societies,  and,  in  addition  to  memoirs  on
ethnological  subjects,  is  the  author  of  "  IJibliogni-
phy  of  the  Languages  of  the  North  American  In-
dians" (Washington,  1885);  "  Bibliography  of  the
Eskimoan  Languages"  (1887);  and  "  Bibliography
of  the  Siouan  Languages  "(1887).  all  of  which  have
been  issued  under  the  auspices  of  the  government.

PILLOW,  (ildeoii  Juhiison,  soldier,  b.  in
Williamson  county,  Tenn..  H  June.  18(Mi:  d.  in  Lee
county.  Ark..  G  Oct.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Niushville,  Tenn.,  in  1827,  prac-
tisetl  law  at  Columbia,  Tenn.,  was  a  delegate  to
the  National  Democratic  convention  in  1844,  and
aided  largelv  in  the  nomination  of  his  neighbor,
James  K.  Polk,  as  the  candidate  for  president.
In  July,  1846,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general
in  command  of  Tennessee  volunteers  in  the  Mexi-
can war.  He  served  for  some  time  with  Gen.
Zachary  Taylor  on  the  Mexican  frontier,  subse-
quently joined  Gen.  Scott  at  Vera  Cruz,  and  took
an  active  j)art  in  the  siege  of  that  city,  afterward
being  one  of  the  commissioners  that  received  its
surrender  from  the  Mexican  authorities.  At  the
battle  of  Cerro  (lordo  he  commanded  the  right
wing  of  the  American  army,  and  was  severely
wounded.  He  was  promoted  to  major-general,  18
April,  1847,  was  engaged  in  the  battles  of  Churu-
busco,  Molino  del  Key.  and  Chapul tepee,  where  he
was  wounded.  He  differed  with  Gen.  Scott  in
regard  to  the  convention  of  Tacubaya,  and  the
differences  letl  to  such  results  that  Gen.  Pillow
requested  a  court  of  inquiry  to  try  him  on  charges
of  insuljordination  that  were  maile  by  Scott.  The
court  was  ordered,  and  he  was  honorably  acquitted.
After  the  Mexican  war  he  resumed  the  j)ractice  of
law  in  Tennessee,  and  was  also  largely  engaged  in
planting.  In  the  Nashville  southern  convention  of
1850  Gen.  Pillow  took  conservative  ground,  and
opposed  extreme  measures.  He  received  twenty-
five  votes  for  the  nomination  for  the  vice-presi-
dency at  the  Democratic  National  convention  in
1852.  On  1)  May,  1861,  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.
Isham  G.  Harris  a  major-general  in  the  provisional
army  of  the  state  of  Tennessee,  and  aided  largely
in  the  organizati(m  of  its  forces.  On  9  July,  1861,
he  was  made  a  brigadier-general  in  the  provisional
Confederate  army.  He  commanded  under  Gen.
Leonidas  Polk  at'the  battle  of  Belmont,  Missouri,
7  Nov..  1861,  and  was  second  in  command  under
Gen.  John  B.  Floyd  at  Fort  Donelson  in  February,
1862.  He  declined  to  assume  the  chief  command
and  to  surrender  the  forces  at  this  fort,  so,  turning
the  place  over  to  Gen.  Simon  B.  Buckner,  he  es-
caped. He  was  now  relieved  from  command,  but
subsequently  led  a  detachment  of  cavalrv,  and
served  under  Beauregard  in  the  southwest.  He  was
also  chief  of  conscrripts  in  the  western  department.

PILLSBl'RY,  Amos,  prison-reformer,  b.  in
New  Hampshire  in  1805;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  14
July,  1878.  His  father  was  a  soldier  in  the  war  of
1812,  and  wa.s  warden  of  state  prisons  in  New
Hampshire  and  Connecticut  for  many  years.  The
son  was  appointed  warden  of  the  state  prison  of


Connecticut  at  Wethersfield,  and  held  the  post  for
manv  years.  After  leaving  Wethersfield  he  was
warden  of  prisons  in  other  states  for  several  years,
and  for  a  short  time  superintendent  of  police  in
New  York  city.  The  new  penitentiary  at  Albany
was  planned  according  to  his  suggestions,  and  he
l)ecame  its  superintendent,  and  continued  there  till
his  death.  lie  was  severe  and  rigorous  in  his  rule,
but  ix)ssessed  great  organizing  ability,  and  caused
prisons  and  penitentiaries  under  his  superintend-
ence to  become  sources  of  revenue  to  the  state.  He
was  considered  a  competent  authority  on  questions
of  moderate  prison-reform,  and  in  the  summer  of
1872  attended  the  prison  congress  in  London  and
took  part  in  its  discussions.

PILLSBURY,  Parker,  reformer,  b.  in  Hamil-
ton, Mass.,  22  Sept.,  1809.  He  removed  to  Henniker,
N.  II.,  in  1814,  and  was  employed  in  farm-work  till
1835,  when  he  entered  Gilmanton  theological  semi-
nary. He  was  graduated  in  1838,  studiea  a  year  at
Andover,  supplied  the  Congregational  church  at
New  London,  N.  IL,  for  one  year,  and  then  aban-
doned the  ministry  in  order  to  engage  in  anti-sla-
very work.  He  was  a  lecturing  agent  of  the  New
Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  and  American  anti-sla-
very societies  from  1840  till  the  abolition  of  slavery,
and  edited  the  "  Herald  of  Freedom  "  at  Concord,
N.  H.,  in  1840  and  1845-'6,  and  the  "  National  Anti-
Slavery  Standard  "  in  New  York  city  in  1866.  In
1868-'70  he  was  the  editor  of  the  "  Revolution,"  a
woman  suffrage  paper  in  New  York  city.  After-
ward he  was  a  preacher  for  Free  religious  societies
in  Salem  and  Toledo,  Ohio,  Battle  Creek,  Mich.,  and
other  western  towns.  Besides  pamphlets  on  reform
subjects,  he  has  published  "Acts  of  the  Anti-Slavery
Apostles"  (Rochester,  N.  Y.,  1883).— His  brother,
Oliver,  b.  in  Henniker,  N.  H.,  16  Feb..  1817;  d.  in
Concord,  N.  H.,  22  Feb.,  1888,  was  educated  at  Hen-
niker academy,  taught  in  New  Jersey  in  1839-'47,
occupying  a  prominent  place  among  the  educators
of  the  state,  returned  to  New  Hampshire  with  im-
paired health,  and  was  a  farmer  for  the  next  seven-
teen years.  He  served  three  terms  in  the  legislature,
was  a  state  councillor  in  1862  and  1863,  displaying
executive  ability  and  energy  in  business  connected
with  the  New  Hampshire  quota  of  troops,  and  in
1869  was  appointed  the  first  insurance  commissioner
of  the  state,  holding  the  office  till  his  death.

PILMORE,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Tadmouth,
Yorkshire,  England,  31  Oct.,  1739;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  24  July,  1825.  He  obtained  his  education
in  John  Wesley's  school  at  Kingswood,  and  under-
took the  work  of  an  itinerant  or  lay  preacher  under
Wesley's  direction.  In  1769  he  came  to  this  country
on  a  mission  to  establish  Methodism  in  Philadel-
phia. He  preached  from  the  steps  of  the  state-house
on  Chestnut  street,  from  stands  in  race-fields,  and
rode  the  circuits  with  his  library  in  his  saddle-bags,
holding  the  first  Methodist  meeting  in  Philadelphia
in  a  pot-house  in  Loxley's  court,  and  establishing
the  first  church  that  was  owned  by  the  Methodists
in  Philadelphia.  It  is  the  present  church  of  St.
George,  and  was  an  unfinished  building  purchased
from  the  Germans,  which  the  British  seized,  when
they  were  in  possession  of  the  city,  and  used  as  a
cavalry  riding-school.  After  the  war  of  the  Revo-
lution, Mr.  Pilmore  sought  for  orders  in  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church.  He  was  ordained  deacon,
27  Nov.,  1785,  by  Bishop  Seabury,  and  priest  two
days  later,  by  the  same  nishop,  and  became  rector
of  three  united  parishes  in  the  vicinity  of  Philadel-
phia. From  1789  till  1794  he  served  as  assistant
to  Rev.  Dr.  Samuel  Magaw.  He  was  then  called  to
Christ  church.  New  York  city,  where  he  remained
ten  years. In  1804  he  succeeded  Dr.  Magaw  in  the


PIM


PINCH  KIRA


21


rectorship  of  St.  Paul's  church.  Pliilmlelphia.  lie
received  the  dejfree  of  1).  I),  from  the  University  of
Petmsvlvanift  in  1807.  Dr.  Pilmore  UHiueathed
half  his  fortune  to  the  Protestant  K|)iscopal  ciuircli.
and  half  to  the  Society  of  St.  Cicorj;e,  an  orpaniza-
tion  for  the  aid  of  Kndish  eniijrrants.  He  pub-
lished "Narrative  of  IinU)rs  in  South  Wales"
(Philadelphia,  1825),  and  h'ft  in  manuscript  an  ac-
count of  his  "Travels  and  Trials  and  Preaching"
in  various  American  colonies,

PIM,  Bedford  Clapnerton  Trevelyan,  Brit-
ish naval  officer,  b.  in  Bideford,  Devon,  12  June,
1820;  d.  in  London,  1  Oct.,  1886.  He  wa.s  the  only
son  of  a  captain  in  the  British  navy.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Royal  naval  school,  went  to  India  in
the  merchant  service,  and  on  his  return  in  1842
was  appointed  a  volunteer  in  the  royal  navy.  He
wa.«  employed  for  several  years  in  the  surveying
service,  made  a  voyage  around  the  world  in  the
"  Herald  "  in  1845-'51,  and  was  engaged  in  the  en-
tire search  for  Sir  John  Franklin  through  Bering
strait  and  Baffin  bay.  He  saved  the  erew  of  the
"  Investigator,"  which  had  been  frozen  in  for  three
years,  and  was  the  first  man  to  make  his  way  from
a  ship  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  northwest  passage
to  one  on  the  western  side.  He  was  in  active  ser-
vice in  the  Russian  war,  and  in  China,  where  he  was
wounded  six  times.  He  was  made  a  commander,
19  April,  1858,  visite<l  the  Isthmus  of  Suez,  and
studied  the  question  of  an  interoceanic  canal  in
1859,  was  sent  to  the  West  Indies  in  command  of
the  "  Gorgon  "  in  1860,  and  employed  on  the  coast
of  Central  America  to  prevent  filibustering  at-
tempts on  the  part  of  William  Walker  against
Nicaragua.  He  retired  on  half-pay  in  1H61,  visited
Nicaragiia  in  1862  in  company  with  Dr.  Berthold
Seemann,  and  devoted  himself  for  several  years
to  the  project  of  interoceanic  railway  communi-
cation across  that  country  and  to  the  promotion  of
mining  interests  there.  He  was  made  a  captain,
16  April,  1868,  and  was  retired  in  April,  1870.  He
afterward  studied  law,  was  called  to  the  bar  of  the
Inner  Temple.  27  Jan.,  1873,  electetl  to  parliament
as  a  Conservative  in  February,  1874,  and  retained
his  seat  till  1880.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
the  oldest  arctic  explorer.  On  the  return  of
Lieut.  Adolphus  W.  Greely  and  his  comrades  from
the  polar  regions,  he  tendered  them  a  banquet  in
Montreal.  He  was  a  member  of  several  scientific
societies,  proprietor  of  "  The  Navy,"  and  author  of
"The  Gate  of  the  Pacific"  (London,  1863);  "  Dot-
tings  on  the  Roadside  in  Panama,  Nicaragua,  and
Mosquito,"  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Berthold  See-
mann (1869) ;  "The  War  Chronicle "  (1873) ;  "Es-
say on  Feudal  Tenure";  and  various  pamphlets
and  maeazine  articles.

PIMENTEL.  Manoel  (pe-men-tel),  Portuguese

Geographer,  b.  in  Lisbon  in  1650;  d.  there  in  1719.
[e  received  a  fine  education  and  succeeded  his
father  as  cosmographer,  and  became  in  1718  pre-
ceptor of  the  prince  that  reigned  afterward  under
the  name  of  Joseph  I.  He  went  several  times  to
South  America  to  collect  materials  and  documents
for  his  works,  and  was  also  appointed  commissioner
to  determine  the  limits  of  the  colony  of  Sacra-
mento on  the  river  Plate,  residing  three  years  in
the  country  and  preparing  a  map.  His  principal
work  is  "Arte  practica  de  navegar  e  roteiro  djis
viagensas  costas  maritimas  do  Brasil,  Guinea,
Angola,  Indias  e  ilhas  orientaes  e  cxjcidentaes "
(Lislx)ii,  1699;  revised  ed.,  1712).  Navarrette  in  his
"  Disertacion  sobre  la  historia  de  la  Nautica"  and
Barbosa  Machado  in  his  "Bibliotheca  Lusitana"
praise  Pimente!  as  one  of  the  ablest  writers  of  his
time  on  the  geognipby  of  South  America.


PI^A.  Kain6n  (peen'-vah),  Cuban  author,  b.  in
Havana  in  1819;  d.  there' in  1861.  He  .studied  in
his  native  city,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  Imr
and  practised  liis  profession,  at  the  same  time  cul-
tivating literature.  His  comedies.  "  No  quiero  ser
conde,"  "  I^as  Fiquivocaciones,"  and  "  Dios  los  jun-
ta," were  i)erformed  in  Havana  with  success.  In
1857  he  went  to  Spain,  where  he  published  his
novel,  "Geronimo  el  honrmlo"  (Madrid,  1858),  and
"  Historia  de  un  brilxin  dichoso  "  (1859),  which  were
praised  for  the  purity  of  their  style.  His  "Com-
entarios  &  las  leyes  Atenienses  "  (1860)  are  consid-
ered  remarkable  for  learning.

PINCHBACK.  Pinckney  Benton  Stewart,
governor  of  Louisiana,  b.  in  Macon,  Ga.,  10  May,
18J37.  He  is  of  African  descent.  In  1846  he  was
sent  to  school  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  In  1848  his
father  died,  and  he  Ix^came  a  Ijoatman.  In  1862
he  ran  the  (IJoirfederate  blockade  at  Yazoo  City  and
reached  New  Orleans,  then  in  possession  of  the
National  troops.  He  enlisted,  and  was  soon  de-
tailed to  assist  in  raising  a  regiment,  but,  owing  to
his  race,  he  was  compelled  to  resign,  3  Sept.,  1863.
He  was  subsequently  authorized  by  Gen.  Nathaniel
P.  Banks  to  raise  a  company  of  colored  cavalry.
In  1867  he  organized  in  New  Orleans  the  4th  ward
Republican  club,  Iwcame  a  member  of  the  state
committee,  and  was  made  inspector  of  customs  on
22  May.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional
convention  of  1867.  state  senator  in  \868,  and  was
sent  to  the  National  Republican  convention  of  the
last-named  year.  He  was  appointed  by  President
Grant,  in  April,  1869,  register  of  the  land-office  of
New  Orleans,  and  on  25  Dec,  1870,  established  the
New  Orleans  "  liouisianian."  The  same  year  he  or-
ganized a  company  for  the  purpose  of  establishing
a  line  of  steamers  on  Mississippi  river.  In  March,
1871,  he  was  appointed  by  the  state  board  a  school
director  for  the  city  of  New  Orleans,  and  on  6
Dec,  1871,  he  was  elected  president  pro  tempore  of
the  state  senate,  and  lieutenant-governor  to  fill  the
vacancy  occasioned  by  the  death  of  Oscar  Dunn.
He  was  acting  governor  during  the  impeachment
of  Gov.  Warmoth  from  9  Dec,  1872,  to  13  Jan.,
1873.  He  was  nominated  for  governor  in  1872,  but
withdrew  in  the  interest  of  party  peace,  and  was
elected  on  the  same  ticket  as  congressman.  He  was
chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  15  Jan.,  1873,  but  after
three  years'  debate  he  was  disallowed  his  seat  by  a
vote  of  32  to  29,  although  he  was  given  the  pay  and
mileage  of  a  senator.  On  24  April,  1873,  he  was  ap-
pointed a  commissioner  to  the  Vienna  exposition
from  Louisiana,  and  in  1877  he  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  state  board  of  education  by  Gov.
Francis  F.  Nichols.  On  8  Feb.,  1879,  he  was
elected  a  delegate  to  the  Constitutional  conven-
tion of  the  state.  Mr.  Pinchback  was  appointed
surveyor  of  customs  of  New  Orleans  in  1882.  and
a  trustee  of  Southern  university  by  Gov.  McEnery
in  1883  and  1885.  He  was  gratluated  at  the  law
department  of  Straight  university.  New  Orleans,
and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  April,  1886.

PINCHEIRA,  Jos^  Antonio  (pin-tchi  -e-rah),
Chilian  guerilla,  b.  in  San  Carlos  about  1801  ;  d.
in  Concepcion  about  1850.  He  formed  in  early  life
with  his  two  brothers  and  other  adventurers  a  band
of  robbers,  which  for  many  years  des<jiated  the
country  south  of  Maule  river.  In  November,  1825,
Pincheira  joined  a  Spanish  force  of  twentv-flve
men  under  an  officer  named  Sent>sain,  and  un-
furled the  banner  of  tha  royalist  cause,  so  that  the
government  sent  an  army  against  him.  Being  hard
pressed,  he  passsed  the  Andes  and  invaded  the
province  of  Mendoza,  the  government  of  which
made  a  regular  treaty  of  peace  with  him. In  1830


22


PINCKNEY


PINCKNEY


the  Chilian  jjoveniment  resolved  to  exterminate
liu'  giuTilhus,  and  sent  Col.  Hulnes  with  iiii  army
against  them.  The  latti'r  penetrated  into  tiie
mountain  regions  and  began  a  regular  campaign
against  Pinelu-ira,  capturing  part  of  his  forces  at
Koble  Guatho.  11  .Jan..  1882,  and  on  the  14th  de-
feating him  near  the  lagoon  of  Palanquin,  where
Pineheira's  brother,  Pablo,  was  killed,  and  the  lat-
ter I'scajH'd  with  only  fifty-two  men.  At  last,  sur-
rounde<I  «>n  all  sides,' he  surrendered,  on  11  March,
under  capitulation  that  insured  him  a  pardon.
This  was  strictly  kept  by  the  government,  and
Pincheira  retired  to  ConceiK-ion.

PINCKNEY,  Charles  Cotesworth,  statesman,
b.  in  Charleston.  S.  ('..  2")  Feb..  1746;  d.  there,  16
Aug.,  1^25.  His  father,  Charles,  was  chief  justice
of  .South  Carolina  in  1752.  The  son  was  sent  to
England to  be  educated  at  seven  years  of  age,

studied  at  West-
minster scho()l,and
wits  graduated  at
Christ  church,  Ox-
ford, read  law  in
the  Middle  Tem-
ple, and  j)assed
nine  months  in
the  Royal  military
acatlemy  at  Caen,
PVance.  He  re-
turned tothiscoun-
try  in  17G9,  settled
as  a  barrister  in
Charleston, and  be-
came attorney-gen-
eral of  the  prov-
ince. He  was  a
member  of  the  1st
Provincial  con-
gress of  South
Carolina  in  1775,  was  appointed  by  that  body  a  cap-
tain of  infantry,  and  in  December  of  that  year  was
promoted  major.  He  assisted  to  successfully  de-
fend PVirt  Sullivan  on  28  June,  1776,  became  colo-
nel on  20  Oct.,  and  left  the  Carolinas  to  join  Wash-
ington, to  whom  he  was  appointed  aide-de-camp,
{)articipating  in  the  battles  of  the  Hrandy wine  and
lermantown.  He  returned  to  the  south  in  the
spring  of  1778.  and  took  part  in  the  unsuccessful
ixpedition  to  Florida.  In  .January.  1779,  he  pre-
sided over  the  senate  of  South  Carolina.  He  dis-
played resolution  and  intrepidity  in  the  rapid  march
that  saved  Charleston  from  the  attack  of  tne  British
under  Gen.  Augustine  Prevost.  and  in  the  invsision
of  (leorgia  his  regiment  formc<l  the  second  column
in  the  assaidt  on  the  lines  at  Savannah,  and  in  the
secoiul  attack  on  Charleston,  in  April,  1780,  he  com-
manded Fort  -Moultrie  with  a  force  of  800  men.
The  fleet  entered  the  harbor  without  engaging  the
fort,  and  he  then  returned  to  the  city,  and  aided  in
sustaining  the  siege.  In  the  council  of  war  that
was  held  in  the  latter  part  of  the  month  he  voted
"for  the  rejection  of  all  terms  of  capitulation,  and
for  continuing  hostilities  to  the  la.st  extremity."
Ho  became  a  prisoner  of  war  on  the  surrender  of
the  city  in  May,  1780,  and  for  two  years  suffered  a
rigorous  confiiienient.  But  "  nothing  could  shake
the  firmness  of  his  soul."  He  was  ordered  into
closer  confinement  from  the  death-lx>d  of  his'  son,
but  he  wrote  to  the  commanding  British  officer:
"  My  heart  is  altogether  American,  and  neither  se-
verity, nor  favor,  nor  poverty,  nor  affluence  can  ever
induce  me  to  swerve  from  it."  He  was  exchanged
in  February,  1782,  and  was  commissioned  brigadier-
general  in  1783,  but  the  war  was  virtually  over,
and  he  had  no  opportunity  for  further  service. He


L>  X=.  Q^<n.Jy^^f^^


then  returnetl  to  the  practice  of  his  profession,  in
which  he  won  great  reputation  and  large  profits.
He  was  a  member  of  tne  convention  that  iramed
the  constitution  of  the  United  States  in  1787,  took
an  active  part  in  its  debates,  and  was  the  author  of
the  clause  in  the  constitution  that  "no  religious
test  shall  ever  be  required  as  a  qualification  to  any
office  or  public  trust  under  the  authority  of  the
United  States."  He  also  moved  to  strike  out  the
clause  that  allowed  compensation  to  senatoi-s,  on
the  ground  that  that  body  should  be  composed  of
persons  of  wealth,  and  consequently  above  the
temptations  of  poverty.  He  became  an  ardent
Federalist  on  the  atloption  of  the  constitution,  and
served  in  the  convention  that  ratified  it  on  the  part
of  South  Carolina,  and  in  the  State  constitutional
convention  of  1790.  He  declined  the  office  of  as-
sociate justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court  in  1791,
the  portfolio  of  war  in  1784,  and  that  of  state  in
1795,  and  in  1796  accepted  the  office  of  U.S.  minis-
ter to  France,  resigning  his  commission  of  major-
general  of  militia,  which  he  had.  held  for  several
vears.  The  Directory  refused  to  receive  him,  and
he  was  reminded  that  the  law  forbade  any  foreigner
to  stay  more  than  thirty  days  in  France  without
permission.  On  his  refusal  to  apply,  he  was  re-
quested to  quit  the  republic.  He  retired  to  Am-
sterdam, and  subsequently  returned  to  America.
While  on  this  mission  he  made  the  famous  reply
to  an  intimation  that  peace  might  be  secured  with
money:  "Millions  for  defence,  but  not  a  cent  for
tribute."  On  his  return,  war  being  imminent  with
France,  he  was  commissioned  major-general  by
Washington,  but  second  to  Alexander  Hamilton,
who  had  lieen  his  junior  during  the  Revolution.
W^hen  his  attention  was  directed  to  that  fact,  he
said :  "  Let  us  first  dispose  of  our  enemies ;  we  shall
then  have  leisure  to  settle  the  question  of  rank."
He  was  a  Federalist  candidate  for  the  vice-presi-
dency in  1800,  and  for  the  presidency  in  1804  and
1808.  In  1801  he  was  elected  first  president  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  the  College  of  South  Carolina,
and  for  more  than  fifteen  years  before  his  death
he  was  president  of  the  Charleston  Bible  society.
Charles  Chauncey  said  of  him  that  "his  love  of
honor  was  greater  than  his  love  of  power,  and
deeper  than  his  love  of  self."  He  was  third  presi-
dent-general of  the  Cincinnati.  He  married  the
sister  of  Arthur  Middleton.  Their  daughter.  Ma-
ria, published  a  work  in  the  defence  of  nullifica-
tion.—Charles's  brother,  Thomas,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.C,
28  Oct.,  1750;  d.
there,  2  Nov.,
1828,  accompa-
nied his  brotner
to  England  in
1753,  and  was  ed-
ucated at  West-
minster and  Ox-
ford. He  then
studied  law  in
the  Temple,  was
admitted  to  the
bar  in  1770,
and,returningto
Charleston  in
1772,  practised
in  that  city.
He  joined  the
Continental  ar-
my as  a  lieuten-
ant in  1775,  was
aide-tie-camp  to  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln,  and  served
in  a  similar  capacity  under  Count  D'Estaing  at  the


PINCKNEY


PINE


28


siege  ot  Savannah.  He  participated  in  the  battle
of  Stoiio  Ferry,  and  us  uule  to  Gen.  Horatio  Gates
was  wounded  and  taken  prii^oner  at  Camden.  He
saw  no  further  service  in  tl>e  llt^volution,  and  re-
turned to  his  profession.  Hedeclinetl  the  appoint-
ment of  U.  S.  district  jud^e  in  17HU,  Ijecanie  gover-
nor in  that  year,  was  a  member  of  the  legislature
in  1791,  and  drew  up  the  act  to  esttiblish  the  South
Carolina  court  of  etpiity.  He  was  ap|)ointcd  by
Washington  LI.  S,  minister  to  Great  Britain  in  1792,
and  on  the  expiration  of  his  term  in  1794  was  sent
on  a  mission  to  Spain,  where  he  arrangetl  the  treaty
of  St.  Ildefonso  that  secured  to  the  United  States  the
free  navigation  of  Mississippi  river.  He  returned
to  Charleston  in  1790,  was  tlie  Federalist  candidate
in  that  year  for  the  vice-presidency,  and  served  in
congri'ss  in  1799-1801.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war
of  1812  he  was  appointed  by  President  Mjulison
major-general,  with  the  charge  of  the  Gth  military
■district,  and  participated  in  the  battle  of  Horsesh(x>
Bend,  in  which  the  Creek  Indians  were  finally  de-
feated. He  then  retired  to  private  life,  and  did
much  to  encourage  the  development  of  the  agricuf-
tural  anil  mineral  resources  of  the  state.  lie  suc-
ceeded his  brother  as  4th  president-general  of  the
Cincinnati. — Charles,  statesman,  b.  m  Charleston,
S.  C.  in  1758:  d.  there,  29  Oct.,  1824,  was  the
^andson  of  William,  Charles  Cotesworth's  imcle.
His  father,  Charles,  was  president  of  the  South
Carolina  convention  in  1775,  of  the  senate  in  1779,
and  of  the  council  in  1782.  The  son  was  etlueateci
for  the  bar,  and  before  he  was  of  age  was  chosen
to  the  provincial  legislature.  He  was  taken  pris-
oner at  the  capture  of  Charleston,  and  remained
such  until  the  close  of  the  war,  when  he  resumed
hip  profession.  He  was  elected  to  the  Provincial
congress  in  1785,  and  subsequently  took  an  active
part  in  preparing  a  plan  of  government  for
the  United  States.  In  1787  he  was  a  delegate
to  the  conventiort  that  framed  the  constitution
of  the  United  States,  and  offered  a  diaft  of  a  con-
stitution, which  was  referred  to  the  committee  of
detail,  submitted,  and  some  of  its  provisions  were
finally  adopted.  In  1788  he  advocated  the  ratifica-
tion of  the  constitution  in  the  South  Carolina
convention.  He  was  elected  governor  the  next
year,  presided  over  the  state  convention  by  which
the  constitution  of  South  Carolina  was  adopted  in
1790,  was  re-elected  governor  in  1791.  and  again  in
1790.  and  in  1798  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as
a  ilef)ublican.  He  was  a  frequent  and  able  speaker
in  that  body,  and  one  of  the  most  active  promoters
of  Thomas  Jefferson's  election  to  the  presidency.
In  1802-'3  he  was  U.  S.  minister  to  Spain,  and
during  his  residence  in  that  country  he  negotiated
a  release  from  the  Spanish  government  of  all  right
or  title  to  the  territory  that  was  purchased  by  the
United  States  from  France.  He  became  governor
for  the  fourth  time  in  1800,  and  in  1812  strongly
atlvocated  the  war  with  England.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1819-'21,  and  opposed  the  Mis-
souri compromise  bill,  earnestly  warning  the  south
of  the  effects  of  the  measure.  This  was  his  last
public  service.  Mr.  Pinckney  was  the  founder  of  the
old  Republican  party  of  South  Carolina.  He  pos-
sessed liberal  views  on  all  subjects,  advocated  the
abolition  of  the  primogeniture  laws,  was  the  prin-
cipal agent  in  the  removal  of  the  civil  and  iK)litical
disal>ilities  that  had  l)een  imposed  on  Jews  in  South
Carolina,  and  was  the  first  governor  of  the  state
that  advocated  the  establishment  of  free  schools.
He  was  an  able  political  writer,  and  issued  a  series
of  addresses  to  the  people  under  the  signature  of
"  Republican "  (Charleston,  18(K))  that  were  in-
strumental in  the  election  of  Jefferson. He  also


published  in  the  same  year  s(fveral  pajwrs  in  de-
nunciation of  the  alien  and  seilition  laws  that  were
enacted  during  the  administration  of  the  elder
Achims.  Prirtcetoti  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  I),
in  1787. — Charles's  son,  Henry  LanrenH,  con-
gressman, b.  in  Charleston, S.  ('.,  24 Sept..  1794  ;  d.
there,  3  Feb.,  1803,  was  gra<luated  at  the  College  of
South  Carolina  in  1812.  studie<l  law  in  the  office
of  his  brother-in-law,  RolxTt  Y.  Hayne.  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  but  never  practised.  He
served  in  the  legislature  in  1810-'32,  and  was  chair-
man of  its  commitUie  of  ways  and  means  for  eight
years.  He  was  three  times  intendant,  and  three
times  mayor  of  Charleston,  an<l  in  188:i-'7  was  a
member  of  congress,  having  l)een  elected  as  a
Democrat.  During  the  administration  of  Presi-
dent Van  Buren  he  was  collector  of  the  port  of
Charleston.  In  1845-'0;^  he  was  tax-collector  of  the
parishes  of  St.  Philip  and  St.  Michael.  Mr.  Pinck-
ney was  a  constant  and  laiK>rious  writer  and  work-
er during  his  public  life.  He  founded  the  Charles-
ton "  Mercury,"  the  organ  of  the  State-rights
party,  in  1819,  was  its  sole  editor  for  fifteen  years,
and  published  many  orations  and  addresses.  He
alsf)  wrote  memoirs  of  Jonathan  Maxcy,  Rolx>rt  Y.
Hayne,  and  Andrew  Jackson. — Thomas's  grandson,
Charles  Cotesworth,  clergvman.  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  31  July,  1812,  was  graduate*!  at  the
College  of  Charleston  in  1831,  studied  at  Alex-
andria theological  seminary,  Va..  and  was  ordained
to  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.
He  has  since  held  charges  in  South  Carolina,  is  a
popular  divine,  active  in  benevolent  and  educa-
tional enterprises,  and  president  of  the  board  of
trustees  of  the  College  of  (Charleston.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  College  of
Charleston,  in  18701

PINDAR,  John  Hothersall,  English  colonial
educator,  b.  in  1794 ;  d.  in  West  jMalvem,  Eng-
land, 10  April,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Cam-
bridge in  1810,  and  was  nresi<lent  of  Cotlrington
college,  Barbadoes,  W.  I.,  from  1830  till  1835.
Subsequently  he  was  a  canon  of  Wells  cathedral,
and  principal  of  Wells  theological  college,  which
latter  office  he  resigned  in  1865.  He  published
"  The  Candidate  for  the  Ministry — Lectures  on  the
First  Epistle  to  Timothy  "  (London,  1837);  "Ser-
mons on  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  "  (1837) :
•'  Sermons  on  the  Holy  Days  of  the  Church "
(1850) ;  and  "  Meditations  for  Priests  on  the  Ordi-
nation Service  "  (1853).

PINDAR,  Susan,  author,  b.  near  Tarrvtown,
N.  Y.,  about  1820.  Her  father,  Charies  Pindar,  a
Russian  by  birth,  and  for  a  time  Russian  consul
to  Florida,  died  in  New  Orleans.  His  estate,  Pin-
dar's Vale,  adjoined  Wolfert's  Roost.  She  con-
tribute<i  numerous  poems  to  the  "  Knickerbocker
Magazine."  and  was  the  author  of  "  F'ireside  Fair-
ies, or  Christmas  at  Aunt  Elsie's  "  (New  York,  1849)
and  "  Midsummer  Fays,  or  the  Holidays  at  Wood-
leigh  "  (1850),  which  were  republished  together  as
"Susan  Pindar's  Story- Book  "  (1858),  and  "Le-
gends of  the  Flowers"  (1851).

PINE,  Robert  Edge,  artist,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  1730,  or,  according  to  some  authorities,
in  1742;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19  Nov.,  1788.
The  earlier  date  of  birth  seems  the  more  probable
from  the  fact  that  in  1700  he  gained  the  first  prize
of  £100  from  the  Society  for  tlie  encouragement
of  the  arts  for  the  l)est  historical  picture  that  was
offered,  "The  Surrender  of  Calais,"  with  figiires
as  large  as  life.  He  was  the  son  of  John  Pine,
the  skilful  artist  who  published  (1733-'7)  the  beau-
tiful edition  of  Honice  with  the  text  engraved
throughout  by  himself,  and  embellished  with  vig-


24


PINEDA


PINELO


nettes,  and  whose  portrait  by  Hogarth,  in  the  style
of  Rembrandt,  is  familiar  to  students  of  that
artist's  works.  From  whom  the  son  j?leaned  his
art  instruction  is  not  known,  but  doubtless  the
rudimentit  were  instilled  by  his  father.  In  1702
he  again  took  a  first  prize  for  his  picture  of
"  Canute  reprr»ving  his  Courtiers."  Both  of  thest;
prize  pictures  have  been  etigrnved.  Between  these
two  dates  he  had  for  a  pupil  John  Hamilton  Mor-
timer (1741-'<1>).  which  would  hardly  have  lx;en
the  case  had  he  iH'en  only  Ix'tween  eighteen  and
twenty.  Pine  devoted  himself  to  historical  com-
{)osition  and  portraiture,  l)ut  succeeded  l)est  in
the  latter  bmnch  of  art.  The  most  familiar  por-
traits of  John  Wilkes,  whose  principles  he  es-
poused, and  of  David  Garrick.  whose  friendship
ne  possessed,  are  from  his  easel,  and  have  been
repeatedly  engrave<l.  He  nainted  at  least  four
different  portraits  of  Garrick,  one  of  which  is  in
the  National  portrait  gallery,  London.  In  1782
he  held  an  exhibition  of  a  collection  of  Shake-
spearian pictures  that  he  hiul  painted,  some  of
which  were  engraved  afterward,  and  found  their
way  into  lioydell's  Shakesj)eare.  The  next  year,
or  the  early  part  of  the  following  one,  Pine  brought
his  family  to  Philadelphia.  His  object  in  coming
to  this  country  was  to  paint  portraits  of  the  emi-
nent men  of  the  Revolution,  with  a  view  of  repre-
senting in  several  large  paintings  the  princinal
events  of  the  war,  but  he  never  carried  out  nis
project.  He  brought  letters  to  Francis  Hopkin-
son,  ami  the  first  portrait  he  is  said  to  have  namted
after  his  arrival  is  the  well-known  one  of  that  pa-
triot. A  letter  from  this  gentleman  to  Wa^^hing-
ton,  explaining  Pine's  design  and  asking  him  to
sit  to  the  artist  for  his  portrait,  drew  out  the  fa-
mous "In  for  a  penny,  in  for  a  pound"  letter,
dated  Mt.  Vernon,  IG  May,  1785.  Pine's  likeness
of  Washington  was  engraved  for  Irving's  "Life  of
Washington,"  but  is  a  weak  and  unsatisfactory
picture,  as  are  all  of  Pine's  portraits  that  were
painted  in  this  country.  He  was  generously  pat-
ronized by  well-known  people,  doubtless  owing  to
his  friendly  dis|)osition  toward  the  land  of  his
adoption,  and  Roliert  Morris  built  a  house  for  him
in  Philadelphia  which  was  adapted  for  the  exhi-
bition of  his  pictures  and  the  prosecution  of  his
painting.  Here  he  died  suddenly  of  apoplexy.  He
IS  descrii)ed  as  a  "  very  small  man,  morbidly  irri-
table. His  wife  and  daughters  were  also  very  di-
minutive— thev  were  indeed  a  family  of  pigmies."'
After  his  death  his  wife  petitioned  the  legislature
of  Pennsylvania  to  Ijc  allowed  to  disjwse  of  her
husband's  pictures  by  lottery,  which  request  was
granted.  A  large  numl)er  of  them  fell  into  the
possession  of  Daniel  Bowen,  who  removed  them  to
Boston,  where  they  were  destroyed  in  the  burning  of
the  Columbian  museum.  They  served  before  their
destruction  to  give  to  Washington  AUston  his  first
les.sons  in  color — Pine's  strong  \mint  as  an  artist.
He  painted  portraits  of  several  of  the  signers  of
the  Declaration  of  Indei)endence.  including  the
familiar  ones  of  Robert  Morris,  George  Read,  and
Thomas  Stone.  A  l)eautiful  portrait  of  Mrs.  John
Jav,  by  Pine,  is  in  the  possession  of  her  grandson,
John  Jav,  of  New  Vork  city.

PIN  Si  DA,  Juan  de  (pe  -  nay' -  dah),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Seville  about  15*20;  d.  in  Nasca,
Peru,  in  1606,  He  went  to  Peru  at  the  time  of  the
war  lietween  the  younger  Diego  de  Almagro  and
the  royalists,  and  served  under  the  orders  of  the
governors  Cristobal  Vaca  de  Castro  and  Pedro  de
la  Qasca.  He  afterward  went  to  Chili,  and.  under
.Garcia  Hurta<lo  de  Mendoza  (q.  v.),  participated  in
the  heroic  deeds  that  are  celebratea  by  Alonso  de


Ercilla  (q.  v.)  in  his  famous  poem.  In  the  festivi-
ties to  celebrate  the  accession  of  King  Philip  II.
in  1558,  Pineda  had  a  quarrel  with  Ercilla.  which
ended  in  a  battle  between  their  followers  in  a
church.  They  were  imprisoned  and  condemned  to
death  by  Mendoza,  but,  the  whole  army  opposing
the  sentence,  it  was  changed,  and  both  were  exiled
to  Callao.  During  the  voyage  Pineda  resolved  to-
abandon  the  military  career  and  enter  the  order
of  San  Agustin.  which  he  did  after  his  arrival  \n
Lima,  0  April,  1560.  He  dedicated  himself  to  th&
conversion  of  the  Indians,  and  in  1571  went  as-
vicar  to  Conchucos,  where  he  worked  for  the  relig-
ious instruction  of  the  savages.  He  was  president
of  the  provincial  chapter  in  1579,  and  died  in  the
convent  of  Nasca  in  Peru.

PINEL,  Jac(|ues  (pe-nel'),  French  buccaneer,
b.  in  St.  Malo  in  1640;  d.  in  Capesterre,  Guade-
loupe, in  1698.  He  followed  the  sea  in  his  youth,
but  afterward  joined  the  buccaneers  in  Tortuga,
and  gained  both  fortune  and  reputation  by  daring-
expeditions.  In  1675,  having  obtained  a  land  grant
ih  Guadeloupe,  he  built  upon  the-seaside  a  fortified
castle,  and  excavated  tne  harbor  of  Capesterre,
which  he  made  the  headquarters  of  his  expeditions.
He  was  among  the  founders  of  the  city  of  Capes-
terre, on  his  land,  atforded  aid  and  assistance  to  the-
colonial  authorities,  and  contributed  much  toward
developing  the  resources  of  the  island.  Every  sum-
mer he  went  on  marauding  expeditions  in  the  Span-
ish possessions,  and  amassed  great  riches.  In  leSS-
he  carried  off  from  Santo  Domingo  a  noble  lady,
and,  having  wed  her,  received  letters  of  nobility
from  Louis  XIV.  His  estate  was  created  a  raar-
(|uis<ite,  and  it  was  the  only  one  that  ever  existed
in  the  French  possessions  in  South  America  Hi&
descendants  are  among  the  wealthiest  land-owners
of  the  West  Indies,  and,  through  alliance  with  his-
torical families,  are  connected  with  several  royal
houses  of  Europe.  "  Rich  as  Pinel  du  Manoir  "  is-
still  a  saying  in  the  French  West  Indies,  and  it  is
said  that  he  never  knew  the  number  of  his  slaves.

PINELO,  Antonio  de  Leon  (pe-nay'-lo),  Pe-
ruvian historian,  b.  in  Cordova  de  Tucuman  in
1589;  d.  in  Seville  about  1675.  He  was  educated
in  the  College  of  the  Jesuits  of  Lima,  and,  going  to
Spain  about  1612,  became  attorney  of  the  council  of
the  Indies,  and  afterward  judge  of  the  tribunal  of
La  Contratacion  in  Seville,  succeeding  Gil  Gon-
zalez Davila  {q.  v.)  in  1637  in  the  post  of  histori-
ographer of  the  Indies,  which  he  held  till  his  death.
As  early  as  1615  he  became  much  impressed  with*
the  necessity  of  collecting  methodically  all  the  de-
crees and  ordinances  that  had  been  issued  either
by  the  home  government  or  by  the  viceroys  of
the  American  possessions.  He  communicated  his
scheme  to  the  council,  and,  receiving  encourage-
ment, began  his  grand  work,  of  which  he  published
the  plan  in  1628:  "Discurso  de  la  importancia,  de
la  forma,  y  de  la  disposicion  de  la  colleccion  de  las-
leyes  de  Indias"  (Seville,  1623).  Having  obtained
the  king's  approbation  and  authority  to  search  the
archives  of  Madrid  and  Simancas,  and  even  a
special  royal  order  for  having  copies  made  from  all
documents  in  the  offices  of  the  state  secretaries  of
Mexico,  Lima,  and  Quito,  he  was  enabled  to  pro-
ceed more  speedily  with  his  work,  and  published  an
abridged  first  part,  "Sumario  de  la  recopilacion
general"  (Seville,  1634).  By  incessant  labor  Pinelo-
had  completed  the  work  in  1645,  but  its  publication
was  deferred  till  1680,  when  Vicente  Gonzaga  pub-
lished it  under  the  title  "  Recopilaci6n  general  de
las  leyes  de  las  Indias"  (4  vols,,  Matlrid,  1680).
Pinelo's  other  works  are  "  Epitome  de  la'Biblioteca
oriental  y  occident-al,  n&utica  y  geogrifica "  {Mad-


PI5JEYR0


I'INKEKTON


35


rid.  1629),  which,  in  a  reviseil  edition  (3  vols..  1787),
has  become  the  jfr«"»test  hibliogriijthy  of  works,
either  inHnuscript  or  printed,  repinlinfj  South
Amerioii:  "Tratado  de  conflrniaciones  reales,  que
«e  n><iuieren  para  hi-s  Indias  OecidentJiles"  (16;J0);
"Cuestion  moral:  si  el  chocolate  quehranta  el
ayunoece!esiastico''(lffiW);  '*Tablas('r«>noloj;icas"'
(iw."));  "  Aparato  politico  do  las  Indias  Occiden-
tnles"  (Ktta);  "  Vida  de  Santo  Torihio  arzol)is|)o
de  Iiima"(H)5;{);  "  Kl  Paraiso  en  el  NuevoMundo"
(16r>0);  and  "  Acuerdos  del  Concejo  de  Indias"
(1658).  Pinelo  left  also  several  manuscripts,  some
of  which  have  been  published  since  his  death.
These  include  "  Politica  de  las  Indias"  (Madrid,
(1829) ;  "  Bulario  Indico  "  is  a  code  of  the  canonical
laws  in  force  in  South  America  (1829);  "  Historia
del  Supremo  Concejo  de  las  Indias  " ;  "  Las  ha-
zafias  de  Chile  con  su  historia";  "  Fundacion  y
historia  de  la  ciudad  de  Lima  " :  '•  Descubrimiento
y  historia  do  Potosi " ;  and  "  Relacion  de  la  pro-
vincia  de  Quiche  y  LacAudon."

PISEYRO,  Enrique  (peen-yay'-ro),  Cuban  au-
thor, b.  in  Havana  in  1839.  He  studied  in  his  na-
tive city,  and  in  1863  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
After  a  tour  on  the  European  continent  he  returned
to  Havana,  where  he  founded  in  1865  the  '*  lievista
del  Pueblo,"  a  literary  and  critical  review,  and  prac-
tisi'd  his  profession.  In  1869  he  emigrated  to  the
United  States  on  account  of  the  Cuban  insurrection,
and  founded  in  New  York  a  review  under  the  title
of  "  El  Mundo  Nuevo."  He  has  published  "  Bio-
grafia  del  General  San  Martin  "  (New  York.  1870) ;
"Morales  Lemus  y  la  Revoluci6n  Cubana"  (1872);
"  Estudios  v  Conferencias"  (1880);  and  "  Poetas
famosos  defSiglo  XIX."  (Paris,  1883).

PINGREE,  Samuel  Everett,  governor  of  Ver-
mont, b.  in  Salisbury,  N.  H..  2  Aug.,  1832.  The
family  name,  formerly  written  Pengrv.  was  changed
by  his  father  to  Pingrv,  and  by  himself  and  his
brothers  to  Pingree.  tie  was  educated  at  Dart-
mouth, in  the  class  of  1857,  studiwl  law.  was  ad-
mitte<l  to  the  bar  in  1859,  and  began  practice  at
Hartfonl,  Vt.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  assisted  in  recruiting  a  company,  and  went  to
the  field  as  1st  lieutenant.  He  was  promoted  cap-
tain in  August,  1861,  was  disabled  by  wounds  that
he  received  at  Lee's  Mills,  and  after  returning  to
his  regiment  was  commissioned  as  major,  27  Sept.,
1862.  On  15  Jan.,  18(53,  he  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant-colonel. He  took  part  in  the  severest  fight-
ing of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  after  the
battle  of  the  Wilderness,  where  all  the  field-ofllcers
of  the  2d  Vermont  infantrv  were  killed  or  wounded,
was  placed  in  commando/  that  regiment.  He  wai-
mustered  out  on  27  July.  1864.  and  returned  to  the
practice  of  law  in  Hartford.  He  was  state  attorney
for  Windsor  county  in  1867-'8,  and  a  meml)er  of
the  Republican  national  convention  in  1868.  In
1882  he  was  elected  lieutenant-governor,  and  in
1884  was  chosen  governor  of  the  state.

PINHEIRO,  Sylvestre  Ferreira  (neen-yi'-e-
ro),  Maniuis  de.  Portuguese  statesman,  b.  in  Lis-
bon, 31  Dec,  1769;  d.  there  in  Septemlwr,  1847.
He  was  destined  for  the  church,  and  entered  the
Oratorians  as  a  novice,  but  left  the  convent  on  ob-
taining the  chair  of  philosophy  in  the  University
of  Coimbra.  His  lilieral  ideas  soon  excited  the  op-
position of  the  cler]E:y,  and  he  fled  in  1797  to  Eng-
land, to  escape  imprisonment.  Afterwanl  he  became
secretary  of  the  Chevalier  de  Araujo.  Portuguese
minister  to  Paris,  and  in  1802  was  promoted  charge
d'affaires  in  Berlin,  but  was  dismissed  in  1807  on
request  of  Napoleon.  He  immediately  rejoined  the
royal  family  in  Mrazil,  and  was  appointed  a  mem-
ber of  the  board  of  trade  and  assistant  secretary  of


state.  In  1809  he  was  sent  as  minister  to  Buenos
Ajres  to  organize  a  court  of  claims  and  settle  the
boundary  between  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese
dominions,  but  he  decline*!.  He  U'came  afterward
a  meml>er  of  the  privy  council,  and  wrote  several
memoirs,  advocating  the  enfranchisement  of  the
slaves  and  a  parliamentary  government  for  Brazil
and  Portugal.  In  1815  he  opposed  the  return  of
.lo^  VI.  to  LislKHi,  and  after  the  revolution  of
Perto  in  1821  became  secretary  of  foreign  relations
antl  war.  and  pro|K)sed  to  the  king  a  plan  to  quell
the  relxjllion.  In  spite  of  his  strenuous  efforts,  the
weak  monarch  determined  to  return  to  Lisbon,  ap-

f)ointed  Dom  Pedro  regent,  and  left  Bahia  in  great
laste.  Pinheiro  tried  to  change  the  king's  reso-
lution, but,  all  efforts  proving  unavailing,  he  ac-
companied Joa<i  to  Lisbon  in  1822.  and  was  secre-
tary of  state  till  the  suppression  of  the  constitu-
tional government  in  April.  1824,  when  he  resigned
and  resided  in  Paris,  living  till  18Ji4,  occupied  in
literary  laliors.  After  the  expulsion  of  Dom  Mi-
guel he  returned  to  Lisbon,  but  continued  to  re-
main in  private  life  till  his  death.  Pinheiro's  works
include  "  Memoria  sobre  os  vicios  da  administra-
qSo  Portugueza " (Bahia,  1811);  "Memoria  sobre  os
meios  de  destniir  a  escravidSo  no  Brazil"  (1812);
"  Memoria  sobre  um  griverno  representativo  com-
mum  ao  Portugal  e  ao  Brazil "  (1814) ;  "  Synopse  de
codigo  do  processo  civil "  (Paris,  1825) ;  "  Oltserva-
cOes  sobre  a  carta  constitucional  do  reino  de  Por-
tugal, e  la  constitucSo  do  imperio  do  Brazil "  (3
vols.,  181:51);  "  Principes  de  droit  public,  constitu-
tionel,  administratif  et  desgens"  (1834);  "Ol)ser-
vations  sur  la  constitution  du  Bresil,  et  la  charte
constitutionelle  du  Portugal"  (1835);  and  "  Pro-
jecto  de  codigo  para  la  nn(;Jlo  portugueza"  (1839).

PINILLOS,  Clandio  M.  de  (i)e-neel'-yos).  Count
of  Villanueva,  Cuban  statesman,  b.  in  Havana  in
Octoljer,  1782;  d.  there  in  1853.  When  very  voung
he  went  to  Spain,  entered  the  army,  and  took  part
in  the  war  against  the  French  in  1808.  He  was
sent  to  Cuba  in  1814,  and  in  1825  appointed  general
superintendent  of  the  finances  of  tne  island,  filling
this  office  during  twentv-five  years.  In  1825  the
income  of  Cuba  was  only  $2,000,000.  but  in  1837  it
had  risen  to  $37,000,006,  which  was  due  in  great
part  to  his  wise  measures.  He  built  many  public
schools,  hospitals,  and  roads,  and  in  1834  contrib-
uted to  the  construction  of  the  first  railroad  in  a
Spanish-speaking  country.  To  his  efforts  was  due
the  creation  of  a  nautical  college,  an  extensive
chemical  lalx>ratory,  an  aqueduct,  and  many  other
public  institutions,  for  the  scientific,  literary,  and
industrial  development  of  Cuba.  He  is  considered
one  of  the  greatest  In'nefactors  of  the  island.

PINKERTON,  Allan,  detective,  b.  in  Glasgow,
Scotland,  25  Aug.,  1819;  d.  in  Chicago.  111..  1  July,
1884.  He  became  a  Chartist  in  early  manhood,
came  to  this  country  in  1842  to  escar)e  imjirison-
ment.  and  settled  in  ("hicago,  HI.  He  wjis  made
deputy  sheriff  of  Kane  county  in  1846.  was  subse-
quently deputy  sheriff  of  Cook  county,  and  in  1850
was  appointed  the  first  detective  for  Chicago.  He
also  established  Pinkerton's  detective  agency  in
that  year,  and  from  that  date  till  the  emancipa-
tion was  largely  engaged  in  assisting  the  escape
of  slaves.  He  was  the  first  special  U.  S.  mail  agent
for  northern  Illinois  and  Indiana  and  southern
Wisconsin,  organized  the  U.  S.  secret  service  di-
vision of  the  National  army  in  1861.  was  its  first
chief,  and  subsecjuently  organized  and  was  at  the
head  of  the  Secret  service  department  of  the  Gulf
till  the  close  of  the  civil  war.  He  added  to  his  de-
tective agency  in  Chicago  in  1860  a  corps  of  night-
watchmen,  called Pinkerton's preventive watch.


26


PINKHAM


PINKNEY


esublishexl  offices  of  both  agencies  in  several  other
citiM,  and  was  sijjnally  succ-essful  in  the  discovery
and  suppn-ssion  of  crime.  While  in  theemploy-
inenl  of  the  Wilmiiij^ton  and  Halliniore  railroad
foMipany  in  1H(J1.  he  (Tiscovered  a  phm  to  assjis-si-
nate  AJmiliani  Lineohi  on  his  way  to  his  inaugura-
tion in  Washington.  Among  the  cases  in  wliicli
he  successfully  traced  thieves  and  recovered  money
are  the  robk'Vy  of  the  Carljondale,  Pa.,  bank  of
$40,000.  and  that  of  the  Adams  express  company
of  i7(H),tK)0.  on  0  Jan.,  18(M5.  from  a  train  on  the
New  York,  New  liaven.  and  Hartford  railroad,
and  the  taking  of  $300,000  from  an  express-car  on
the  IIu(lson  Kiver  railroad,  lie  also  broke  up
gangs  of  thieves  at  Seymour,  Ind.,  and  the  "  Mollie
Maguires  "  in  Pennsylvania.  He  published  alxuit
fifteen  detective  stories,  the  most  popular  of  \yliich
are  "The  Molly  Maguires  and  the  Detectives"
(New  York,  1877);  "Criminal  Reminiscences"
(1878);  "The  Spv  of  the  Ket)ellion  "  (1883);  and
"Thirtv  Y.-ars  a  betoctive"  (1884).

PlNkHAM,  William  Cyprian,  Canadian  An-
glican bishop,  b.  in  St.  Johns.  Newfoundland,  11
Nov.,  1844.  He  was  graduated  at  St.  Augustine's
college,  Canterburv,  England,  in  18Gi).  ordained
priest  in  the  established  church  in  18(59.  came  to
Canada,  iK'came  chief  superintendent  of  the  Prot-
estant schools  of  Manitoba  in  1871,  which  odice
he  resigned  in  1883,  and  was  appointed  archdea-
con of  Manitoba  in  1882.  In  1887  he  was  nuide
bishop  of  Saskatchewan,  and  in  1888  lie  became
bishon  of  Saskatchewan  and  Calgary.

PINKNEY,  William,  statesman.'  b.  in  Annapo-
lis, Md..  17  March,  17<)4;  d.  in  Washington,  25
Feb.,  1822.  His  father  wjvsan  Englishman  by  birth
and  was  a  loyalist  during  the  American  Revolu-
tion. Young.  Pinkney
showed  his  independ-
ent spirit  as  a  boy  by
joining  the  patriotic
side.  Owing  to  the
troubled  state  of  the
times,  his  early  edu-
cation was  imperfect,
but  he  made  up  for
this  deficiency  by  dili-
gent application  as  he
approached  manhood.
lie  first  chose  medi-
cine as  a  profession,
but  becomingac({uaint-
ed  with  Judge  Samuel
Cluuse.  who  offered  to
take  him  as  a  pupil,  he
began  the  study  of  law
at  Haiti  more  in  1783,
and  three  years  afterward  Wiis  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  practised  successfully  in  Harford  county.  Md.,
for  a  few  years,  and  was  sent  from  thai  district  in
1788  to  the  State  convention  that  ratified  the  con-
stitution of  the  United  States.  In  the  same  year
he  was  elected  to  the  hous*'  of  delegates,  in  which
he  continued  to  represent  Harford  county  till  his
return  to  Annapolis  in  1792.  Ilis  speeches  in  the
legislature  by  his  natural  eloquence  and  his  pure
and  felicitous  diction  won  for  him  more  than  a
local  reputation.  From  1792  till  1795  he  was  a
meml)er  of  the  executive  council  of  Maryland.  In
1796  President  Washington  appointed  him  a  com-
missioner on  the  part  of  the  bniled  States,  under
Jay's  British  treaty  of  1794,  to  determine  the  claim
of  American  merchants  to  compensation  for  losses
and  damages  by  acts  of  the  English  government.
This  was  the  lieginning  of  his  diplomatic  career
abroad. The  particular  service,  involving  the  con-


i^yL^/^<PL,£^


sideration  of  many  nice  questions  of  admiralty  law,
gave  employment  to  Pinkney's  best  powers.  He
remained  in  England  until  1804,  when  he  returned
home  and  resumed  the  practice  of  the  law  in  Balti-
more. The  next  year  he  was  appointed  attorney-
general  of  the  state  of  Maryland.  In  1806  he  was
again  sent  to  England  as  commissioner,  jointly
with  James  Monroe,  to  treat  with  the  English  gov-
ernment respecting  its  continued  aggression,  in
violation  of  the  rights  of  neutrals.  When  Mr.
Monroe  retired  in  1807,  Pinkney  was  left  as  resi-
dent minister  in  London,  in  which  post  he  remained
until  President  Madison  recalled  him  in  1811,  at
his  own  earnest  solicitation.  On  his  return  to
Maryland  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  state
senate,  and  at  the  close  of  the  year  President  Madi-
son apjiointed  him  attorney-general  of  the  United
States.  He  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  the  war  of
1812,  and  defended  the  policy  of  the  government
both  by  his  pen  and  sword,  being  wounded  at
the  battle  of  Bladensburg  while  leading  a  com-
pany of  riflemen.  In  1814  he  resigned  his  post
as  attorney-general  when  the  law  was  passed  re-
(juiring  that  officer  to  reside  at  the  seat  of  govern-
ment. In  1815  he  was  elected  to  congress  from
Baltimore,  but  he  resigned  the  next  year  on  being
appointed  by  President  Monroe  minister  to  Russia
and  special  envoy  to  Naples.  He  remained  abroad
two  years,  but,  feeling  the  want  ot  his  legal  income,
he  resigned  in  1818,  returned  to  Baltimore,  and  re-
sumed the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  was  en-
gaged in  most  of  the  chief  cases  in  the  supreme
court  of  the  United  States  during  the  next  four
years.  In  1820  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  discussion  on  the
admission  of  Missouri  into  the  Union.  He  con-
tinued also  his  labors  in  the  supreme  court,  and
while  engaged  in  his  double  duties  at  the  bar  and
in  the  senate  he  was  attacked  by  the  illness  that  ter-
minated his  life. — William's  son,  Edward  Coate,
author,  b.  in  London,  England,  1  Oct.,  1802 ;  d.  in
Baltimore,  11  April,  1828,  passed  the  first  nine
years  of  his  life  in  the  British  metropolis,  at  the
end  of  which  time  he  was  brought  by  his  father  to
the  home  of  the  family  in  Baltimore.  Soon  after  his
arrival,  young  Pinkney  entered  college,  but  before
he  had  completed  his  studies  he  was  taken  away
and  placed  in  the  U.  S.  navy.  After  remaining  six
years  he  resigned  on  account  of  a  quarrel  with
Com.  Ridgely,  his  superior  officer,  whom  he  chal-
lenged to  fight  a  duel.  The  commodore  treated
the  challenge  as  the  freak  of  a  boy,  and  declined  Jo
notice  it.  This  roused  the  anger  of  the  young
midshipman,  and  he  posted  Ridgely  in  the  streets
of  Baltimore.  After  leaving  the  navy,  Pinkney
began  the  study  of  the  law,  and  in  1824  was  ad-
mitted a  member  of  the  Baltimore  bar.  But  he
was  known  to  be  a  poet,  a  character  which  the  wis-
dom of  the  world  has  decided  to  be  incompatible
with  those  serious  studies  necessary  for  eminence
at  the  bar.  In  1825  he  published  his  exquisite
poems  in  a  thin  volume  of  about  sixty  pages.
They  were  written  between  his  twentieth  and
twenty-second  year.  Of  these  "  The  Health  "  and
"The  Picture  Song"  are  still  popular.  Extracts
from  them  were  circulated  throughout  the  United
States,  and  established  his  reputation.  As  an  evi-
dence of  the  estimation  in  which  he  was  held,  it  is
sufficient  to  mention  that  when  it  was  determined
to  publish  biographical  sketches  of  the  five  greatest
poets  of  the  country,  with  their  portraits,  Edward
rinkney  was  requested  to  sit  for  his  miniature  to
l)e  used  in  the  proposed  volume.  Tired  of  the  law,
which  he  found  even  less  profitable  >than  poetry,
Pinkney  in  1825  embarked  for  Mexico,  with  tlie


PINKNKY


PINTARD


27


intention  of  joininfj  t ho  patriots,  who  wore  fightinp
for  the  in(lei>en(lence  of  their  country.  But  the
Mexienn  navy  was  full,  and  while  waiting  for  a
vacancy  he  became  involved  in  a  (juarrel  with  a
native.'whoin  he  kille<l  in  a  duel  and  was  obliged
to  flee  the  country.  He  returned  to  Haltimore dis-
appointed, (liscouraged.  and  almost  crushed  by
sicKuess  and  sorrow.  The  year  after  his  return
from  Mexico,  Pinkney  was  appointed  professor  of
rhetoric  and  l)elles-lettres  in  the  University  of
Maryland.  There  was  no  salary  attachetl  to  the
post,  but  it  was  given  to  him  in  recognition  of  his
Drilliant  scholarship.  In  December,  1827.  he  was
chosen  editt)r  of  tlie  "  Marylander,"  a  political
newspaper  that  had  lK»en  established  in  the  interest
of  John  Quincy  Adams,  at  that  time  president  of
the  United  States.  A  few  months  after  taking
charge  of  the  "Marylander"  Pinkney "s  health,
which  had  l)een  declining  gradually,  failed,  and  by
1  April,  1828.  he  was  on  his  death-bed.— Another
son.  Frederick,  b.  at  sea,  14  Oct.,  1804:  d.  13  June.
1871},  was  deputy  attorney-general  of  Maryland,
and  assistant  editor  of  the  ''  Marylander."  anJl  sub-
sequently of  the  "  Baltimore  Patriot."  During  the
civil  war  he  published  poems  and  songs  that  be-
came pt)|)ular.  —  William's  brother,  Niiiian,  au-
thor, b.  HI  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  177G;  d.  there,  16
Dec.,  1825,  entere<l  the  U.  S.  army  as  lieutenant  of
infantry  in  1799.  became  captain  in  1807,  was  major
of  the  5th  infantry,  and  aide  to  Gen.  James  Wil-
kinson in  1813.  became  lieutenant-colonel  in  1814,
and  commanded  the  5th  i-egiment  at  Lyons'  creek,
for  which  service  he  was  honorably  mentioned  in
the  report  of  the  commanding  officer.  In  1820
he  was  promoted  colonel.  In  1807-'8  he  made  a
tour  of  the  south  of  France,  an  account  of  which
he  embodied  in  a  book  entitled  "Travels  in  the
South  of  Prance  and  in  the  Interior  of  the  Prov-
inces of  Provence  and  Languedoc  by  a  Route  never
before  performed "  (London,  1809).  Leigh  Hunt
said  of  this  book :  "  It  set  all  the  idle  world  to
going  to  France  to  live  on  the  charming  banks  of
the  Loire."— Ninian's  son,  Ninian,  surgeon,  b.  in
Anna|>olis,  Md.,  7  June.  1811 ;  d.  near  East  on,  Md.,
15  Dec,  1877.  was  graduated  at  St.  John's  college,
Annapolis,  Md.,  in  1829,  and  at  Jefferson  medical
college  in  18iS3.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  as-
sistant surgeon  in  1834,  became  surgeon  in  1841.
was  fleet  surgeon  of  the  Mississippi  squadron  in
1863-'5,  and  became  medical  director  with  the  rank
of  commodore  in  1871.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  St.  John's  college  in  1873.  Dr.  Pink-
ney delivered  many  addresses,  including  "  Home
and  Foreign  Policy  of  the  United  States  "  l)efore
the  house  of  delegates  of  Maryland  (1855);  one  on
the  presentation  of  the  American  flag  that  was
hoisted  by  Com.  Matthew  C.  Perry  in  Japan  (1853);
and  an  address  before  the  societies  of  St.  John's
college  (1873).— William's  nephew,  William,  P.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  17  April,  1810;  d.  in
Cockevsville,  Md.,  4  July,  1883,  was  gratluated  at
St.  John's  college.  Annapolis,  in  1827,  i)renared  for
the  ministry,  and  was  ordained  deacon  ni  Christ
church,  CaTnbridge.  Md.,  12  April,  1835,  by  Bishop
Stone,  and  prifst  in  All  Saints'  church,  Frederick,
Md.,  27  May,  1830,  by  the  same  bishop.  For  a  brief
period  he  was  in  charge  of  the  [)arish  in  Somer-
set. From  that  place  he  removed  to  Bladensburg.
where  he  became  rector  of  St.  Matthias's  church.
Several  years  later  he  accepted  the  rectorship  of
the  Church  of  the  Ascension.  Washington,  I).  C.
which  he  held  when  he  was  called  to  the  episcopate.
He  received  the  degree  of  I).  I),  from  St.  John's
college  in  185.';,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Columbian
university,  Washington,  D.  C,  and  from  Williain


and  Mary  in  1873.  Dr.  Pinkney  wa.«  elected  assist-
ant bishJtp  of  Marvland.  and  was  consecrated  in
the  Churcn  of  the  hipiphanv,  Washington,  D.  C,  6
Oct.,  1870.  On  the  death  of  Bishop  Whittingham
in  Octol)er,  1879,  he  iMH-'amo  bishop  of  the  diocese.
He  published  a  "  Life  "  of  his  uncle,  William  Pink-
ney (New  York,  1853).  and  a  "  Memoir  of  John  H.
Alexander,  LL.  D.."  which  hereatl  lx>forethe  Mary-
land historical  so<-iety  (Baltimore,  18G7).

PINNEY,  Norman,  dergvman,  b.  in  Simsburv,
Conn.,  21  Oct.,  18W):  d.  in"  New  Orleans,  La., 'l
Oct.,  1862.  He  wjis  gra«luated  at  Yale  in  1823,  and
then  studied  for  tlie  ministry  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church  under  Bishop  Thomas  C.  Brown-
ell,  by  whom  he  was  ordained.  In  1824  he  became
tutor  at  Washington  (now  Trinity)  college,  and  in
1826  he  was  nimle  professor  of  ancient  languages,
which  chair  he  then  held  for  five  years.  He  was
called  to  the  charge  of  a  church  in  Mobile  in  1831,
but,  Ijecoming  a  Unitarian,  he  resigned,  and  in
1839  attempted  to  found  a  college  in  that  city.
This  project  failed  on  account  of  his  inability  to
secure  a  satisfactory  faculty.  In  1852  he  was  asso-
ciatetl  with  Joseph  Rindge  in  establishing  a  large
boys'  school,  which  was  called  the  Collegiate  insti-
tute of  Mobile.  Mr.  Pinney  was  a  scholar  of  no
mean  ability.  He  contributed  poetrv  to  periodi-
cals, and  was  the  author  of  a  series  of  text-books,
including  "First  Book  in  French  "  (New  York);
"  Key  to  the  Same" ;  "  Progressive  French  Reader" ;
and  "  Practical  French  Reader."

PINTARD,  Lewis,  merchant,  b.  in  New  York
city.  12  Oct.,  1732 ;  d:  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  25  March,
1818.  He  was  descended  from  a  French  Protestant
family  that  fled  to  this  country  on  the  revocation
of  the  edict  of  Nantes.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he
succeeded  his  father  in  a  large  shipping  and  com-
mission business  with  the  East  Indies  and  London.
During  the  Revolutionary  war  he  was  agent  for
American  prisoners,  and  administered  the  scanty
funds  that  congress  wjvs  able  to  supply  toward
mitigating  the  sufiferings  of  the  captives  with
fidelity  and  economy,  for  which  he  received  the
thanks  of  Gen.  Washington.  After  the  war  he  was
the  chief  importer  of  Madeira  wine  into  the  United
States,  and  exporter  of  flaxseed  to  Ireland,  but,
owing  to  the  failure  of  his  consignee  in  Dublin,  his
cargoes  were  seized  and  bills  drawn  to  the  amount
of  £20,000  were  sent  back  protested.  He  then  en-
gaged in  the  importation  of  sugar  and  molasses
from  the  West  Indies,  which  he  carried  on  with
much  success  until  the  interference  with  American
vessels  by  British  cruisers  in  1812  led  to  his  re-
tii-ement.  He  withdrew  to  Princeton,  N.  J.,  where
he  spent  the  latter  part  of  his  life.  Mr.  Pintard
ranked  as  one  of  the  great  merchants  of  his  time,
and  was  one  of  the  incorporators  of  the  Chamber
of  commerce,  which  was  established  by  George  III.
in  1770  and  by  the  New  York  legislature  in  1784.
He  married  Susannah  Stockton,  sister  of  Richard
Stockton,  and  was  connected  with  many  of  the  Itest
families  in  this  country. — His  nephew,  Julin,  phi-
lanthropist, b.  in  New  York  city,  18  May,  1759:  d.
there,  21  June,  1844.  On  the  arrival  of  the  British
troops  in  New  York  city  he  left  Princeton  college
and  joined  the  patriot  forces,  but  returned  in  time
to  receive  his  degree  in  1776.  Subsequently  he
served  on  several  military  ex|M?dit  ions  and  then  bo-
came  deputy  commissary  of  American  prisoners  in
New  York  under  his  uncle.  Louis.  In  tliis  capacity
it  was  his  duty  to  examine  and  relieve  the  wants  of
the  prisoners,  and  he  continued  so  engaged  until
1781.  After  peace  had  been  est^iblished  he  turned
his  attention  to  the  shipping  business,  having  in-
herited a  large  fortune  from  his  mother,  which  he


28


PINTARD


PINZON


subsequently  lost  by  enpajrinjf  with  William  Duer
in  Aloxaniler  Hamilton's  scheme  for  funding  the
national  debt. In  17H7  he  was  sent  to  the  legisla-
ture, and  for  a  time  he  was  also  translator  of  the
French  language  for  the  government. He  edited
the  New  Yi»rk  "  Daily  Advertiser"  in  18()2,  but  he
soon  relincjuished  it  and  visited  New  Orleans  on
business. The  knowl-
edge of  the  province  of
Louisiana  tnat he  ac-
quired there  led  to  his
l»eing  called  in  1803  by
Alljeii Gallatin,  then
secretary  of  the  treas-
ury, toexpress  his  views
as to  the imtural re-
sotirces  of  this  colony,
and he  rosjiondod  fa-
vorably. Indeed, his
exact  information  con-
cerning  the value of
the province was  Iw-
yoiid  doubt the most
important considera-
<7^ ^  yi  y tion  submitted  to  the

./c//>>t  ^o€a/:f^£k^U  authorities,  and  the  one
that  led  to  its  purchase.
For  many  years  after  1804  he  was  first  city  inspec-
tor, and  during  the  war  of  1813,  owing  to  scarcity
of  change,  he  was  authorized  by  the  corporation  to
issue  notes  of  fractional  denominations,  lie  was
secretarv  of  the  Mutual  assurance  company  from
1809  till  1829.  and  in  1819  he  originated  the  first
savings  bank  that  was  estaljjished  in  New  York
citv.  serving  as  its  second  president  from  182:}  till
1842.  From  1H19  till  1829  he  was  secretary  of  the
New  York  chamber  of  commerce,  and  it  was  prin-
cipally through  his  interest  that  that  body  was  re-
established after  the  war.  Mr.  Pintard  was  treas-
urer of  the  Sailors' Snug  Harbor  in  ]819-'23,  and
he  was  instrumental  in  the  purchase  of  property  on
.Staten  island,  where  the  home  is  now  located. '  In
1H()4  he  was  active  in  founding  the  New  York
historical  society,  to  which  he  presented  many
valuable  works  on  colonial  history,  and  he  was
likewise  instrumental  in  establishing  the  Massa-
chusetts historical  society  in  1791,  winning  the
title  of  "father  of  historical  societies"  in  this
country.  Mr.  Pintard  was  also  active  in  the  foun-
dation of  the  American  Bible  society,  served  as  its
secretary  and  then  as  its  vice-president,  and  was
the  first  sagamore  of  the  Tammany  society.  He
was  manager  of  lotteries  in  New  York  city  when
such  were  fa.shionable.  and  it  is  believed  that  Co-
lumbia college  received  the  grant  of  the  liotanic
gardens,  containing  twenty  acres,  by  his  interven-
tion and  the  aid  of  De  Witt  Clinton  and  David
llosack.  On  19  Feb..  1805.  with  others,  he  liegan
the  efforts  that  resulted  in  the  present  free-school
system  of  New  York  city,  and  he  was  also  active  in
all  the  movements  that  resulted  in  the  building
and  completion  of  the  Eric  canal.  Mr.  Pintard
pn)jected  the  plan  of  streets  and  avenues  that
IS  now  in  existence  in  the  upper  part  of  New  York.
From  1800  till  near  the  close  of  his  life  there  were
few  enterprises  of  public  utility  that  he  did  not
further  by  his  pen  and  purse.  Mr.  Pintard  was
one  of  the  chief  supporters  of  the  General  theo-
logical seminary,  devising  ways  and  means  for
its  removal  from  New  Haven  to  New  York  city,
and  presenting  it  with  many  valuable  works.  In
1885  Pintard  Hall,  one  of  the  dormitories  of  the
seminary,  was  erected  in  his  honor.  The  degree  of
LL.  I),  was  conferred  on  him  by  Allegheny  college
in  1822. He  published  an  account  of  New  Orleans


in  the  "  New  York  Medical  Repository,"  and  a  notice
of  "Philip  Freneau"  in  the  "New  York  Mirror"
(1833),  and  translated  the  "  Book  of  Common
Prayer"  into  French  for  the  Huguenot  church  in
New  York  city,  of  which  he  was  a  vestryman  for
thirty-four  years. His  version  is  still  used.

Pf  NTO,  'Bento  Teixeira  (peen  -to),  Brazilian
poet,  b.  in  Pernambuco  in  the  first  half  of  the  16th
century;  d.  about  1610.  He  composed  and  pub-
lished a  poem  in  eight-line  stanzas  entitled  "  Pro-
sopopea,"  dedicated  to  Jorge  de  Albuquerque  Co-
elho  (Rio  Janeiro,  1601),  This  work,  which  had
become  extremely  rare,  was  reprinted  in  1872  by
the  librarian  of  the  Rio  Janeiro  national  and  pulJ^
lie  library  from  the  original  copy,  which  was  dis-
covered in  the  library,  where  it  nad  lain  neglected.
In  1601  he  also  published  in  Rio  Janeiro  a  "  Dia-
logo  sobre  as  grandezas  do  Brazil "  and  a  "  Narra-
tive de  naufragio  de  Jorge  Coelho  em  su  viagem
de  Pernambuco  sobre  6  navio  Santo  Antonio  em
1565,"  republished  in  "  Historia  das  tragedias  mari-
timas"  (Itio  Janeiro.  1852).

PINTO,  Francisco  Antonio,  Chilian  states-
man, b,  in  Santiago  about  1785 ;  d.  there  in  1858.
He  acquired  a  good  education,  and  when  very
young  was  graduated  as  a  lawyer  in  the  University
of  San  Felipe.  Soon  afterward  the  revolution  of
1810  began,  and  he  took  part  in  the  patriotic  move-
ment. The  following  year  he  went  to  Buenos
Ayres  as  a  diploiiuitic  agent,  and  in  1813  he  was
sent  to  London  with  a  like  commission.  He  served
in  1817  in  the  Argentine  Republic  under  the  orders
of  Gen.  Manuel  Belgrano  \q.  v.),  but  in  1821  he
returned  to  Chili  and  went  to  Peru  with  the  Chilian
liberating  army.  On  his  return  to  Chili  he  was
elected  vice-president  of  the  republic :  when  Gen.
Freire  resigned  the  presidency  in  1827  Pinto  as-
sumed the  executive.  He  accomplished  many  re-
forms, promoted  public  instruction,  and  enlarged
the  National  library.  He  resigned  on  14  July,  1829,
and,  although  in  the  same  year  he  was  re-elected,
he  resigned  again  in  1830.  Afterward  he  lived  in
retirement  for  several  years,  but  later  he  occupied
the  offices  of  senator  and  councillor  of  state. — His
son,  Anibal,  president  of  Chili,  b.  in  Santiago  in
1824 ;  d.  in  Valparaiso  in  1884,  studied  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Chili,  in  1845  was  appointed  attache  of
the  Chilian  legation  in  Rome,  and  in  1848  promoted
secretary.  On  his  return  to  Chili  he  was  called  to
the  chair  of  philosophy  and  the  humanities  in  the
university.  During  the  government  of  Jose  Joaquin
Perez  {q.  v.)  in  1862  he  was  appointed  intendant  of
the  province  of  Concepeion,  and  during  his  long
administration  he  embellished  the  capital  and  im-
proved its  hospitals  and  highways.  He  was  elected
deputy  to  congress  several  times,  and  in  1869  was
offered  the  portfolio  of  the  treasury,  which  he  re-
fused, not  wishing  to  take  part  in  politics.  In  1870
he  was  appointed  senator,  and  was  one  of  the  prin-
cipal promoters  of  the  railway  that  unites  the  port
of  Talcahuano  with  the  province  of  Sfuble.  When
Federico  Errazuriz  (q.  v.)  occupied  the  presidency
of  Chili  in  1871,  he  called  Pinto  to  organize  a  cabi-
net; but  the  latter  declined,  accepting  only  the
portfolio  of  war  and  the  navy,  which  he  occupied
three  years.  In  1876  he  was' elected  president  of
Chili.  During  his  administration  the  war  against
Peru  and  Bolivia  began  in  1879,  and  V)y  his  energy
the  means  for  its  prompt  prosecution  were  for-
warded to  the  front.  On  8  Sept.,  1881.  he  delivered
the  executive  to  his  successor,  Domingo  Santa
Maria,  and  retired  into  private  life.

PINZON,  Martin  Alonso  (pin-thonr),  Spanish
navigator,  b.  in  Palos  de  Moguer  in  1441 ;  d.  there
in  1493. He  was  descended  from  a  family  of  sea-


PINZON


PINZON


20


men,  and  became  an  able  pilot,  but  retired  from
active  service  and  was  the  senior  partner  of  the
firm  of  Pinzon  Brothers,  ship-builders  at  Palos  de
Mojjiier.  According?  to  Francis  Parkman  in  his
"  Pioneers  of  France  in  the  New  World,"  Pinzon
saUed  on  Iward  the  vessel  of  one  Cousin,  a  navi-
gator of  Dieppe,  in  14H8,  and  they  were  on  the
coast  of  Africa  wiien  their  vessel  was  forced  by
storms  far  to  the  southwest,  where  they  descried  an
unknown  land  and  dis<!overed  the  mouth  of  a
mighty  river.  On  the  return  voyage  Pinr,bn's  con-
duct became  so  mutinous  that  C'ousin  made  com-
plaint to  the  admiralty,  and  the  offender  was  dis-
missed from  the  maritime  service  of  the  town,
communicating  on  his  return  to  Spain  the  discovery
to  Columbus.  The  same  fact  is  cited  by  Leon
Guerin  in  *'  Navigateurs  Fran9ais,"  and  by  Charles
Estancelin  in  "  Navigateurs  Normands."  But  other
historians  affirm  that  Pinzon  had  not  navigated  for
vears  when,  bein^  called  to  Rome  on  business,  he
heard  of  the  projects  of  Columbus,  and  made  in-

auiries  at  the  holy  office.  There  he  learned  of  the
imes  and  tithes  that  hatl  lx>en  paid  to  the  holy
see  before  the  beginning  of  the  15th  century  by  a
country  named  Vinland,  and  saw  charts  that  had
been  made  by  the  Norman  explorers,  after  which
he  resolved  to  trust  Columbus.  On  his  return  to
Spain  he  was  consulted  by  Queen  Isal)el la's  advisers
on  Columbus's  schemes,  and  gave  a  favorable
answer,  which  greatly  aided  the  Genoese  navigator,
and  when  Columbus  obtained  permission  to  arm
three  ships,  Pinzon  provided  an  eighth  of  the  ex-
penses. He  took  command  of  the  caravel  "  La
rinta,"  but  from  the  first  showed  his  desire  to  rival
Columbu.s,  always  sailing  in  advance  of  the  other
ships  and  refusing  to  obey  the  admiral.  When
land  was  seen.  Pinzon  nretended  to  have  been  the
first  to  discover  it,  ana  a  Te  Deum  was  sung  on
board  his  ship.  On  21  Nov.,  1492,  he  separated
from  the  expedition  off  Cuba  for  the  purpose  of
taking  possession  of  the  treasures  that  were  to  be
found  m  that  island,  according  to  the  natives.
When  he  again  met  Columbus,  on  his  return
voyage  in  January,  1493,  near  Cape  Monte  Cristo,
he  attributed  his  parting  company  to  stress  of
weather,  and  the  admiral  feigned  to  believe  his
excuses.  On  the  homeward  journey  he  separated
from  Columbus  again  in  a  storm  off  the  Azores,
and  made  all  possible  sail  for  the  purpose  of  ar-
riving before  the  admiral  and  claiming  the  dis-
covery ;  but  he  was  carried  by  a  hurricane  to
Galicia,  where  he  was  detained  several  days,  and
asked  by  letter  an  audience  from  the  king.  He
arrived  in  Palos  on  the  evening  of  the  same  day
with  the  admiral  and  set  out  immediately  for
Madrid,  but  was  met  on  his  way  by  a  messenger
who  forbade  his  appearance  at  court.  Anger,  envy,
and  resentment  shattehed  his  health,  and  he  died  a
few  weeks  later  in  Palos  de  Moguer. — His  brother,
Vicente  Yailez,  Spanish  navigator,  b.  in  Palos  de
Moguer  about  1460;  d.  there  about  1524,  provided
also  an  eighth  of  the  expenses  for  the  expedition  of
Columbus,  and  was  aptK)inted  commander  of  the
caravel  "  La  NiAa."  Unlike  his  brother,  he  was
always  faithful  to  the  atlmiral,  and  when  the  flag-
ship "  Santa  Maria  "  was  wre<'ked,  24  Dec.,  1492,  off
the  coast  of  Hispnniola,  he  rescued  Columbus,  who
emlmrked  upon  Pinzon's  vessel.  According  to
Gomara,  he  accompanied  Columbus  in  his  second
and  third  voyages  to  the  Now  World  ;  but  other  his-
torians dispute  this.  In  1499.  having  obtained
a  concession  for  new  discoveries,  he  armed  four
caravels  in  partnership  with  his  nephew.  Arias
Martin,  and  spiled  from  Palos  de  Moguer,  13  Nov.,
1499. Steering  to  the  southward,  he  crowed  the


e(]uinoctial  line,  lost  sight  of  the  north  star,  and
on  20  Jan.,  1500,  descrried  land,  being  thus  the  first
to  discover  Brazil,  and  naming  the  Cajw  Santa
Maria  de  la  Consohicion  (now  Cape  St.  Agustinho).
He  landed  with  a  notary  and  witnesses  to  take  pos-
session of  the  country  for  the  king  of  Spain,  out,
ln'ing  attacked  by  warlike  Indians,  re-embarked,
and.  coasting  to  the  northwest,  discovcre<l  the
mouth  of  the  Amazon,  which  he  called  Santa  Maria
de  la  Mar  Dulce,  and  continued  to  explore  thecoa*it
to  the  Gulf  of  Paria.  He  arrived  in  Spain  on  iiO
Sept.  after  a  disastrous  homeward  voyage,  in  which
he  lost  two  ships  and  all  his  fortune.  In  150(1  he
associated  himself  with  Juan  Diaz  de  Solis  (a.  r.)
for  the  discovery  of  a  passage  from  the  Atlantic  to
the  Indian  ocean,  and  after  landing  on  the  coast  of
Honduras,  in  the  island  of  Guanaja,  they  entered
the  Gulf  of  Mexico  an«J  discovered  Yucatan  and
the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  which  they  called  Natividad.
On  his  return  he  was  summoned  to  court  to  consult
with  Americo  Vespucci  upon  new  discoveries  to  be
made.  Again,  in  association  with  Solis,  he  went
in  1508  on  a  new  expedition  to  South  America,  and
coasted  the  shores  of  Brazil  from  Cape  St.  Agus-
tinho to  latitude  40°  S.  He  quarrelled  with  Solis,
and  on  their  return  to  Seville  in  1509  they  were
not  received  with  favor.  Solis  was  imprisoned,  and
Pinzon  escaped  punishment  onlv  on  account  of  his
long  services.  After  that  time  he  gave  up  naviga-
tion and  settled  in  Palos  de  Moguer.  Pinzon's
descendants  exist  in  Huelva  and  Moguer,  and  they
have  always  been  navigators.  He  wrote  a  relation
of  his  explorations,  which  is  preserved  among  the
manuscripts  in  the  archives  of  Siniancas. — Another
brother,  Francisco  Martin,  b.  in  Palos  de  Moguer
about  1462 ;  d.  at  sea  in  July,  1500,  served  as  a
pilot  under  his  brother,  Martin  Alonso,  in  the  ex-
pedition of  1492,  and  was  likewise  hostile  to  Co-
lumbus. After  the  death  of  his  elder  brother  he
became  the  managing  partner  of  the  business  firm
in  Moguer,  and,  having  reconciled  himself  with  his
brother,  Vicente  Yafiez,  he  was  attached  as  pilot  to
the  expedition  of  1499.  During  the  homeward
journey  he  commanded  one  of  the  two  ships  that
went  down  in  a  hurricane  off  Hispaniola,  and  was
lost  with  all  his  crew. — Their  nephew.  Arias  Mar-
tin, Spanish  navigator,  b.  in  Palos  de  Moguer  in
1465 ;  d.  there  in  1510,  was  the  only  son  of  an  elder
brother,  and  was  already  a  pilot  of  reput*  at  the
time  of  the  expedition  of  Columbus.  He  embarked
as  such  on  board  "  La  Nifia,"  was  a  stanch  supporter
of  Columbus  during  the  voyage,  and  often  took
the  admiral's  part  against  Alartin  Alonso,  his
uncle  and  former  guardian.  Arias  accompanied
Columbus  also  in  his  second  and  third  voyages  to
America,  and  in  1499  obtained,  with  his  uncle,
Vicente  Yafiez,  permission  to  make  new  discoveries.
Stress  of  weather  separat^l  him  for  some  time  from
the  latter,  but  they  joined  again,  towanl  the  close
of  January,  1500,  off  Cape  St.  Agustinho,  and  they
sailed  in  companv  to  the  mouth  of  the  Amazon,
when  they  parted  again,  Vicente  steering  for  the
Guiana  coast,  while  Arias  made  sail  to  the  south-
ward along  the  coast  of  Brazil.  It  is  prolmble
that  he  advanced  as  far  as  the  present  Bay  of  Rio
Janeiro.  In  the  Gulf  of  Paria  he  fell  in  again  with
Vicente  Yafiez.  During  the  following  years  he
established  a  trade  between  Moguer  and  Cuba,  His-
paniola, and  the  other  American  possessions,  in
which  he  made  a  large  fortune.  In  1507  an(}  1509  he
accom|)anied  the  expeditions  of  his  uncle.  Vicente,
and  Solis.  which  proved  unfortunate.  Several  his-
torians assert  that  Arias  Pinzon  wrote  a  narrative
of  his  travels  which  is  preserved  among  the  manu-
scripts of  the  Escorial ;  out  this  has  not  been  proved.


30


PIPER


PISON


PIFER.  Richard  I'pton,  physician,  b.  in  Stra-
tham,  N.  11..  -i  April,  1818.  He'was  pnuhiated  at
Dartmouth  inwlical  school  in  184().  and  now  (1888)
practises  his  profession  in  Chicaj^o,  111.  Besides
contributinjj  to  various  njedical  jwriodicals,  ho  has
publishe<l  a  treatise  on"()|M.'rative  Sur^'ery,"  illus-
trate<l  with  alH)ut  !2,(XK)  drawings  by  the  author
(Boston,  18.Vi),  and  "  The  Trees  of  America  "  (4
(Mirts,  18r)7,  incomplete),  lie  also  drew  the  illus-
tnitions  for  Maclise's  "  Surgical  Anatomy."

PIRES,  Francisco  ({K'e-rays).  Hnt/iiian  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Celorico,  Portugal,  alx»ut  1520;  d.  in
Bahia.  Brazil,  in  158H.  He  l)ecame  a  Jesuit  in  1548,
afterward  went  to  Bnizil  as  a  missionary,  and  was
for  several  years  rector  of  the  College  of  Bahia.
He  wrote  "Cartas  Annuasaos  Padres  da  Provincia
de  Portugal  escripta.s  na  Bahia  a  17  de  Setend)ro,
1552"  (Italian  translation,  Venice,  1559)  and
"Cartas  escriptas  da  Capitania  do  p]spirifo  Santo
ao  P.  ManiH-l  de  Nobrega  em  o  anno  de  1558,"  also
published  in  Italian  (15()2).

PIRTLK,  Henry,  jurist,  b,  in  Washington
county,  Ky..  5  Nov.,  1798;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  28
March,  1H80.  His  parents  were  among  the  early  set-
tlers in  Kent  ucky.  The  son  received  a  good  English
education,  working  at  intervals  on  his  father's
farm,  studied  law,  and  after  practising  five  years
in  llarfonl.  Oiiio  county,  rt^moved  in  1825  to  Ixniis-
ville.  A  few  months  later  he  was  appointed  a
judge  of  the  general  court  to  till  a  vacancy,  which
post  he  resigned  in  18152  and  engaged  in  active
practice.  He  was  again  a|)pointed  in  1842,  but
again  icsigned  in  a  few  days,  at  the  close  of  the
pending  term  of  court.  In  1840  he  was  elected  to
the  state  senate,  and  while  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  Federal  relations  ho  made  a  report  that
condemned  certain  state-rights  resolutions  of  the
South  Carolina  and  Virginia  legislatures.  The
same  construction  of  the  constitution  that  was
made  in  this  report  was  laid  down  several  days
later  by  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  Judge  Pirtle
was  chancellor  of  the  Louisville  chancery  court  and
professor  of  constitutional  law.  efpiity,  and  commer-
cial law  in  the  University  of  Louisville  in  1846-'G8.
He  published  "  Digest  of  the  Decisions  of  the  Court
of  Appeals  of  Kentucky  "  (2  vols.,  Louisville,  1832).

PISE,  Charles  Constantine,  clergyman,  b.  in
Annapolis,  Md.,  in  1802;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  26
May,  18(J(».  After  graduation  at  (Georgetown  col-
lege, D.  C,  he  entered  the  College  of  the  propa-
gaiula.  Rome,  but  was  obliged  to  leave,  owing  to
his  father's  death,  and  completed  his  theological
course  in  Mount  St.  Mary's  seminary,  Emmetts-
burg,  at  the  same  time  teaching  classes  in  rhetoric
and  poetry.  He  was  ordained  there  in  1825,  and
ap{M)inted  to  a  mission  in  Frederick,  Md.,  but
was  transferred  soon  afterward  to  the  cathedral  at
Baltimore.  After  doing  missionary  work  for  sev-
eral years  his  health  failed,  and  he  went  to  Italy.
He  had  alreatly  become  recognized  as  the  pioneer
of  Roman  Catholic  literature  in  the  United  States,
and  at  Rome  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.,  and  was
made  a  knight  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire.  On
his  return  he  was  attached  to  St.  Patrick^s  church
in  Washington.  He  was  aii  intimate  friend  of
Henry  Clay,  and,  partly  through  the  influence  of
the  latter,  was  appointed  chaplain  of  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate, being  the  oidy  Iif>man  Catholic  priest  that  ever
held  that  office.  The  same  statesman  offered  Dr.
Pise  a  chair  in  Transylvania  university ;  but  he  pre-
ferred active  missionary  work.  He"  removed  to
New  York  on  the  invitation  of  Bishop  Dubois,  and
was  connected  with  several  (rhurches  in  the  city,
also  attaining  a  reputation  »is  a  lecturer  ahd
preacher. He  purchased  Emmanuel  church,  Brook-


Ivn,  which  became  the  Roman  Catholic  church  of
St.  Charles  Borromeo,  and  he  assumed  the  pastor-
ate of  it  in  1849.  His  works  are  "  Father  Row-
land," a  tale  in  answer  to  "  P^ither  Clement  "  (Bal-
timore, 1829) ;  "  Indian  Cottage,  a  Unitarian  Story  "
(1829);  "  History  of  the  Church  from  its  Establish-
ment to  the  Reformation"  (5  vols.,  1830);  "The
Pleasures  of  Religion,  and  other  Poems  "  (Phila-
delphia, 18JW) :  "  Iiorff  Vagabund»,"  an  account  of
his  travels  in  Ireland  ;  "  Alethia,  or  Letters  on  the
Truth  of  the  Catholic  Doctrines  "  (New  York,  1843) ;
"  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles,"  a  poem  (1845) :  "  Zeno-
sius,  or  the  Pilgrim  Convert  (1845);  "  Letters  to
Ada  " ;  "  Lives  of  St.  Ignatius  and  his  First  Com-
panions" (1845);  "Notes  on  a  Protestant  Cate-
chism"; "The  Catholic  Bride."  translated  from
the  Italian  (Baltimore.  1848);  and  "Christianity
and  the  Cniurch  "  (1850).

PISKARET,  Simon,  Algonquin  chief,  b.  in  Ot-
tawa, Caiuula,  in  1002;  d.  near  Three  Rivers  in
March,  164(5.  He  was  champion  of  the  Algonquins,
and  his  marvellous  exploits  are  still  recounted
among  the  northwestern  Indians.  At  first  he  was
an  enemy  of  the  Jesuits,  but  he  became  a  Christian
in  1642,  in  the  hope  of  gaining  French  favor,  and
soon  afterward  was  really  a  convert.  His  conver-
sion aided  the  French  colonization  of  Canada,  and
secured  a  momentary  f)eace  between  the  French
and  the  Indian  allies  and  the  Six  Nations.  This
was  brought  about  in  the  following  manner,  ac-
cording to  Parkman  in  his  "Jesuits  in  North
j  America  "  :  In  the  spring  of  1645  Piskaret.  with
six  other  converted  Indians,  set  out  on  a  war-
party,  and,  after  killing  fourteen  Iroquois,  made
two  prisoners,  whom,  owing  to  the  instructions  of
his  Jesuit  teacher,  he  treated  with  unexampled  for-
bearance. He  led  them  to  Sillery,  and  presented
them  to  Gov.  Montmagny,  and  they  were  after-
ward convteyed  to  Three  Rivers,  where  Champleur,
the  comnuindant,  after  clothing  and  equipping
them,  sent  thetn  home.  The  >Iohawks  felt  this
kindness  deeply,  and  on  5  July  following  they
sent  an  embassy  to  Three  Rivers,  led  by  the  chief
Kiotsatou. The  result  was  that,  on 17  Sept.,  a

fraud  council  was  held  at  Three  Rivers  by  Gov,
lontmagny,  the  Jesuit  superiors,  and  representa-
tives of  various  tribes,  at  which  a  general  peace  was
concluded,  and,  although  it  lasted  scarcely  a  year,
it  had  valuable  results  for  the  colonization  of
Canada.  Piskaret  now  followed  agriculture  in
his  domain  near  Three  Rivers.  He  was  killed  by
surprise  by  a  party  of  Mohawks  toward  the  clo§©
of  March,  1646,  when  peace  was  partially  broken.

PISON,  Willem  (pe-son),  Dutch  naturalist,  b.
in  Leyden  in  1596 ;  d.  there  in  1681.  He  studied
medicine  and  practised  his  profession  successively
in  Leyden  and  Amsterdam.  In  1()37  he  followed
Prince  Maurice  de  Nassau-Siegen  (q.  v.)  to  Brazil.
With  the  help  of  two  German  students,  one  of
whom  was  George  Marggraff  (q.  v.),  he  explored  that
country,  and,  discovering  the  ipecacuanha-tree,  pop-
ularized its  use  in  medicine.  Returning  to  Leyden
in  1645  with  a  fine  collection,  which  he  presented
to  the  city,  he  showed  his  manuscript  to  Jean  de
Laet,  who  inserted  in  his  "  Historia  naturalis  Brasi-
lisB "  (Leyden,  1648)  Pison's  treatise  "  De  Medi-
cinaB  Bnisiliensi,  Libri  IV."  After  the  death  of
Prince  Maurice,  Pison  entered  the  service  of  the
Elector  of  Brandenburg,  but,  returning  later  to
Holland,  he  published  a  revised  edition  of  his
former  work  with  many  additions,  under  the  title
of  "  De  IndiiP  utriusque  re  naturali  et  medicini,
Libri  XIV  "  (Amsterdam,  1658).  Plumier  dedicated
to  Pison  a  plant  of  the  Nictaginei  family,  arbor
spinis  horrida  Pisonia.


PITCAIRN


PITCHLYNN


31


PITCAIRN,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Pife-
shiro.  Scotliiiid.  alxiut  1740;  d.  in  lioston.  Miiss.,  17
June,  1775.  Ht<  became  captain  of  niarinos  on  10
Jan.,  1765,  and  major  in  April.  1771,  and  was
stationed  for  several  years  in  Boston,  where  he  is
said  to  have  l)een  the  only  British  olTK-er  that  dealt
fairly  with  the  jwople  in  their  disputes  with  the
soldiery.  He  took  part  in  the  expeuition  that  was
despatched  by  Gen.  Gage  to  Lexington  on  the
morning  of  19  April.  177o,  and  was  sent  in  advance
with  six  companies  with  orders  to  press  on  .to  Con-
cord and  secure  the  two  bridges  there.  At  Lexing-
ton he  found  the  Iwal  militia  drawn  u|>  an<l
ordered  them  to  disperse.  The  skirmish  that  fol-
lowed, which  is  known  as  the  battle  of  Lexington,
was  begun  by  the  British,  according  to  the  received
account.  Tlie  statement  that  Pitcairn  began  it  by
giving  the  order  to  fire  is  adopted  as  the  true  one
By  George  Bancroft  in  his  "  History  of  the  United
States,"  but  other  accounts  say  that  there  was  des-
ultorv  firing  before  the  order.  Pitcairn  insisted
till  his  death  that  the  minute-men  had  fired  first.
Later,  in  the  retreat  from  Concord  to  Boston,  Pit-
cairn was  obliged  to  abandon  his  horse  and  i)istols.
At  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill  he  was  the  first  to
ascend  the  redoubt  in  the  third  and  final  assault,
crying,  as  he  did  so,  "  Now  for  the  glory  of  the
marines."  but  he  was  shot  by  a  negro  soldier  in  the
last  volley  that  was  fired  by  the  provincials.  He
was  carried  by  his  son  to  a  boat  and  conveyed  to
Boston,  where  he  died  shortly  afterward,  his
widow  was  given  a  pension  of  £200  by  the  British
government.  Pitcairn  left  eleven  children,  of  whom
the  eldest,  David,  became  an  eminent  physician  in
London,  and  died  in  1809.

PITCHER,  Nathaniel,  governor  of  New  York,
b.  in  Litchfield.  Conn.,  in  1777;  d.  in  Sandy  Hill,
N.  Y.,  25  May,  1830.  He  removed  early  in  life  to
Sandy  Hill,  N.  Y.,  and  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature of  that  state  in  1806  and  1815-'17.  and  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  in  1821.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  holding  his  seat
in  1819-'23,  was  chosen  lieutenant-governor  of  New
York  in  1826.  and,  by  the  death  of  Gov.  De  Witt
Clinton,  became  governor  in  February,  1828,  serv-
ing till  January,  1829.  He  was  afterward  again  in
congress  in  1831-'3. — His  brother,  Zina,  phvsieian,
b.  in  Sandy  Hill,  N.  Y.,  12  April.  1797;  d.'in  De-
troit, Mich.,  5  April,  1872,  received  an  academical
education,  and  in  1822  was  graduated  in  medicine
at  Middlebury  college,  Vt.  He  was  appointed
assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army  on  8  May  of
that  year,  and  surgeon  with  rank  of  major  on  13
July,  1832,  but  resigned  on  31  Dec,  1830,  after  see-
ing service  in  the  south,  southeast,  and  southwest.
In  1835  he  was  president  of  the  army  medical  board,
and  from  2  Feb.  till  31  Aug.,  1839,' he  served  again
as  assistant  surgeon.  Meanwhile  he  had  removed
to  Detroit,  where  he  practised  till  his  death,  attain-
ing note  in  his  profession.  He  was  a  regent  of  the
University  of  Michigan  in  1837-52.  took  an  active
part  in  organizing  the  medical  department  of  that
institution,  and  was  afterward  given  the  honorary
title  of  emeritus  professor  there.  Dr.  Pitcher  was
a  member  of  many  professional  bodies,  and  at  one
time  served  as  president  of  the  American  medical
association.  He  was  for  several  years  an  editor  of
the  "Peninsular  Journal,"  and  publishetl  various
addresses,  reports,  and  contributions  to  profes-
sional journals.  While  he  was  in  the  army,  sta-
tioned on  the  northern  frontier,  he  studied  the
habits,  diseases,  and  remedies  of  the  Indians,  and
he  was  the  contributor  of  an  article  on  practi-
cal therapeutics  among  the  Indians  to  Heury  E.
Schoolcraft's  work  on  the  aborigines.


PITCHER.  Thomas  Gamble,  s^ddier,  b.  in
RfH'kport,  SjK'ncer  co..  Ind.,  23  Oct.,  1824.  He  was
graduated  at  the  I'.  S.  military  academy  in  1845,
and  assigned  to  the  .5th  infantry,  with  which  he
served  in  the  military  occupation  of  Texa.s.  He
was  transferred  to  the  8th  infantry  in  1846,  and
during  the  war  with  Mexico  took  part  in  the  en-
gagements at  Vera  Cruz.  Cerro  Gordo,  San  An-
tonio. Contreras.  and  Churubusco,  for  which  he
was  brevetted  Ist  lieutenant,  Molino  del  Rcy.  Cha-

F'ultepec,  and  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Slexico.
le  was  promoted  to  1st  lieutenant,  26  June,  1849,
antl  was  on  duty  at  posts  in  Texas  and  Arkansas
till  the  civil  war,  serving  as  de[K)t-commis»ary  at
San  Antonio  in  1857-'9.  and  receiving  his  promo-
tion to  a  captaincy,  19  Oct.,  1858.  He  served  in
defence  of  Harf>er'8  Ferry  in  June,  1862,  and  in  the
Virginia  campaign  of  that  year,  being  brevetted
major  for  services  at  Cedar  Mountain,  where  he
was  severely  wounded.  He  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.,  1862,
but  was  disabled  by  his  wound  till  10  Jan.,  1863.
He  was  on  duty  as  commissary  and  provost-mar-
shal during  the  rest  of  the  war,  attaining  the  rank
of  major  on  19  Sept.,  1863.  and  receiving  all  the
brevets  up  to  and  including  brigadier-general  in
the  regular  army  on  13  March.  186.5.  He  was  made
colonel  of  the  44th  infantrv,  28  July,  1866.  served
as  superintendent  of  the  tT.  S.  military  academy
from  28  Aug.  of  that  year  till  1  Sept.'.  1871,  and
was  governor  of  the  Soldiers'  home  at  Washington,
1).  C,  in  1871-'7.  Ho  was  then  on  special  duty  or
leave  of  absence  till  his  retirement  on  28  June,
1878, "  for  disabilitv  contracted  in  the  line  of  dutv."
From  1  March,  1880,  till  15  Oct..  1887,  he  was
superintendent  of  the  New  York  state  soldiers'
and  sailors'  home.

PITCHLYNN,  Peter  P.,  Choctaw  chief,  b.  in
Hush-ook-wa  (now  part  of  Noxubee  county.  Miss.).
30  Jan.,  1806;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in  January,
1881.  His  father  was  a  white  man,  liearing  Gen.
Washington's  commission  as  an  interpreter,  and
his  mother  was  a  Choctaw.  He  was  brought  up
like  an  Indian  boy,  but.  manifesting  a  desire  to  be
educated,  he  was  sent  200  miles  to  school  in  Ten-
nessee, that  being  the  nearest  to  his  father's  log-
cabin.  At  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  he  returned
hone  to  find  his  people  engaged  in  negotiating  a
treaty  with  the  general  government.  As  he  con-
sidered the  terms  of  this  instrument  a  fraud  uijon
his  tribe,  he  refused  to  shake  hands  with  Gen.
Andrew  Jackson,  who  had  the  matter  in  charge  on
behalf  of  the  Washington  authorities.  He  after-
ward attended  the  Columbia,  Tenn.,  academy,  and
was  ultimately  graduated  at  the  University  of
Nashville.  Although  he  never  changed  his  opinion
regarding  the  treaty,  he  became  a  strong  friend  of
Gen.  Jackson,  who  was  a  trustee  of  the  latter  in-
stitution. After  graduation  he  returned  to  Missis-
sippi, became  a  farmer,  and  married,  being  the  first
Choctaw  to  depart  from  the  practice  of  polygamy.
He  also  did  good  service  in  the  cause  of  temper-
ance, in  recognition  of  which  he  wjis  made  a  mem-
ber of  the  national  council.  His  first  proposition
in  that  body  was  to  establish  a  schot)!,  and,  that  the
students  might  become  familiar  with  the  manners
and  customs  of  white  people,  it  was  located  near
Georgetown.  Ky.,  rather  than  within  the  limits  of
the  Choctaw  country.  Here  it  flourished  for  many
years,  supported  by  the  funds  of  the  nation.  In
1828  he  was  appointed  the  leader  of  an  Indian
delegation  sent  by  the  U.  S.  government  into  the
Osage  country  on  a  peace-making  and  exploring
expedition,  preparatory  to  the  removal  of  the  Choc-
taws,  Chickasaws,  and  Creeks  beyond  the  Missis-


32


PITKIN


PITKIN


sippi.  Six  months  were  occupied  in  the  journey,
ana  the  negotiations  were  every  way  successful.
Pitchlyiin  displayinj;  no  little  diplomatic  skill  and
courape.  lie  eiiiijfrntod  to  the  new  reservation
with  his  people  and  built  a  cabin  on  Arkansjis
river.  Ho  was  an  wlmirer  of  Henry  Clay,  whom  he
met  for  the  first  time  in  1840.  He  was  ascending
the  Ohio  in  a  stoamlH)at  when  Mr.  Clay  came  on
iKwrd  at  Maysviile.  The  Indian  went  into  the
cal>in  and  found  two  farmers  earnestly  engaged  in
talking  al)out  their  crops.  After  listening  to  them
with  great  delight  for  more  than  an  hour,  he  re-
turned to  his  travelling  companion,  to  whom  he
said :  "  If  that  old  farmer  with  an  ugly  face  had
only  bt>en  educated  for  the  law.  he  would  have
made  one  of  the  greatest  men  in  this  country."
He  soon  learned  that  the  '*  old  farmer"  was  Henry
Clay.  At  the  Ixjginning  of  the  civil  war  in  1861
Pitchlynn  was  in  Washington  attending  to  public
business  for  his  trilx;,  and  assured  Mr.  Lincoln  that
he  hoped  to  keep  his  jwople  neutral  ;  but  lie  could
not  prevent  three  of  his  own  children  and  many
others  from  joining  the  Confederates.  He  himself
remained  a  Lnion  man  to  the  end  of  the  war,  not-
withstanding the  fact  that  the  Confederates  raided
his  plantati(m  of  (MK)  acres  and  captured  all  his
cattle,  while  the  enuincipation  proclamation  freed
his  10()  slaves.  He  was  a  natural  orator,  as  his  ad-
<lress  to  the  president  at  the  White  House  in  1805,
his  speeches  before  the  congressional  committees
in  1808,  and  one  delivered  before  a  delegation  of
(Quakers  at  Washington  in  18G9,  abundantly  prove.
According  to  C^haries  Dickens,  who  met  him  while
on  his  first  visit  to  this  country,  Pitchlynn  was  a
haiidsouK!  man,  with  black  hair,  aquiline  nose,
brojul  cheek-lx)iies,  sunburnt  complexion,  and
bright,  keen,  dark,  and  piercing  eyes.  He  was
buried  in  the  Congressional  cemetery  at  Washing-
ton with  nifisonie  honors,  the  poet,  Albert  Pike,
delivering  a  eulogy  over  his  remains.  See  Charles
Dickens's  "  American  Notes "  and  Charles  Lan-
man's  "  Recollections  of  Curious  Characters  "(Edin-
burgh. 1881).

PITKIN,  Wniiam,  lawyer,  b.  near  London,
Kngland,  in  KW");  d.  in  East  Hartford,  Conn.,  1(5
Dec,  1094.  He  received  an  excellent  English  edu-
cation, studied  law,  and  settled  in  Hartford  about
1659,  where  he  taught,  bt^ught  a  tract  of  land  on
the  east  side  of  Connecticut  river,  and  engaged
largely  'u  planting.  On  9  Oct.,  1662,  he  was  ad-
mitted a  freeman,  and  in  that  year  was  also  made
prosecutor  for  the  colony,  became  attorney  for  the
colony  by  appointment  of  the  king  in  1664,  was
deputy  in  1675  and  trejisurer  in  1676-'7,  and  in
16<6  lie  went  with  Maj.  John  Talcott  to  nego-
tiate peace  with  the  Narragausett  and  other  Indian
tribes.  From  1605  till  1690,  with  the  exception  of
a  brief  jieriod,  he  was  a  member  of  the  general
court,  and  occasionally  serveil  as  commissioner
from  this  colony  to  the  United  Colonies.  In  1690
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  colonial  council,
which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  In  169y  he
was  appointed  with  Samuel  Chester  and  Capt.
William  Whiting  to  a  commissioner  to  run  the
division-line  lx?tween  Connecticut  and  the  Massa-
chusetts colonies,  and  in  that  year  he  was  sent  by
the  colony  to  Gov.  Benjamin  Fletcher,  of  New
York,  to  negotiate  terms  respecting  the  militia  until
Gov.  Winthrop's  return  from  England,  whither  he
had  gone  for  the  same  purpose.  He  laid  out  with
John  Crow  the  first  Main  and  other  streets  of  Hart-
ford on  the  ea.st  side  of  the  river.  He  owned  a  full-
ing-mill near  liurnside,  which  was  burned  in  1690.
and  the  Kx-ality  Ix'came  known  as  Pitkin's  falls.
Many  of  bis  descendants  held  important  places  in


the  civil,  political,  and  military  affairs  of  the  col-
ony, lie  married  Hannah,  daughter  of  Ozias
(T(K>dwin,  the  progenitor  of  the  Goodwin  family  of
Connecticut,  who  came  to  this  country  with  Dr.
Thomas  Hooker. — Their  son,  William,  jurist,  b.
in  Hartford.  Conn.,  in  1664;  d.  there,  5  April,  1728,
was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  war  that  was
appointed  with  plenary  power  to  send  troops  into
Massachusetts  and  the  frontier  towns  of  Connecti-
cut, and  that  ordered,  on  1  Jan.,  1704,  400  men  to
\Hi  in  readiness  for  any  sudden  occurrence.  He
studied  law  with  his  father,  and  was  judge  of  the
county  and  probate  courts  and  of  the  court  of  as-
sistants from  1702  till  1711  when  the  superior
court  was  established  in  place  of  the  court  of  as-
sistants, and  of  which  he  was  chief  justice  in  1713.
This  office  was  held  by  four  successive  generations
of  William  Pitkins.  He  was  said  to  have  been  apt
in  repartee  as  well  as  argument,  and  once,  when  a
lawyer  named  Eels,  in  summing  up  a  ease,  said,
"  The  court  will  perceive  that  the  pipKin  is  cracked,"
Mr.  Pitkin's  reply  was:  "Not  so  much  cracked,
your  honor,  but  he  will  find  it  will  do  to  stew  eels
In  yet."  In  1697  he  was  elected  one  of  the  council
of  the  colony,  serving  until  his  death.  He  was  one
of  the  commissioners  to  receive  the  Earl  of  Bello-
mont  on  his  arrival  in  New  York,  was  a  commis-
sioner of  war  in  1706-'7,  one  of  a  committee  to
prepare  the  manuscript  laws  of  the  colony  in  1709,
and  again  to  revise  the  said  laws.  In  1718  he  was
appointed  one  of  a  committee  of  three  to  build  the
first  state-house  in  Hartford,  and  one  of  a  commit-
tee to  |)repare  a  map  of  the  course  of  the  Connecti-
cut river  from  the  "  mouth  of  it  to  the  north  bounds
of  the  colony,  to  be  inserted  in  the  plan  of  the
colony  now  ordered  to  be  drawn."  In  1706  he
built  two  fulling-mills  at  Pitkin's  falls,  in  connec-
tion with  which  he  conducted  a  large  business  in
clothing  and  woollens,  which  was  continued  by  his
sons. — The  second  William's  son,  William,  gov-
ernor of  Connecticut,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  30
April,  1094;  d.  in  East  Hartford,  Conn.,  1  Oct.,
1769,  was  chosen  town-collector  in  1715,  served  in
the  colonial  Jissembly  from  1728  till  1734,  was  made
captain  of  a  "  train  band  "  in  1730,  and  rose  to  colo-
nel in  1739.  He  was  elected  to  the  council  in  1734,
appointed  chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court  in
j  1741,  holding  this  office  until  1766.  From  1754
till  1766  he  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Connecti-
cut, and  was  the  first  to  resist  the  stamp-act  passed
in  1765.  He  was  one  of  the  delegates  to  the  Colo-
nial convention  in  Albany  on  19  June.  1754,  and
also  one  of  a  committee,  of  which  Benjamin  Franlc-
lin  was  chairman,  to  prepare  the  plan  of  union  that
was  adopted.  He  was  governor  of  Connecticut
from  1766  till  1769,  being  elected  by  so  great  a  ma-
jority "that  the  votes  were  not  counted."  His
urbanity  and  courtesy  of  manner  were  long  reraem-
liered,  and  a  "  Satire  on  the  Governors  of  Connecti-
cut," published  in  1769,  mentions  him  as  "bowing,
and  scraping,  and  continual  hand-shaking." — His
brother,  Joseph,  b.  in  1696;  d.  in  1762,  was  justice
of  the  peace,  represented  the  town  in  the  general
assembly  for  twenty  years,  and  was  judge  of  the
county  court  in  1735.  He  was  captain  in  the  3d
militia  company  and  became  colonel  of  the  1st  regi-
ment in  1757.  He  mustered  the  company  raised  for
the  expedition  against  Crown  Point,  which  was  led
there  by  his  brother,  John,  b.  in  1707;  d.  in  1790,
who  also  served  in  the  legislature,  and  presented
with  others  a  memorial  to  incorporate  the  town  of
East  Hartford,  which  was  effected  in  1783.— The
third  William's  son,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Hart-
ford in  1725;  d.  there,  12  Dec,  1789,  was  major  of
the  1st  regiment  of  the  colonial  forces  that  were


PITKIN


PITOU


83


raised  for  the  expo<lition  af^in.st  Canada  under
Gen.  Abercronihie  in  175H,  and  was  a  nieniljer  of
theroiincil  of  safety  durinj;  the  pfrcater  part  of  the
Il«'vc)lutionary  war.  He  was  apifointcd  colonel  in
17<52  and  was  a  nietnln'r  of  the  council  from  17(MJ
till  ITHo.  In  1784  he  was  elected  to  congress.  He
was  chief  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court  for
nineteen  years,  and  was  a  delejjate  to  the  conven-
tion for  the  ratification  of  the  constitution  of  the
United  States  in  178H.  He  was  connected  with
lart^o  manufacturing  interests  in  East  Hartford,
and  in  1775  began  to  manufacture  gun|K>wder  for
the  I{*>volutionary  war  in  the  same  mills  owne<i  by
his  grandfather.  This  wjis  the  first  powder-mill  in
the  stAte. — Another  son.  (iteor^e,  b.  in  1709;  d.  in
1806,  was  clerk  of  the  sufwrior  and  supreme  courts
for  nmny  years,  was  commissioned  captain  in  1708,
lieutenant-colonel  in  1774,  colonel  in  1775,  and
commanded  the  4th  regiment  of  minute-men,  with
which  he  marched  t«)  Boston  on  hearing  of  the
battles  of  Conconl  and  Lexington. — George  s  broth-
er, Timothy,  clergyman,  b.  13  Jan.,  1727;  d.  8
July,  1812,  was  grmluated  at  Yale  in  1747,  was  tutor
there  in  1750-'l,  and  a  fellow  of  the  corporation
from  1777  till  1804.  He  studied  theology  and  was
installed  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in
farmington,  Cotm.,  in  1752.  At  the  one  hun-
dretlth  anniversary  of  the  church  in  Farmington,
Rev,  Noah  Porter  said  that,  while  pastor  of  that
church  and  afterward,  Rev.  Mr.  Pitkin  "walked
with  dignity  up  the  centre  aisle  in  flowing  coat  and
venerable  wig,  with  his  three-cornered  hat  in  hand,
bowing  to  the  people  on  either  side." — The  third
William's  grandson,  Timothy,  lawyer,  b.  in  Farm-
ington, Conn.,  21  Jan.,  1760;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  18  Dec,  1847,  was  the  son  of  Rev.  Timothy
Pitkin.  He  graduated  at  Yale  in  1785,  devoted
much  time  to  astronomy,  calculating  the  eclipses
of  1800,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  served
in  the  legislature  for  several  years,  and  was  speaker
of  the  house  during  five  successive  sessions.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  serving  from  2
Dec,  1805,  till  3  March,  1819,  and  during  his  term
was  esteemed  good  authority  on  the  political  his-
tory of  the  country.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  I),  in  1829.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Statisti-
cal View  of  Commerce  of  the  United  States  of
America"  (Hartford,  1810;  3d  ed.,  New  Haven,
1835)  and  "A  Political  and  Civil  History  of  the
United  States  of  America  from  the  Year  1703  to
the  Close  of  Washington's  Administration  "  (2  vols..
New  Haven,  1828).  He  left  in  manuscript  a  contin-
uation of  this  work  to  the  close  of  his  own  political
life. — The  second  William's  descendant  through  his
son  Joseph,  Fredericli  Walker,  governor  of  Colo-
rado, b.  m  Manchester,  Conn.,  31  Aug.,  1837;  d.  in
Pueblo,  Col.,  18  Dec.  1880,  was  graduated  at  Wes-
leyan  university,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1858,  and
at  Albany  law-school  in  1859.  In  1860  he  went  to
the  west  and  began  to  practise  in  Milwaukee,  Wis.
His  health  became  impaired.  an<l  he  went  to  Eu-
ropo,  whence  in  \STi  he  was  brought  home  in  a
dying  condition,  but  removed  to  Colonwlo  and  en-
gaged in  rough  labor  in  the  mines,  regaining  sufli-
cient  health  to  resume  his  practice.  He  also  entered
politics,  and  in  1878  was  elected  governor  of  Colo-
nwlo. and  re-elected  to  this  office  in  1880  as  a  Re-
publican. He  was  prompt  and  fearless  during  the
riots  at  Ijeadvilio.  his  energetic  action  preventing
the  loss  of  many  lives  and  the  destruction  of  much
valuable  property.  He  was  urged  to  l>ecome  a  can-
didate for  U.  S.  senator  in  188;i.  but  declined.  The
town  and  county  of  Pitkin,  Col.,  wore  named  in  his
honor.  A  genealogy  of  the  Pitkin  familv  was  pub-
lished by  Albert  1'.  Pitkin  (Hartford,  1867).

VOL.  T. 3


PITMAN.  Benn.  stenographer,  b.  in  Trow-
bridge, Wiltshire,  England,  22  July.  1822.  He  was
educated  in  his  native  town,  and  in  1837  assisted
his  brother  in  fjerfecting  the  latter'a  system  of  pho-
nography. From  \H4S  till  1852  he  lectured  on  the
system  throughout  (treat  Britain,  and  ha<i  a  large
share  in  compiling  his  bn>ther's  text-books.  At
Isaacr's  request  he  cauje  to  the  United  States  in
January,  1853,  to  give  instruction  in  phonography,
and  settle<l  at  Cincinnati,  where  he  has  since  re-
sided. In  1855  he  discovered  the  process  of  pro-
ducing relief  copper-plates  of  engraved  work  by
the  galvanic  process  known  as  electrotypes,  for
which  he  wjus  awarded  a  silver  medal  by  the  Cin-
cinnati mechanics'  institute  in  1856.  The  follow-
ing year  he  succeeded,  in  connection  with  Dr.  J.  B.
Burns,  in  prmlucing  stereotyfHJ  plates  bv  the  gela-
tine process  in  photoengraving.  From  )iis  arrival
in  this  country  until  18'nJ  Mr.  Pitman  was  chiefly
engaged  in  rejjorting.  In  1805-'7  he  acte<l  as  the
omcial  stenographer  during  the  trials  of  the  assas-
sin of  President  Lincoln,  the  "  Sons  of  Liberty,"
the  "  Ku-Klux  Klan,"  and  other  similar  government
prosecutions. He  also  e<lited  and  comi)iled  the

Srinted  reports  of  these  trials.  In  187J^  he  aban-
oned  reporting  and  Ixjcame  connected  with  the
school  of  design,  now  the  art  acmlemy,  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Cincinnati.  His  object  was  to  secure  the
development  of  American  decorative  art  and  to
open  up  a  new  profession  for  women.  The  display
of  wood-carving  and  painting  on  china  sent  to  the
Phila<lelphia  centennial  exhibition  was  the  first
attempt  to  give  the  public  an  idea  of  what  had
been  accomplished.  Over  one  hundred  pieces  were
exhibited,  including  elalxirately  decorated  cabinets,
base-lx)ards,  bedsteads,  doors,  casings,  mantels,  pic-
ture-frames, and  book-cases — all  the  work  of  girls
and  women.  Mr.  Pitman  still  (1888)  lectures  and
teaf^hes  in  the  same  institution.  Besides  many  ele-
mentary books  of  instruction  on  phonography,  he
has  published  "  The  Reporter's  Companion  "  (Cin-
cinnati, 1854);  "The  Manual  of  Phonography,"
of  which  250,000  copies  have  been  issued  (1855);
"Trials  for  Treason  at  Indianapolis"  and  "The
Assassination  of  President  Lincoln,  and  the  Trial
of  the  Conspirators "  (1805);  and,  with  Jerome  B.
Howard,  "The  Phonographic  Dictionary"  (1883).
PITMAN,  Marie  J.,  author,  b.  in'Hartwick,
N.  Y.,  17  March,  1850;  d.  in  Paris.  France,  30  Nov.,
1888.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Lucius  D,  Davis,  of
the  Newport,  R.  I..  "  Daily  News."  was  educate<l  by

firivate  tutors,  and  in  1800  m'arried  Theophilus  T.
Mtman.  Her  pen-name  was  "  Margery  Deane,"  and
she  wrote  many  children's  stories  and  sketches  of
travel,  was  the  Newptirt  correspondent  of  the  Bos-
ton "  Transcript "  and  other  journals,  and  the  au-
thor of  "  Wonder  World,"  translations  (New  York,
1878),  and  "European  Breezes"  (Boston,  1880).

PITOU,  Louis  Ange,  French  author,  b.  in  Ch«-
teaudun,  France,  in  1709  ;  d.  in  France  about  1828.
He  entered  the  priesthood,  but  after  the  beginning
of  the  French  revolution  he  abandoned  his  profes-
sion. He  was  a  zealous  royalist,  was  arrested  six-
teen times,  and  finally  transported  to  Guiana  under
the  Directory.  Shortly  after  his  arrival  at  Cayenne
he  escaped,  and  after  manv  adventures  among  the
natives  he  returned  to  t^rance.  He  engagetl  in
new  conspiracies  under  the  consulate,  and  was  a
few  years  in  prison.  He  published  "Relation  de
mon  voyage  A  Cayenne  et  chez  les  anthropo-
phages'  (Paris,  1805).  This  work,  although  full  of
inaccuracies,  excited  the  public  curiosity,  and  a
second  enlarged  etlition  was  published  (2  vols.,
1808).  After  the  return  of  the  Bourbons,  Pitou  re-
ceived a  small  pension.


84


PITT


PITTS


PITT,  William,  English  statesman,  b.  in
Hav«<,  Kent,  28  May.  1759 ;  d.  in  Putney.  Surrey,
23  Jan.,  1806.  He  was  the  second  son  of  the  Earl
of  Chathmn  (q.  v.),  and  was  e<lucttted  at  Cambridge.
His  entire  training  was  directed  toward  making
him  a  parliamentary  orator.  He  studied  hiw  at
Lincohi's  Inn,  and  in  1780  became  a  meml)er  of
imrliament  for  the  Iwrough  of  Appleby.  His  first
speech,  on  20  Feb.,  1781,  was  in  favor  of  Edmund
Burke's  plan  of  economical  reform,  and  made  a
great  impression.  When  explaining  the  principles
and  conduct  of  his  father  on  American  affairs, and
referring  to  Lord  Westcote,  he  said  :  "  A  noble  lord
has  called  the  American  war  a  liolv  war.  I  alTirm
that  it  is  a  most  accursed  war,  wiclvwl,  barbarous,
cruel,  and  unnatural ;
conceived  in.injustice,
it  was  brought  forth
and  nurtured  in  f<»l-
ly;  its  footsteps  are
marked  with  slaugh-
ter and  devastation,
while  it  meditates  de-
struction to  the  mis-
erable people  who  are
the  devoted  objects
of  the  resentments
which  produced  it.
Where  is  the  English-
man who  can  refrain
from  wcepingon  what-
ever side  victory  may
be  declared  ?  "  The
voice  was  listened  to
as  that  of  Chiitliam
"again  living  in  his  son  with  all  his  virtues  and
all  his  talents."  In  the  next  session  Pitt  distin-
guished himself  more  brilliantly,  and  on  the  rise
of  the  liockinglmin  ministry  he  wa-s  offered  the
oflice  of  vice-treasurer  of  Ireland,  which  he  de-
clined. At  the  age  of  twenty-three  he  was  the
only  memlMT  of  his  party  in  the  house  of  commons
that  had  the  courage  and  eloquence  to  confront
Burke,  Fox.  and  the  other  great  orators  of  the  op-
lK)sition.  He  became  chancellor  of  the  exchequer,
and  in  178J3  prime  minister.  He  secured  the  pas-
sage of  imfK)rtant  bills,  and  negotiated  the  treaty
of  peace  with  the  United  States,  but  enforced  the
navigation  acts  of  England  against  America  with
much  severity.  Owing  to  current  events,  his  min-
istry l)ecame  enfeebjed,  and  yet,  notwithstanding
his  failure  in  foreign  expeditions,  Pitt's  extraordi-
nary genius  as  a  parliamentary  leader  gave  him
absolute  control  of  the  house  of  commons  and  over-
came opjxisition.  He  resigned  his  office  in  March,
1801,  and  lived  in  retirement.  In  May,  1803,  when
the  ambitious  designs  of  Napoleon  forced  England
to  break  the  peace  of  Amiens,  he  appeared  in  par-
liament to  deliver  a  speech  in  favor  of  the  war.  In
the  next  year  he  wjvs  recalled  to  the  ministry.  He
Iwcame  ill  with  anxiety  and  grief  at  the  success  of
Napoleon,  and  the  surrender  of  the  Austrian  army
at  Ulm  gave  him  a  shock  from  which  he  never  re-
covered. He  died  soon  after  hearing  of  the  battle
of  Austerlitz,  2  Dec,  1805.  Parliament  gave  him
the  honor  of  a  public  funeral,  and  buried  nim  near
his  father's  remains  in  Westminster  abbey.  See
"  Life  of  William  Pitt,"  bv  Lord  Stanhope  (4  vols.,
London,  1861-'2).

PITTA,  Sebastlao  da  Rocha  (pit  -tah),  Bra-
zilian historian,  b.  in  Bahia,  3  May,  16«0;  d.  in
Paraguassu,  2  Nov.,  1738.  He  studied  in  the  Jesuit
college  of  Bahia,  and  there  took  the  degree  of
master  of  arts.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  went
to  Portugal,  and  was  graduated  in theology  at


Coimbra  university.  On  his  return  to  Brazil  he
wrote  in  Castilian  a  romance  in  imitation  of  the
"Palmeirim  de  Inglaterra,"  and  comiwsed  verses
of  some  merit.  He  resolved  to  write  the  history  of
Brazil,  and  went  to  Lisbon  to  obtain  further  data,
where,  in  ortler  to  secure  more  material,  he  studied
French,  Italian,  and  Dutch.  After  devoting  half
of  his  life  to  the  work,  he  published  his  "  Historia
da  America  Portugueza  desde  su  descobriraento
ate  1724"  (Kio  .Janeiro.  1730).

PITTENtlER,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Knox-
ville.  Jefferson  co.,  Ohio,  31  Jan.,  1840.  He  stud-
ied in  the  county  schools  until  he  had  reached  the
age  of  sixteen,  and  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  2d
Ohio  volunteer  infantry  on  17  April,  1861.  He
served  in  the  battle  of  fiull  Run,  and  took  jjart  in
the  noted  Andrews  railroad  raid  which  began  on
7  April,  1862.  He  escaped  execution  as  a  spy,  wa*
imprisoned  until  18  March,  1863,  received  a  medal
of  nonor,  was  promoted  lieutenant,  and  returned
to  the  army,  in  which  he  served  until  impaired
health  forced  him  to  resign  in  August,  1863.  In
1864  he  entered  the  Pittsburg  conference  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  in  1870  was  trans-
ferred to  the  New  Jersey  conference,  in  which  he  now
(1888)  labors.  Since  1878  he  has  been  a  professor
in  the  National  school  of  elocution  and  oratory  in
Philadelphia.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Daring  and
Suffering,  a  History  of  the  Great  Railroad  Adven-
turers" (Philadelphia,  1863;  enlarged  ed..  New
York,  1887) ;  "  Oratory,  Sacred  and  Secular  "  (Phila-
delphia. 1881);  and  "Extempore  Speech"  (1882).

PITTS,  Edmund  Levi,  lawyer,  b.  in  Yates,
Orleans  co.,  N.  Y^,  23  May,  1839.  After  receiving
an  education  at  Yates  academy  he  was  graduated  at
the  State  and  national  law-school  in  Poughkeepsie,
N.  Y.,  in  1860.  He  was  a  member  of  the  assembly
from  1864  till  1868,  its  speaker  in  1867,  and  from
1869  till  1873  was  U.  S.  assessor  of  internal  reve-
nue. He  was  a  state  senator  fi'om  1880  till  1887,
serving  as  })rcsident  jaro  tempore  in  1886-'7.

PITTS,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  England  in  1668.
His  father,  Baruth  Pitts,  was  mayor  of  Lyme
Regis.  England.  The  son  emigrated  to  Boston  in
1694,  became  a  merchant,  and  held  several  offices
under  the  city.  Smibcrt  painted  portraits  of  him
and  his  wife. — His  son,  James,  b.  in  Boston  in
1712;  d.  in  1776.  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1731,  and  succeeded  to  his  fathers  business  and
fortune.  He  married  Elizabeth  Bowdoin,  sister  of
Gov.  James  Bow-
doin, in  1732,  and
was  a  member  of
the  king's  council
from  1766  till  1775.
On  the  death  of
Gov.  Bowdoin,  Mr.
Pitts  became  his  ex-
ecutor. He  and  his
wife  and  their  six
sons  took  an  active
part  in  the  Revolu-
tion. His  house,
which  stood  on  the
spot  that  is  now  oc-
cupied by  the  How-
ard athenaeum,  was
a  resort  of  the
Adamses  and  other
patriots.  In  1770,
with Royal Tyler

and  Samuel  Dexter,  he  was  instrumental  in  persuad-
ing Gov.  Hutchinson  to  comply  with  the  popular
demand  for  the  removal  of  the  troops  from  Boston.
He  was  for  many  years  treasurer  of  the  Society  for


PITZER


PIZARRO


85


pnipagtttinff  Christian  knowledjje  among  tlie  In-
dians. UlackWurn  painted  portraits  of  Ixtth  Jainvs
and  his  wife. — James's  eldest  son,  John,  b.  in  Bos-
ton in  1738;  d.  in  Tynjfsboro  in  IMlo,  was  cfradu-
ateil  at  Harvard  in  ITn?,  was  selectman  of  Hoston
from  1773  till  1778,  represented  the  city  in  several
provincial  conjjresses,  was  sfieakerof  the  houst*  in
177H.  and  afterward  state  senator. — Another  son,
Lendall,  b.  in  Boston  in  1737;  d.  in  1787,  wjisa  pa-
triot and  princijial  lemler  of  the  Boston  "  tea  party."
— .James's  j^^randson,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Bos-
ton in  177U;  d.  in  1830,  was  commissioned  lieuten-
ant of  lipht  artillery  in  18(>8,  and  captain  in  1809,
and  s<«rv(>d  through  the  war  of  1812.

PITZER,  Alexander  White,  clergyman,  b.  in
Salem,  Roanoke  co.,  Va.,  14  Sept.,  1834.  lie  was
graduated  at  Hamixlen  Sidney  in  1854,  and  at
Danville  theological  seminary,  Ky.,  in  1857,  after
which  he  was  pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  in
Ix'Avenworth,  Kan.,  Sparta,  Ga.,  and  Liljerty,  Va.,
and  in  1868  organized  in  Washington,  D.  C,  the
Central  Presbyterian  church,  of  which  he  is  now
(1888)  pastor.  Since  1875  he  has  been  also  professor
of  biblical  history  and  literature  in  Howard  uni-
versity in  that  city.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Prophetic  convention  in  New  York  city  in  1878,
and  assisted  in  drafting  and  rept)rted  the  doctrinal
testimony  adopted  by  the  conference.  He  has
taken  an  active  part  in  promoting  the  union  of  the
northern  and  southern  divisions  of  his  church.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Arkansas  college
in  1876.  In  addition  to  numerous  contributions
to  denominational  literature,  he  is  the  author  of
"  Ecce  Deus  Homo,"  published  anonymously  (Phila-
delphia, 1867);  '•  Christ,  Teacher  of  Men  "(1877);
and  "The  New  Life  not  the  Higher  Life"  (1878).

PIZARRO,  Francisco  (pe-thar -ro),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Trujillo,  Estremadura,  in  1476;  d.  in
Lima,  Peru,  20  June,  1541,  He  was  a  natural  son
of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  a  colonel  of  infantry,  and,  al-
though he  was  afterward  recoo^nized  by  his  father,
he  received  no  education,  and  was  unable  to  write
his  own  name.  According  to  Francisco  Gomara.
he  was  in  his  youth  a  swineherd,  until  he  ran  away
and  joined  some  adventurers  that  were  going  to
Hispaniola,  while  Garcilaso  and  Pizarro's  descend-
ants, in  a  memorial  to  the  king,  afTirtn  that  he
served  with  his  father  in  Italy.  Although  it  is
said  that  in  later  years  he  learned  to  reail  imper-
fectly, he  never  was  able  to  write,  and  was  author-
ized by  a  special  imperial  decree  to  sign  his  name
with  a  stamp.  In  Hispaniola  he  joined  in  Novem-
ber, 1509,  the  expedition  of  Alonso  de  Ojeda  {q.  v.)
to  Nueva  Andalucia,  and,  when  the  latter  went  in

?uest  of  re-enforceraents  and  provisions,  he  left
izarro  in  command  of  the  new  colony  of  San  Se-
bastian, promising  to  return  in  fifty  days.  At  the
expiration  of  that  time  Pizarro,  forced  by  neces-
sity, killed  the  horses  for  provisions  and  abandonee!
the  colony,  but  in  Carthagena  met  the  expedition
of  Martin  Fernandez  de  Eneiso  {q.  r.\  with  whom
he  returned  to  Darien,  and  took  j)art  in  the  foun-
dation of  the  colony  of  Santa  Maria  de  la  Antigua.
He  also  accompanied  Vasco  Nufiez  dti  BallK)a  in
the  expedition  on  which  they  discovered  the  Pacific
ocean.  Pedrarias-Davila  sent  him  in  1515  with  an
ex|)c<lition  across  the  isthmus  to  ex[)lore  the  Pearl
islands,  and  in  1517  ordered  him  to  arrest  Balboa.
Later  he  accomi)anied  the  governor  on  his  ex-
pedition to  Venigua,  and  served  crcelitably  in  the
campaign  against  the  cacique  Urraca.  In  recom-
pense he  received  a  grant  of  land  and  Indians  near
the  site  of  Panama,  and  settle<l  on  his  possessions,
which  he  cultivated  with  his  Indian  slaves.  The
expedition  of  Pascual  de  Andagoya  brought  the


first  news  of  a  rich  empire  to  the  south,  and
Pizarro  conceived  the  project  of  conipiering  it
He  forme<l  a  |>artnership  with  Diego  de  Almagro
and  Fernando  de  Luque,  and,  by  lending  Pedrarias
some  money  for  his
exiK^dition  to  Nica-
ragua, the  [Mirtners
obtained  jK'rmis-
sion  to  form  an
expedition.  In  No-
vember, 1524,  Pi-
zarro left  Panama
with  eighty  adven-
turers, and  some
time  afterward
Almagro  followed
with  sixty  men.
Both  continued
along  the  coast  to
the  southward,  but
in  their  attempts  to
penetrate  to  the  in-
terior they  met  with  a  detennined  resistance,  lost
many  men,  and,  after  sustaining  terrible  hardshijis,
returned  to  Panama  with  news  of  the  riches  of  Peru.
Pedrarias,  after  much  difficulty,  permitted  them  to
arrange  for  another  exf>edition ;  l)Ut  the  mishaps  of
the  first  voyage  frightened  many  adventurers,  and
thev  could  enlist  only  100  men.  They  sailed  again
in  March,  1526,  and,  entering  San  Juan  river,  cap-
tured an  Indian  town  with  abundant  provisions
and  $15,000  in  gold,  with  which  Almagro  returned
to  Panama,  while  Pizarro  remainetl,  and  sent  his
pilot,  Bartoloine  Ruiz,  to  explore  the  southern
coast.  Pedro  de  los  Rios,  who  had  succeeded  Pe-
drarias as  governor,  refused  to  permit  any  further
enlistment,  and  sent  a  vessel  to  bring  the  expedi-
tion bactk.  But  Pizarro,  who,  with  the  small  rem-
nant of  his  force,  had  retired  before  the  warlike
Indians  to  the  island  of  El  Gallo,  refused  to  obey,
and.  drawing  a  line  in  the  sand  with  his  sword,  in-
vited those  that  wished  to  follow  him  to  glory  and
riches  to  pass  the  line.  Only  thirteen  followetl
him,  and  with  these  he  remained  till  he  was  joined
by  a  force  under  Bartoloine  Ruiz,  which  liad  been
despatched  by  his  associates  under  the  pretext  of
obliging  him  to  return  to  Panama.  He  now  en-
tered u|x)n  an  exploration  of  the  coast  farther
south,  landed  in  Tuml)ez,  Paita,  and  Sana,  obtained
presents  of  gold.  llama.s,  silver  tankards,  and  other
samples  of  tno  productions  of  Peru,  and  hearing  of
the  death  of  Huaina  Capac,  and  seeing  the  insuffi-
ciency of  his  small  forces  to  subdue  this  immense
empire,  returned  to  Panama  toward  the  end  of  the
year  1527.  As  the  governor  still  refused  to  permit
another  expedition  to  set  sail,  the  associates  rest)lved
to  send  Pizarro  to  Spain,  and  in  1528  he  left  Nom-
bre  de  Dios,  carrying  some  Indians  that  he  had
brought  from  Peru,  together  with  llamas,  gold  and
silver  plate,  and  other  presents  for  the  court.  On
his  arrival  in  Seville  he  was  arrested  for  a  debt  on
request  of  Eneiso ;  but  he  was  set  at  lilierty  by  ordei
of  the  emperor,  and  ordered  to  appear  at  court  in
the  city  of  Toledo,  where  he  was  well  received.  On
20  July,  1529,  he  obtained  from  the  oueeii-regent  a
commission  that  granted  him  the  right  of  conquest
of  Peru,  with  the  title  of  governor  and  captain-
general  for  life  of  all  the  country  to  be  discovered,
and  a  salary  of  725,000  marave<lis  on  condition
that  he  should  raise  a  force  of  250  men  for  the
conquest.  Hernan  Cortes,  whom  he  met  at  court,
gave  him  some  aid,  but  without  Imnp  able  to  raise
the  whole  force  that  was  named  in  his  commission.
Pizarro  sailed  in  January,  1530,  with  a  few  adven-
turers and  four  of  his' brothers,  for  Nombre  de


36


PIZARRO


Dios.  After  a  disaereement  with  Almajjro,  who
thought  himself  neglocted,  Pizarro  yielded  him  the
title  of  adelantado;  hut  after  nine  months  of  un-
ceasing efforts  lie  could  gather  only  IHO  men  and
27  horses,  with  which  he  sailed  in  "January.  1581,
for  Tuml>ez.  while  Almagro  renuiined  to  collect
further  forces.  Ho  wjls  joined  iti  Tumlx'Z  by  130
men,  with  whom  came  Hernando  de  Soto  and
Sebastian  de  Velalcazar  {q.  v.).  In  June,  1532,  he
founded  in  the  valley  of  Piura  the  town  of  San
Miguel,  and,  after  leaving  a  garrison,  he  continued
his  march  southward,  on  24  S<'pt.,  with  110  infantry
and  t«)  cavalry,  and  on  15  Nov.  they  entered  the
beautiful  valley  of  C'ajamarca.  Next  day  they  met
the  emperor  Atahualpa,  whom  they  made  a  captive
by  surfirise.  and  the  Peruvian  army  lied  in  dismay,
'fhe  inca  offered  as  a  ransom  to  fill  with  gold  the
apartment  in  which  he  was  confined,  and  the  orna-
ments of  the  temples  and  palaces  were  brought  and
melted  so  that,  after  separating  one  fifth  for  the
em|>eror  and  two  large  amounts  for  the  garrison
of  San  Miguel  and  for  Ahnagro's  followers,  every
one  of  Pizarro's  cavalrymen  obtained  for  his  share
302  nuirks  of  silver  and  8,8(X)  weights  of  gold,  and
every  foot-soldier  half  that  amount.  The  total
was  "more  than  $17,000,000.  Notwithstanding  this,
Atahualpa  was  kept  a  prisoner,  and,  under  pretext
of  having  killed  his  brother  Iluascar,  he  was  con-
demned to  death  and  executed  on  29  Aug.,  1533.
Pizarro  now  marched  on  Cuzco,  the  ancient  capital
of  the  incas.  and  entered  it  on  15  Nov.,  procilaim-
ing  Manco  Yupanqui  {().  r.)  inca.  lie  determined
to  build  the  new  capital  of  his  jiossessions  near  the
sea,  and  selected  the  beautiful  valley  of  the  river  Ri-
niac,  where,  on  6  Jan.,  1535,  he  founded  Los  Reyes,
now  called  Lima,  probably  a  corruption  of  the
name  of  the  river.  Shortly  afterward  disputes  be-
tween Pizarro  and  Almagro  began  over  their  re-
.spective  powers ;  but  they  were  amicably  arranged,
and,  to  avoid  further  difficulties,  Almagro  set  out
on  3  July,  1535,  for  the  conquest  of  Chili.  During
the  latter's  absence  the  Indians  rose  and  besieged
Cuzco  for  a  long  time,  but  on  his  return  they
retired.  Meanwhile  a  royal  decree  had  arrived  ap-
pointing Almagro  governor  of  the  southern  part
of  the  country  under  the  name  of  Nueva  Toledo,
and  there  were  new  differences  between  the  two
conquerors  about  the  possession  of  Cuzco,  which
both  l>elieved  to  be  included  in  the  limits  of  their
respective  governments.  Almagro  was  finally  de-
feated and  captured  by  Hernando  Pizarro,  and
executed  on  8  July,  1538,  it  is  said  with  the  secret
acquiescence  of  his  former  partner.  When  these
occurrences  were  reported  at  court  by  two  commis-
sioners, wlio  had  been  sent  by  Almagro's  partisans,
the  emperor  decided  in  1540  to  send  out  Cristoval
Vaca  de  Castro  as  a  commissioner  to  investigate
Pizarro's  cf)nduct ;  but  l)efore  his  arrival  the  feud
between  Pizarro  and  Almagro's  followers  had  cul-
minated. On  a  Sunday  morning  twenty-one  of
Almagro's  partisans,  who  were  called  Chilenos  in
Lima,  penetrated  into  the  governor's  palace,  and.
after  a  desperate  affray,  in  which  Pizarro  killed
three  of  their  numl>er,  assassinated  him  and  pro-
claimed Almagro's  son  governor.  When  the  con-
spirators returned  to  drag  Pizarro's  body  tlirough
the  streets,  it  had  already  been  removed  and  se-
cretly buried  by  a  friend,  and  later,  by  King  Phil-
ip's orders,  it  was  buried  in  the  cathedral  of  Lima.
Pizarro  was  not  married,  but  had  two  children  by
the  Indian  princess  Ines  Huayllas  Siusta,  Atahual-
pa's  sister,  a  son,  who  died  in  infancy,  and  a  daugh-
ter, Beatriz,  who  married  her  uncle,  Hernando,  in
1551,  and  whose  descendants  inherited  her  father's
riches  and  his  title  of  marquis  of  the  conquest.


PIZARRO

Pizarro  was  tall  and  of  commanding  presence,  pos-
sessing extreme  coumge  and  fortitude,  but  cruel,
cunning,  and  perfidious.  He  was  grasping  in  the
acquisition  of  money,  yet  liberal  in  its  use,  and  he
nr)t  only  gave  largely  to'  his  followers,  but  spent  part
of  the  Vast  treasure,  of  which  he  robbed  the  incas,
in  public  buildings  and  improvements. — His  half-
brother,  Oonzalo,  b.  in  Irujillo  in  1506;  d.  in
Cuzco,  Peru,  10  April,  1548,  served  in  boyhood
with  his  father  in  the  Italian  war  in  1521-'5,  and,
although  wholly  uneducated,  was  thoroughly  con-
versant with  the  art  of  war.  He  went  to  Peru  with
his  brother  in  1531,  and  did  good  service  in  the
conquest,  esj)ecially  in  the  campaign  of  Charcas,  in
the  siege  of  Cuzco  by  Manco  Yupanqui,  and  in  the
defence  of  that  city  against  Almagro,  by  whom  he
was  taken  prisoner,  but  escaped  a  few  days  after
the  latter's  march  from  Cuzco.  In  1539' he  was
appointed  governor  of  Quito,  and  he  soon  resolved
to  explore  the  eastern  slope  of  the  Andes,  where
the  popular  belief  located  the  famous  "  El  Dorado  "
and  the  country  of  the  cinnamon-tree.  Early  in
1540  he  left  Quito  with  an  army  of  250  soldiers  and
4,000  auxiliary  Indians,  and,  after  innumerable
hardships,  reached  Napo  river,  whence  he  de-
spatched Francisco  de  Orellana  (q.  v.)  on  an  explora-
tion which  resulted  in  the  discovery  of  Amazon
river.  Having  awaited  in  vain  the  return  of  Orel-
lana, he  began  the  homeward  journey,  and  after
terrible  privations  reached  Quito  in  June,  1543,
with  only  eighty  half-starved  Spaniards  on  foot
and  less  than  half  of  his  Indians.  There  he  re-
ceived the  news  of  his  brother's  assassination,  and
retired  to  his  commandery  of  Charcas,  not  taking
part  in  public  life  during  the  short  administration
of  Vaca  de  Castro.  But  when,  in  1544,  the  viceroy
Blasco  Nunez- Vela  {q.  v.)  appeared  with  the  im-
perial decree  that  forbade  the  personal  servitude
of  the  Indians,  Gonzalo,  fearing  to  lose  the  advan-
tages of  the  conquest,  went  to  Cuzco  and  was  pro-
claimed by  the  Spanish  colonists  supreme  justice
and  captain-general  of  Peru.  At  the  head  of  the
army  he  marched  against  the  viceroy,  who  aban-
doned Lima,  and  the  city  was  occupied  by  Gon-
zalo, 24  Oct.,  1544.  After  various  encounters  he
met  the  royalist  troops  at  Afiaquito,  near  Quito,
where  Nuilez  was  defeated  and  slain,  18  Jan.,  1546,
and  for  a  time  Pizarro  was  undisputed  master  of
Peru,  until  the  new  royal  commissioner,  Pedro  de
la  Grasca  (q.  v.),  appeared  in  June,  1547,  when,  by
suspension  of  the  royal  decree  regarding  the  In-
dians and  a  general  amnesty,  Gasca  succeeded.in
causing  the  defection  of  many  of  Gonzalez's  fol-
lowers. When  the  two  armies  met  at  last  in  Xa-
quixaguana,  8  April,  1548,  Garcilaso  de  la  Vega,  the
elder,  and  many  others  went  over  to  the  royalists,
who  gained  an  easy  victory.  Gonzalo  was  taken
prisoner,  condemned  to  death,  and  beheaded  in
Cuzco  two  days  afterward. — Another  brother,  Her-
nando, the  only  legitimate  son  of  Col.  Pizarro  and
his  wife,  Isabel  de  Vargas,  b.  in  Trujillo  in  1474 ;
d.  there  in  1578,  received  a  fair  education,  and
served  with  his  father  in  Italy  under  Gonzalo  de
Cordova  in  1502-'3,  arfd  in  1512  in  Navarre  under
the  Duke  of  Najera.  In  1530  he  came  to  Peru  with
his  brother  Francisco  and  took  an  important  part
in  the  conquest ;  but  from  the  first  he  showed  great
hatred  of  Almagro,  so  that  his  brother  sent  him.  in
1533,  to  Spain  with  the  royal  share  of  the  booty.  He
was  well  received,  made  a  knight  of  Santiago,  and
empowered  to  equip  an  expedition  in  Seville,  with
which  he  returned  early  in  1535  to  Peru.  There  he
was  appointed  governor  of  Cuzco.  which  he  de-
fended from  March  till  August,  1536,' against  Man-
co Yupanqui  and  his  warriors. When  the  city  was


PIZARRO


PLACIDE


87


au)tured  by  Aimagro,  8  April,  1587,  Hernando  was
talccn  prisoner;  but  he  was  released  a  few  months
afterward  on  conditions  which  he  broke  as  siHjn  as
lie  was  at  liberty,  and  t(N)lc  the  command  of  the
troops  against  Almagro,  whom  ho  defeated  at  Sa-
linas andordercd  his  execution.  liut  he  was  ac-
cused at  court,  and,  in  order  to  obtain  his  justifica-
tion, sailed  in  the  lx>ginning  of  1539  with  a  large
quantity  of  gold  as  a  gift  for  the  crown  to  Spain.
He  was  coldly  received  at  court,  and,  although  the
council  of  the  Indies  did  not  pronounce"  a  final
sentence  regarding  his  accusation  by  Almagro's
executor,  Diego  de  Alvarado,  he  was  imprisoned  in
1540  in  the  lortr&ss  of  Medina  del  Cani|Kj,  where
he  was  kept  till  15(58,  although  not  in  rigid  seclu-
sion, so  that  he  married  his  niece  in  1551.  After
his  release  he  retired  to  his  native  city,  where  he
died  at  the  age  of  104  years. — Another  brother,
Juan,  a  natural  son  of  Col.  Pizarro  by  the  same
mother  as  Gonzalo,  b.  in  Trujillo  about  1500;  d.  in
Cuzco  in  July,  1530,  came  with  his  brothers  to  Peru
in  1531,  and  even  in  Panama  began  to  show  enmity
to  Almagro.  When  the  army,  after  the  death  of
Atahualpa,  penetrated  into  the  interior,  Juan  com-
manded the  van-guard,  and  was  the  first  to  discover
the  rich  valley  of  Jauja.  When  Francisco  Pizarro
despatched  Almagro  against  Alvarado  in  1534,  and
marched  with  re-enforcements  toward  the  coast,  he
left  Juan  as  commander  of  the  garrison  in  Cuzco,
where,  by  his  oppression  of  Manco  Yupanqui,  for
the  purpose  of  obtaining  gold  from  him,  he  gave
the  first  cause  for  the  rebellion  of  that  chieftain,
who  fled  to  the  mountains,  but  was  captured  again
by  Juan  and  imprisoned.  In  1535  he  marched
against  the  Indians  of  Condesuyos,  who  had  assas-
sinated some  Spaniards.  While  he  was  on  this  ex-
pedition his  brother  Hernando  returned,  and  was
api^Miinted  by  Francisco  vice-governor  and  chief
justice  of  Cuzco,  and  Juan  served  under  him.  Her-
nando, against  the  advice  of  his  brothers,  set  Man-
co Yupanqui  at  liberty,  and  the  inca  soon  rose  in
rebellion  and  besieged  Cuzco.  When  the  supreme
priest,  Villac-Uma,  had  captured  the  citadel,  wnence
ne  seriously  interfered  with  the  safety  of  the  Span-
ish headquarters,  Juan,  whose  dauntless  courage
was  generally  acknowledged,  was  ordered  by  Her-
nando to  the  assault  of  the  fortress,  and  in  the  at-
tack he  was  mortally  wounded  by  a  stone.  He  was
buried  in  the  Church  of  Santo  Domingo,  which
had  been  principally  endowed  by  him  and  built  on
the  site  of  the  Temple  of  the  Sun,  which  was  as-
signed to  him  after  the  capture  of  Cuzco.

PIZARRO,  Jos6  Alfonso,  Marc^uis  of  Villar,
Spanish  naval  officer,  b.  in  Murcia  m  1G89 ;  d.  in
Madrid  in  1762.  He  entered,  in  his  youth,  the
naval  service  of  the  knights  of  Malta,  and  after-
ward served  in  the  Spanish  navy,  attaining  the
rank  of  rear-admiral.  When  the  government
heard  of  the  expedition  of  the  English  admiral,
George  Anson,  to  the  Pacific,  a  fleet  of  two  ships
of  the  line  and  four  frigates,  with  a  regiment  of
infantry  for  Chili,  was  despatched  under  Pizarro's
command  in  October.  1740,  and  arrived,  5  Jan..
1741,  in  the  river  Plate.  Hearing  that  Anson  wa»
refitting  in  Santa  Catharina  for  entering  the  Pa-
cific by  the  Strait  of  Lemaire,  Pizarrf)  sailed  at  once
to  intercept  him,  iiut  lost  one  ship  and  one  frigate
in  a  storm,  was  obliged  to  put  baclc  for  repairs,  and
on  the  second  attempt,  with  two  vessels,  was  again
dismasted,  and  returned  to  Montevideo.  Thence
he  despatched  the  frigate  "Esperanza"  to  the  Pa-
cific, and  passed  across  the  Andes  to  Peru,  where
for  some  time  he  exercised  the  functions  of  naval
commander-in-chief.  After  the  peace  with  Eng-
land, Pizarro  left  the  frigate  on  the  Pacific  station


and  returned  overland  to  Montevideo,  where  he
found  his  flag-ship,  the  "  Asia,"  refitted,  and  sailed
in  her  for  Kiirojie  in  November,  1745.  Part  of  the
crew  consisted  of  Indians  from  the  pampas,  who  one
night  rose  on  the  Spaniards,  and,  after  killing  the
watch  on  deck,  had  gained  possession  of  the  vessel,
when  Pizarro  sucwxjded  in  killing  the  ringleader,
and  in  the  confusion  drove  the  nmtine(>rs  uito  the
sea.  On  his  arrival  at  Ca<liz  in  January,  1740,  he
was  promoted  vice-a<inural,  and  in  1749  was  ap-
pointed viceroy  of  New  Granaila;  but  he  resigned
m  1753  and  returned  to  Spain.

PLACIDE,  Henry,  ac-tor,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  8  Sept.,  1799;  d.  near  liabylon,  L.  I.,  23  Jan.,
1870.  His  father,  Alexander,  "was  a  French  va-
riety performer,  who  appeared  at  SaiUer's  Weils
theatre,  London,
and  came  to  this
country  in  1782.
For  many  years  he
was  a  professional
itinerant,  but  he
became  lessee  of
the  playhouse  in
Charleston,  S.  C,
and  in  1811  was  one
of  the  managers  of
the  Richmond,  Va.,
theatre,when  it  was
destroyed  by  fire,
with  the  loss  of
man  y  1  i  ves.  H  en  ry
appeared  as  a  child,
under  his  father's
direction, at the '^/^  ^~\OP 'J

Charleston  theatre,  ^0/V\A.u jf  CclCJOUL

and in 1814 was  J

seen  at  the  Anthony  street  playhouse  in  Now  York
city.  Thereafter  he  became  attached  to  various
travelling  companies,  playing  occasionally  iti  some
of  the  southern  cities.  On  2  Sept.,  1823.  he  appeared
at  the  New  York  Park  theatre  as  Zekiel  Homespun
in  "  The  Heir  at  Law,"  and  for  about  twenty-five
years,  with  slight  interruptions,  he  remained  at-
tached to  that  establishment.  He  made  a  few
brief  visits  to  other  cities,  and  in  1838  played  at
the  Havmarket  theatre  in  London.  Being  disap-
pointed by  his  reception,  he  soon  returned,  and
after  the  destruction  of  the  Park  theatre  by  fire  in
1848  played  only  occasionally  at  Burton's  theatre
and  tne  Winter  garden.  His  final  performances
were  in  1865,  after  which  he  retired  to  his  country
home.  There  was  never  a  more  conscientious
American  actor,  nor  one  who  filled  a  wider  range
of  characters.  Besides  being  a  comedian,  Placiue
was  also  a  good  buffo  singer;  but  his  manner  was
somewhat  hard,  and  his  Shakespearian  interi)reta-
tions  often  lacked  unction  and  racinoss.  He  was
an  artist  of  remarkably  good  average  performances
and  the  greatest  of  New  York  favorites,  but  never
rose  to  distinction  in  any  particular  character.
The  portrait  of  Placide  represents  him  as  Dromio
in  the  "  Comedy  of  Errors.' — His  brother,  Thonia.'),
actor,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1808;  d.  in  Tom's
River,  N.  J.,  20  July,  1877,  was  attached  in  his
youth  to  several  minor  playhouses  in  suliordinate
parts,  but  his  real  dtbut  was  made  at  the  Chatham

f:arden  theatre  in  New  York  city  in  1828  as  Andrew
iang  in  "Love,  Law.  and  Physic."  For  several
years  he  was  connected  with  the  Park  theatre,  and
he  afterward  led  a  roving  life.  From  1850  until
1854  he  managed  the  Varieties  theatre  in  New  Or-
leans, La.,  and  in  1855  he  joined  the  company  at
Wallack's  theatre.  New  York  city.  A  little  later
he  retired  from  the  stage. Thoilias  Placide  was  a


38


PLAISTED


PLATT


boisterous  performer,  who  never  rose  to  prominence.
His  lx»st  parts  were  servants  and  footmen.  In  voice,
look,  anti  action  the  brothers  were  much  alike,  but
«s  artists  they  were  widely  distinct.  This  was
stronely  n»anifeste<l  when  thev  appeared  as  the
two  I)ri)mi<)s  in  the  "Comedy  of  Errors."

PLAISTKD.  HarriH  Merrill,  soldier,  b.  in
Jefftrson,  N.  H..  2  Nov..  1828.  lie  worked  on  a
farm  and  tnucht  during  his  early  raanh(K>d.  and
wa-s  jrraduatod  at  Waterville  collefje  (now  Colby
university)  in  1853,  and  at  Albany  law-school  in
1855. He  wjis  then  admitted  to  the  bar  and  bepin

Kractice  in  Bangor,  Me.,  in  1850.  He  entered  the
lational  volunteer  service  in  1801  as  lieutenant-
colonel,  WHS  commissionetl  colonel  in  18(i2,  partici-
pated in  McClellan's  peninsular  campaign,  com-
manded a  brigmle  before  Charleston,  an<l  served
with  Grant  In'fore  Richmond.  He  received  the
brevet  of  l)rigadier-geiieml  of  volunteers  in  F'elv
ruary.  18(55,  and  that  of  major-goneral  of  volunteers
in  >iarch  of  the  same  year.  He  resumed  his  i)r(v
fession  after  the  peace,  was  a  delegate  to  the  Na-
tional Republican  convention  in  1808,  and  attorney-
general  of  Maine  in  187;J-'5.  He  went  to  congress
as  a  Rei)ublican  in  1874  to  fill  a  vivcancy,  served  one
t*rm,  (iedined  re-election,  and  was  governor  of
Maine  in  1881-3.  Since  1884  he  has  edited  and
published  "The  New  Age,"  in  Augusta,  Me.

PLASSMANN,  Ernst,  artist,  b.  in  Sondern,
Westphalia,  14  June,  1823;  d.  in  New  York  city,
28  Nov.,  1877.  At  the  age  of  twenty  he  began
to  study  art  under  JSIiinsternuinn,  and  he  con-
tinued liis  studies  at  Aix-la-Chanelle,  Cologne,  and
Paris.  In  tin-  last-named  place  ne  remained  about
four  years,  lieing  employed  most  of  the  time  in  the
studil)  of  Michi'l  Licnard.  In  1853  he  went  to  New
York.  wluM-c.  the  following  year,  he  opened  "  Plass-
mannV  Sehool  of  Art,"  which  he  carried  on  until
his  death.  The  "  Verein  fiir  Kunst  und  Wissen-
schaft  '  was  founded  by  him  in  1858.  His  princi-
pal works  in  sculpture,  all  in  New  York  city,  are
the  figure  of  Tammany  on  Tammany  hall  (1809);
the  group  on  the  freight-depot  of  the  New  York
Central  railroad  (1870);  the  statue  of  Benjamin
Franklin  in  Printing-House  square  (1870-'l);  and
the  figures  of  Franklin  and  Guttenberg  on  the
"Staats-Zeitung"  building,  modelled  about  1873.
He  executed  also  many  models  for  statuettes  and
ornamental  metal-work,  and  gained  several  medals
at  the  American  institute  for  his  work  in  wood-
carving  and  j>hister  models.  He  published  "  Mod-
ern Gothic  Ornaments,"  with  33  plates  (New  York,
1875),  and  "  Designs  for  Furniture  "  (1877).  Of  the
latter,  onlv  three  parts  were  i)ublished.

PLATfiR,  Georgre,  statesman,  b.  in  St.  Mary's
county,  Md.,  in  1730;  d.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  10
Feb.,  17!»2.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and
Mary  in  1753,  studied  law.  and  won  reputation  at
the  bar  of  Maryland.  When  the  troubles  with  the
mother  country  began  he  took  an  early  and  active
part  in  resisting  the  encroachments  of  the  British
government  upon  the  rights  of  the  colonies.  He
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  Marvland  convention
that  assembled  at  Annapolis,  8  May,  1770,  and  one
of  whost!  first  public  acts  was  the  election  of  a  com-
mittee, on  24  May,  for  the  purpose  of  inviting
Robert  Eden,  the  royal  governor,  to  vacate.  On  20
May  Plater  was  apjjointedoneofthecouncil  of  safety,
a  Ijiuly  created  for  the  express  purpose  of  preparing
the  stiite  for  the  conflict  that  was  every  day  grow-
ing more  imminent.  He  represented  St.  Mary's
county  in  the  Maryland  convention  at  Annapolis,
14  Aug.,  1776,  and  on  the  17th  of  the  same  month
was  chosen  one  of  the  committee  "  to  prepare  a
declaration  and  charter  of  rights  and  a  form  of


government "  for  the  state  of  Maryland.  Prom
1778  till  1781  he  was  a  member  of  the  Continental
congress  from  Maryland,  and  he  was  president  of
the  Maryland  convention  that,  on  28  April,  1788,
ratified  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  In
1792  he  was  elected  governor  of  Maryland.

PLATT,  Charles  Adams,  artist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  16  Oct.,  1801.  He  studied  at  the  Art  league
and  the  National  academy.  New  York,  during
1878-'80,  and  in  1884-'5  under  Boulanger  and  Le-
febvre  in  Paris.  He  has  given  much  attention  to
etching,  in  which  branch  of  art  he  has  been  very
successful.  His  works  include  "  Interior  of  Fish-
houses,"  "  Fishing  Boats,"  and  "  Provincial  Fishing
Village  "(1882):  "Old  Houses  near  Bruges "(1883);
"Deventer.  Holland"  (1885);  "Quai  des  Orfevres,
Paris"  (1880);  and  "Dieppe"  (1887).  He  paints
also  in  oil  and  in  water-color,  and  has  exhibited  at
the  Salon,  the  National  academy,  New  York,  and
the  American  water-color  society.

PLATT,  Franklin,  geologist,  b.  in  Philadel-

fhia.  Pa.,  19  Nov.,  1844.  He  was  educated  at  the
Iniversity  of  Pennsylvania,  but  left  in  1862,  before
graduation,  and  in  1803  served  in  the  82d  Pennsyl-
vania Gray  reserve  regiment.  In  1864  he  was  ap-
pointed to  the  U.  S.  coast  survey,  and  assigned  to
surveying  work  with  the  North  Atlantic  squadron
during  that  year.  He  then  was  appointed  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Orlando  M.  Poe,  chief  engineer  of  the
military  division  of  the  Mi-ssissippi,  and  was  en-
gaged in  this  duty  until  thesurrender  of  Gen.  Joseph
E.  Johnston's  army  in  April,  1805.  Subsequently,
in  July,  1874,  he  was  appointed  assistant  geologist
of  Pennsylvania,  which  post  he  held  until  May,
1881,  after  which  he  became  president  of  the  Roch-
ester and  Pittsburg  coal  and  iron  company.  Mr.
Piatt  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  to  whose
transactions  he  has  contributed  frequent  papers  on
geology  and  kindred  subjects.  He  prepared  nine
volumes  of  the  reports  of  the  geological  survey  of
Pennsylvania.  Those  that  were  his  exclusive  work
are  "  On  Clearfield  and  Jefferson  Counties  "  (Har-
risburg,  1875);  "Coke  Manufacture"  (1876);  "On
Blair  County  "  (1880) ;  and  "  The  Causes,  Kinds,  and
Amount  of  Waste  in  Mining  Anthracite  "  (1881).

PLATT,Orville  Hitchcock,senator,b.  inWash-
ington,  Conn.,  19  July,  1827.  He  was  educated  in  the

Eublic  schools,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1849,  and
egan  practice  in  Meriden,  Conn.  He  was  clerk  of
the  state  senate  in  1855-'0,  secretary  of  state  in
1857,  state  senator  in  1801-'2,  and  a  member  of  the
legislature  in  1804-'9,  serving  as  speaker  in  the  lat-
ter year.  He  was  elected  to  the  U.  h.  senate  as  a  VCe-
publican  in  1878,  and  was  re-elected  in  1884  for  the
term  that  will  end  in  March,  1891.  Mr.  Piatt  has
been  an  earnest  advocate  of  the  abolition  of  secret
executive  sessions  of  the  senate.  Yale  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1887.

PLATT,  Thomas  Collier,  senator,  b.  in  Owego,
N.  Y.,  15  July,  1833.  He  left  Yale  in  his  sophomore
year  in  1853  on  account  of  failing  health,  but  re-
ceived the  honorary  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1870  from
that  college.  He  entered  mercantile  life,  became
president  of  the  Tioga,  N.  Y.,  National  bank,  and
engaged  in  the  lumber  business  in  Michigan.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican  in  1872.  re-
elected in  1874,  and  on  18  Jan..  1881, was  chosen  U.  S.
senator  to  succeed  Francis  Kernan.  but  resigned,
10  May  of  the  same  year,  with  his  colleague,  R^sc^oe
Conkhng  (q.  v.),  on  account  of  a  disagreement  with
the  executive  regarding  New  York  apjwintments.
He  returned  home,  was  a  candidate  for  re-election,
and  after  an  exciting  canvass  was  defeated.  He  be-
came secretary  and  a  director  of  the  United  States
express  company  in  1879,  and  since  1880  has  been


PLATT


PLEASONTON


89


I


it«  president.  lie  whm  appointed  commissioner  of
quanintine  of  Xew  York  city  in  18H(),  lx'o«me
president  of  the  Ixwrd.  and  held  office  till  14  Jan..
1888,  when  he  was  removed  by  proceedinjrs  insti-
tuted on  account  of  his  alleged  non-residence  in
New  York  city.  He  was  a  member  of  the  National
Renublican  conventions  in  1876.  1880.  and  1884.
ana  for  several  years  of  the  Republican  national
committee.  He  is  now  (1888)  president  of  the
Southern  Central  railroa*!.

PLATT,  William  Henry,  clerjrvman,  b.  in
Amenia,  Dutchess  co..  N.  Y..  10  Annl.  1821.  He
received  a  f^Knl  education,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1840,  and  for  four  years  practised  in  Ala-
bama. He  was  ordained  deacon  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church  in  1851,  and  priest  in  1852.  held
rectorships  in  Selma,  Ala..  Petersburg,  Va..  Ijouis-
ville,  Ky..  and  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  and  U'came
rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in
1882.  William  and  Mary  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1878,  and  also  that  of  LL.  D.  Dr.  Piatt's
publications  include  "Art  Culture"  (New  York,
1873) ;  "  Influence  of  Religion  in  the  Development
of  Jurisprudence"  (1877);  "After  Death,  what!"
<San  Francisco,  1878) ;  "  Unity  of  Law  or  Legal
Morality"  (1879);  "God  out.  and  Man  in."  a  reply
to  Robert  G.  Ingersoll  (Rochester.  1883) ;  and  "  The
Philosophy  of  the  Supernatural."

PLATT,  Zephaniah,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Dutchess  county,  N.  Y.,  in  1740;  d.
in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  12  Sept..  1807.  He  received  a
classical  education,  studied  law,  and  practised.  He
was  a  delegate  from  New  York  to  the  Continental
congress  in  1784-'6,  and  was  judge  of  the  circuit
court  for  many  years.  He  was  one  of  the  origina-
tors of  the  Erie  canal,  and  founded  the  town  of
Plattsburg. — His  son.  Jonas,  jurist,  b.  in  Pough-
keepsie,  N.  Y.,  30  June,  1769;  d.  in  Peru,  Clinton
CO.,  N.  Y..  22  Feb..  1834,  was  educated  in  the  public
schools,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1790,  and  the  next
year  settled  in  Whitesboro,  N.  Y.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly  in  1790.  of  congress  in  1796-
1801,  and  of  the  state  senate  in  181^'13.  He  was
an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  governor  in  1810,  a
member  of  the  council  in  1813,  and  in  1814-'23  a
justice  of  the  New  York  supreme  court.  He  then
engaged  in  practice  in  Utica,  and  subsequently  in
New  York  city. — Another  son.  Zephaniah,  jurist,
b.  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  in  1796;  d.  in  Aiken,  S.  C,
20  April,  1871,  removed  to  Michigan  in  early  life,
studietl  and  subsequently  practised  law,  and  was
appointed  by  the  U.  S.  government  its  attorney  to
settle  its  claims  on  the  Pacific  coast.  He  was  state
attorney-general  for  several  years,  and  took  high
rank  at  the  bar.  He  removed  to  South  Carolina  at
the  close  of  the  civil  war.  and  from  1808  until  his
death  was  judge  of  the  2d  circuit.

PLAZA,  Manuel  (plah'-thah),  Peruvian  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Riobamba,  1  Jan.,  1772 ;  d.  in  Lima
about  1845.  He  entered  the  Franciscan  convent  of
Quito,  was  ordained  priest  at  the  age  of  twenty-
three  years,  and  immediately  afterward  set  out  as  a
missionary  for  the  river  JJapo.  After  a  year  he
went  to  the  missions  of  Ucayali  and  settled  in
Sarayacu,  where  he  soon  gained  the  esteem  of  the
Indians  and  founded  two  new  villages.  There  he
remained  till  1814,  when  the  viceroy,  Jose  de  Abas-
cal,  fearing  the  success  of  the  revolution,  appointed
him  to  open  another  outlet  to  Europe  by  way  of
Comas  and  Chanehamayo.  He  explored  the  coun-
try three  months,  and,  after  giving  an  account  of
his  commission  to  the  viceroy,  returned  to  Sarayacu
and  continued  his  missions  till  1821,  w^hen  the
Spanish  missionaries  fled  to  Brazil,  and  he  was  left
alone  among  the  savages. He  suffered  greatly  till


1828,  when  he  found  his  way  to  Quito,  and  was
well  received  by  the  bishop  and  Gen.  liolivar,  who
provided  him  with  abundant  means,  and  ordere<l
nim  to  return  to  his  missions.  After  an  explora-
tion of  the  rivers  of  the  interior  by  a  Peruvian
commission,  the  government  resolved  to  assist  the
efforts  of  F'ather  Plaza,  and  the  latter  came  to
Lima  in  1845.  Congress,  on  24  May.  pa.s.sed  an  act
that  provided  a  yearly  subvention  for  the  missions,
and  Plaza  planned  to  return  in  1846.  but  dietl  Xte-
fore  he  could  make  the  journey,  and  his  manu-
scripts were  lost.

PLAZA,  Nlcanor  (plah'-thah).  Chilian  sculptor,
b.  in  Santiago  in  1844.  He  entered  the  academy
of  sculpture  of  the  University  of  Chili  in  1858.  and
in  1863  the  government  sent  him  to  Europe
to  study.  In  1800  he  openetl  a  studio  in  Pans,
where  he  exhibited  his  "  Susannah."  "  Hercules,"
and  "  Caupolican "  in  1867.  In  1871  he  was  ap-
pointed director  of  the  Academy  of  sculpture  of
Santiago.  In  that  city  he  executed  many  works
that  relate  to  the  history  of  his  country,  some  of
which  are  erected  in  the  public  places  of  Santiago.
In  1872,  at  the  exposition  of  Santiago,  he  received
a  gold  medal.  In  1874  he  was  sent  to  Europe  on
an  artistic  mission,  and  during  the  first  months  of
his  stay  there  he  executed  a  statue  of  Andres  Bello,
which  was  erected  in  1882  in  Santiago,  in  the
square  of  the  national  congress.  He  also  made  a
statue  of  Domingo  Eyzaguirre.

PLEASANTS,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Gooch-
land county,  Va.,  24  Oct.,  1769 ;  d.  at  his  residence,
"  Contention,"  Goochland  county,  Va..  9  Nov..  1839.
He  was  a  first  cousin  of  Thomas  Jefferson.  He
was  educated  by  private  tutors,  studied  law.  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  his  native  county,  and  en-
joyed an  extensive  practice,  especially  as  an  advo-
cate. He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1796,
having  been  elected  as  a  Republican,  clerk  of  the
house  in  1803-'ll,  and  from  the  latter  date  till
1819  was  in  congress.  He  then  became  U.S.  sena-
tor, served  in  1819-'22,  when  he  resigned,  and  was
S)vemor  of  Virginia  for  the  succeeding  three  years,
uring  his  terra  of  office,  in  1824,  Lafayette  visited
Virginia.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Virginia  con-
stitutional convention  in  1829-'30,  and  subse-
quently declined  the  appointment  of  judge  of  the
circuit  court  and  of  the  Virginia  court  of  appeals.
The  county  of  Pleasants,  now  W.  Va.,  is  named  in
his  honor.  John  Randolph  of  Roanoke  said  of
him  :  "James  Pleasants  never  made  an  enemy  nor
lost  a  friend." — His  son,  John  Hampden,  jour-
nalist, b.  in  Goochland  county,  Va.,  4  Jan.,  1797;
d.  in  Richtnond,  Va..  27  Feb..  1846.  was  educated
at  William  and  Mary  college,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  at  an  early  age.  out  abandoned  law  for
journalism,  and  founded  and  became  editor  of  the
Lynchburg  "  Virginian."  He  subsequently  re-
moved to  Richmond,  Va..  and  in  1824  founded  the
"Constitutional  Whig  and  Public  Advertiser."  and
was  its  chief  editor  for  twenty-two  years.  He  was
killed  in  a  duel  with  Thomas  Ritchie.  Jr.,  of  the
"  Richmond  Enquirer,"  a  Democratic  organ.  Mr.
Pleasants  was  a  brilliant  editor  and  paragraphist,
and  his  journal  was  the  principal  exponent  of  the
Whig  party  in  Virginia.  His  brother  Whigs
erected  a  monument  to  his  memorj-,  on  which  his
gallant  and  s€>lf-sacrificing  patriotism  is  recortled.

PLEASONTON,  Augustus  James,  s<ildier,  b.  in
Washington.  D.  C.  18  Aug.,  1808.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  tlie  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1826.  and  then
served  on  garrison  duty  at  the  Artillery  school  for

Sractice  in  Fortress  Monroe,  and  on  topographical
uty  until  30  June,  1830,  when  he  resigned  from
the  army. After  studying  law,  he  was  admitted  to


40


PLEASONTON


PLESSIS


the  har,  and  he  has  since  practised  in  Philadelphia.
He  has  served  in  the  Pennsylvania  militia,  holding
the  rank  of  brigmle-inajor  in  18;W,  and  U'coining
eo.onel  in  1835,  and  he  wjis  wounded  during  the
conflict  with  armed  rioters  in  Southwark,  Pa.,  on
7  July,  1844.  During  the  |X)litical  disturbances  in
Harrisburg,  Pa.,  in  18;i8-'9,  he  was  assistant  adju-
lant-general  and  j)ay master-general  of  the  state.
On  10  May.  18(51,  he  was  apjMjinted  brigiulier-gen-
eral  of  Pennsylvania  militia,  and  charged  with  the
organization  and  sul>se»iuent  command  during  the
civil  war  of  a  home-guard  of  10,000  men,  including
cavalrv,  artillerv,  and  infantry,  for  the  defence  of
Philtulelphia.  In  1839-40  he" whs  president  of  the
Harrisburg,  Portsmouth,  Mountjoy,  and  Lancaster
railroad  company.  He  hiis  devoted  his  leisure  to
the  cultivation  of  a  farm  near  Philadelphia,  where,
as  early  as  1801,  he  began  to  experiment  on  the
action  of  different  colored  rays  upon  vegetable  and
animal  life.  He  claimed  to  have  demonstrated
that  the  blue  rays  of  the  sun  were  especially  stimu-
lating to  vegetation.  His  experiments  were  subse-
quently anplied  to  animals,  and  afterward  to  in-
valids, anu  wonderful  cures  were  said  to  have  been
wrought.  The  public  became  interested  in  his  ex-
periments, and  for  a  time  a  so-called  "  blue-glass
craze"  prevailed,  culminating  in  1877-'8.  Gen.
Pleasonton  published  many  papers  in  advocacy  of
his  theories,  and  a  book  entitleu  "  Influence  of  the
Blue  Itav  of  the  Sunlight  and  of  the  Blue  Color
of  the  sky  in  Developing  Animal  and  Vegetable
Life,  in  Arresting  Disease"  (Philadelphia,  1876).
— His  brother,  Alfred,  soldier,  b.  in  VVashington.
D.  v.,  7  June.  1824,  wjis  gnuluated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1844,  served  in  the  ^Mexican

war,  and  was  bre-
vetted  1st  lieuten-
ant for  "  gallant
and  meritorious
conduct  in  the  bat-
tles of  Palo  Alto
and  Resaca  de  la
Palma."  He  sub-
sequently was  on
frontier  duty  with
his  company,  and
was  commissioned
1st  lieutenant  in
1849,  and  captain
in  1855.  He  was
acting  assistant  ad-
«y  J^ ^  y  ^  —  jutant  -  general  to
,,^yn^--*CrM^^*i^a-yi>-C^ri^  Q^^ William S.

Harney  during  the
Sioux  expedition,  and  his  adjutant-general  from
1856  till  1860  in  the  campaign  against  the  Seminoles
in  Florida,  and  the  operations  in  Kansas,  Oregon,
and  Washington  territory.  He  commanded  his
regiment  in  its  march  from  Utah  to  Washington
in  the  autumn  of  1861,  was  commissioned  major  of
the  2d  cavalry  in  February,  1862,  served  through
the  Virginia  peninsular  campaign,  became  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  in  July  of  that  year,  and
commanded  the  division  of  cavalry  of  theArmy  of
the  Potomac  that  followed  Lee's  invading  army
into  Maryland.  He  was  engaged  at  Boonesborougli,
South  Mountain,  Antietau),  and  the  subsequent
pursuit,  engaged  the  enemy  frequently  at  Freder-
icksburg, and  stayed  the  further  advance  of  the
enemy  at  Chancelloniville.  On  2  May,  when  Jack-
son's Confederate  corps  was  coming  down  upon  the
right  flank  of  Hooker's  array,  and  had  alremly
routed  Howard's  corps.  Gen. '  Pleasonton,  by  his
quick  and  skilful  action,  saved  the  army  from  a
serious  disaster. Ordering  the  8th  Pennsylvania


cavalry  to  charge  boldly  into  the  woods  in  the  face
of  the  advancing  host  (see  Keenan,  Peter),  he  de-
layed Jackson's  progress  a  few  minutes — just  long
enough  to  throw  into  position  all  the  artillery  that
was  within  reach.  He  ordered  the  guns  loaded
with  gra()e  and  canister,  and  depressed  enough  to
make  the  shot  strike  the  ground  half  way  between
their  line  and  the  edge  of  the  woods.  When  the
Confederate  column  emerged,  it  met  such  a  storm
of  iron  as  no  troops  could  pass  through.  About
this  time  Jackson  fell,  and  before  any  new  manoeu-
vres could  h&  undertaken  darkness  put  an  end  to
the  day's  work.  He  received  the  brevet  of  lieu-
tenant-colonel for  Antietam  in  1862,  was  promoted
major-general  of  volunteers  in  June,  1863,  partici-
pated in  the  numerous  actions  that  preceded  the
battle  of  Gettysburg,  was  commander-in-chief  of
cavalry  in  that  action,  and  was  brevetted  colonel,
3  July,  1863.  He  was  transferred  to  Missouri  in
1804,  drove  the  forces  under  Gen.  Sterling  Price
from  the  state,  and  in  March,  1865,  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  in  the  U.  S.  army  for  gallant  and
meritorious  conduct  in  that  campaign,  and  major-
general  for  services  throughout  the  civil  war.  He
resigned  in  1808,  was  U.  S.  collector  of  revenue  for
several  years,  and  subsequently  president  of  the
Terre  Ilaute  and  Cincinnati  railroad.  In  May,
1888,  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list,  with  the
rank  oi  colonel,  U,  S.  A.

PLEE,  Aiigiiste,  French  botanist,  b.  in  Pointe
i\  Pitre,  Guadeloupe,  in  1787 :  d.  in  Fort  Royal,
Martinique,  17  Aug.,  1825.  He  occupied  a  high
ofiicial  post,  but  was  devoted  to  natural  history,
and  embarked  in  1819  for  South  America,  charged
by  the  government  with  the  mission  of  exploring
the  continent  as  a  botanist.  After  travelling  ex-
tensively, and  forming  numerous  collections  of
f  hints,  he  fell  sick  and  returned  to  Martinique,
lis  principal  works  are  "  Le  jeune  botaniste,  ou
entretiens  d'un  pere  avec  son  fils  sur  la  botanique
et  la  physiologic  vegetale,  etc."  (2  vols.,  Paris,
1812);  and  a  "Journal  de  voyage  du  botaniste
Auguste  Plee,  a  travers  les  Antilles,  les  Guyanes  et
le  Bresil "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1828).  The  administra-
tion of  the  Paris  museum  published  in  1830  a
catalogue  of  Pice's  collection  m  3  vols.

PLESSIS.  Francis  Xavier,  Canadian  clergy-
man, b.  in  Quebec,  15  J'an.,  1694.  He  became  &
member  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  was  engaged
on  the  Indian  missions.  He  wrote  "  Avis  et  pra-
tiques pour  profiter  de  la  mission  et  en  conserver  le
fruit  a  I'usage  des  missions  du  Pere  du  Plessisde  la
(Jompagnie  de  Jesus"  (3  vols.,  Paris,  1742)  and
"  Lettre  au  sujet  des  calomnies  publiees  par  I'au-
teur  des  nouvelles  ecclesiastiques (1745).

PLESSIS,  Joseph  Octave,  Canadian  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  near  Montreal,  Canada,  in  1763 ;  d.  in
Quebec,  4  Dec,  1825.  He  studied  classics  in  the
C^ollege  of  Montreal,  but  refused  to  continue  hia
education,  and  his  father,  who  was  a  blacksmith,
set  him  to  work  at  the  forge.  After  a  short  experi-
ence at  manual  labor,  he  consented  to  enter  the
Petit  seminaire  of  Quebec  in  1780.  On  finishing
his  course  he  taught  belles-lettres  and  rhetoric  in
the  College  of  Montreal,  and,  notwithstanding  his
youth,  became  secretary  to  Bishop  Briand.  He  was
ordained  priest  on  29  Nov.,  1786.  Shortly  after  his
ordination  he  was  made  secretary  to  Bishop  Hubert,
and  he  exercis«d  so  much  influence  over  this  prel-
ate that  he  rejiUy  filled  the  functions  of  coadjutor-
bishop.  In  1792  he  was  appointed  cure  of  Quebec.
Bishop  Denault  named  him  his  grand  vicar  in  1797,
and  at  the  sjime  time  announced  his  intention  of
choosing  him  for  coadjutor.  The  popularity  of
Plessis  with  the  French  Canadians  excited  the  hos-


PLESSYS


PLUMB


41


tility  of  the  English  party,  and  Gpti.  Prpscott,  the
ffovenior  of  the  provinco,  opixjsed  the  api)<»intment,
but  he  firmlly  yielded  to  the  demaiuis  of  public
opinion.  Plessis  was  conseerated  bishop  in  the
cathedral  of  QucIkjc  on  25  Jan..  18()1,  in  presence
of  the  povenior  and  oflicials  of  the  province.  The
death  of  iiishof)  Denault  raise<l  him  U>  the  episcopal
see  of  QiielK'o  in  180(J,  HelK'fjan  his  administration
under  dinicult  circumstances.  Efforts  were  made
to  appropriate  the  property  of  the  Jesuits  and  of
the  Seminary  of  Montreal  to  the  uses  of  the  state,
to  orjjanize  an  exclusively  Protestant  system  of
public  instniction,  and  to  jfive  a  jKJwer  of  veto  on
the  nomination  of  nriests  and  the  erection  of  par-
ishes to  the  Enpish  crown.  An  unsuccessful
attempt  was  nuule  to  prevent  him  from  takinp:
the  oath  of  allegiance  in  his  capacity  of  bishop
of  Quebec.  In  1810  Gov.  Craij;  sent  a  messenger
to  England  to  complain  of  the  bishop's  conduct ;
but  the  authorities  atlopted  a  conciliatory  i>olicy,
Craig  was  recalled,  and  Sir  George  Prevost  was
sent  to  replace  him.  The  new  governor  hatl
several  interviews  with  the  bishop,  who  refused  to
make  any  concessions,  and  finally  all  his  demands
in  behalf  of  the  Roman  Catholic  church  in  Canada
were  conceded.  The  part  that  he  took  during  the
war  of  1813  in  exciting  the  loyalty^  and  warlike
spirit  of  the  French  Canivdians  gamed  him  the
good-will  of  England.  He  received  letters  from  the
government  recognizing  his  title  and  jurisdiction
as  Roman  Catholic  bishop  of  Quebec,  and  granting
him  a  pension  of  a  thousand  louis  a  year  with  a
seat  in  the  legislative  council.  Bishop  Plessis  was
the  first  to  introduce  the  gospel  into  the  vast  terri-
tory of  Red  river,  and  founded  religious  and  edu-
cational institutions  in  Upper  Canada  and  the
provinces  along  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence.  His
great  work  was  the  organization  of  his  church  in
Canada.  In  1818  he  was  nominated  archbishop  of
Quebec,  and  the  rest  of  British  America  was  formed
into  four  suffragan  sees.  In  the  legislative  council
he  was  an  ardent  defender  of  the  religious  and  civil
rights  of  his  co-religionists,  and  in  1822,  when  the
English  government  tried  to  force  a  union  between
Upper  and  Lower  Canada,  his  energetic  resistance
counted  for  much  in  the  failure  of  the  plan.  The
reformation  and  development  of  Canadian  educa-
tion formed  the  great  end  of  his  life.  He  resisted
successfully  efforts  to  weaken  the  force  of  French-
Canadian  nationality  through  the  medium  of  a
system  of  popular  education.  The  colleges  of
Nicolet  and  St.  Hyacinth  were  founded  through
his  encouragement,  and  schools  and  acatlemicswere
established  in  every  direction.  He  spent  his  time  and
income  in  searching  out  young  men  and  educating
them  at  his  own  expense.  Some  of  the  most  emi-
nent men  of  Canada  owed  their  training  to  him.
The  passage  of  the  education  law  of  1824  was  to  a

Ereat  extent  his  work,  and  his  correspondence  with
ord  Bathurst  on  this  subject  proves  him  a  man  of
great  cliplomatic  fone.

PLESSYS,  or  PLESSIS,  Paciflcus  du,  French
missionary,  b.  in  France  in  the  latter  part  of  the
10th  century  ;  d.  in  Quebec  in  the  first  part  of  the
17th.  He  was  one  of  the  four  RecoUet  mission-
aries that  accompanied  Champlain  to  Canada  in
1615,  and  was  employed  to  instruct  the  children  of
the  French  and  Indians  that  had  st'ttled  at  Three
Rivers.  His  influence  over  the  Indians  enabled
him  to  render  a  great  service  to  the  French  colony.
In  1618  a  conspinuy  was  formed  to  cut  off  all  the
French,  and  80()  Indians  assembled  near  Three
Rivers  to  carry  out  the  plot.  Brother  Pacificus
was  warned  by  a  friendly  savage.  He  gaine<I  over
some  of  the  chiefs,  and  with  their  help  prevailed


on  the  others  to  agree  to  a  treaty  of  peace,  which
he  undertook  to  negotiate  with  ('hamplain.  He
sailetl  with  the  latter  for  France  the  same  year,  but
afterward  returned  to  Canada.  His  Ixnly  was  dis-
covered near  the  vault  of  Champlain  in  1HG({.

PL<^:VILLE  LE  PELEY,(Jeorges  Kenf  (nlay-
veel).  French  naval  oflicer.  b.  in  (iranville,  20  June,
1726;  d.  in  Paris,  2  Oct..  18()5.  He  ran  away  from
school  when  he  was  twelve  years  ol«l,  and  enlisted
as  a  cabin-boy  at  Havre,  under  the  name  of  Du
Vivier,  on  a  ship  bound  for  the  Newfoundland
fisheries.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  of  1742  he
joined  a  privateer  as  lieutenant,  and  did  good  ser-
vice off  tne  coast  of  Canada.  In  1746  he  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  English  near  Louisburg,  but  he
was  soon  released  and  entered  the  royal  navv  as
sub-lieutenant  under  his  uncle,  (Commander  'filly
Le  Peley.  During  the  war  of  1755  he  was  again
employed  in  Canadian  waters,  and,  as  commander
of  the  brig  "  Hirondelle,"  forced  three  ships  to  sur-
render in  1759,  after  a  desperate  action.  In  1770,
l)eing  stationed  in  Marseilles,  he  saved  an  English
frigate  which  had  grounded  on  a  sand-bank  in  a
hurricane.  The  English  admiralty  presented  him
with  a  purse  of  $10,000.  and  when  afterward,  dur-
ing the  war  of  American  indeiK'ndence,  his  two
sons  were  captured  by  the  English,  the  admiralty
issued  orders  to  release  them,  In  1778  he  became
second  captain  of  the  "  Languedoc,"  the  flag-ship  of
Admiral  d'Estaing,  and  during  the  gale  that  dis-
persed the  French  fleet  off  Newport  he  saved  his
vessel.  After  serving  creditably  in  the  attack  on
St.  Lucia,  and  participating  in  the  caf)ture  of  St.
Vincent  and  Grenada  in  the  West  Indies,  he  urged
D'Estaing,  whose  confidence  he  had  gained,  to
utilize  the  momentary  French  superiority  on  the
sea  in  undertaking  some  great  enterprise  for  the
American  cause,  and  was  charged  with  convoying
captured  English  vessels  to  the  United  States.  The
Baltimore  merchants  were  so  satisfied  with  their
dealings  with  him  that,  after  the  siege  of  Savan-
nah, when  D'Estaing  opened  negotiations  for  a  loan
of  f  60,000  to  repair  his  vessels,  they  consented  to
advance  the  sum  upon  the  personal  security  of
Pleville  le  Peley.  This  conduct  is  the  more  mem-
orable when  it  is  rememl)ered  that  Lafayette,  the
acknowledged  owner  of  a  large  fortune,  was  able
to  raise  only  $10,000  in  1781  from  those  same  mer-
chants. In  the  assault  on  Savannah,  9  Oct.,  1779,
he  commanded  a  company,  and  was  conspicuous
in  his  efforts  to  reform  the  column  when  it  lost
its  way  in  a  swamp  and  became  exposed  to  the
British  batteries.  In  1780  he  served  under  De
Guichen,  and  he  fought  also  at  Yorktown  under
De  Grasse  in  October.  1781.  After  the  defeat
of  that  admiral.  12  April,  1782.  he  rejoined  Vau-
dreuilles.  and  served  under  him  till  the  conclusion
of  the  campaign.  He  was  [)romoted  commodore  in
1783,  and  employed  in  several  cruises  in  North
America.  Adopting  in  1789  the  principles  of  the
French  revolution,  he  was  appointed  minister
plenipotentiary  to  Ancona  in  1795,  and  afterward
given  a  like  mission  to  Corfu.  In  1797  he  was  pro-
moted rear-admiral,  and  in  March,  1798,  vice-
admiral.  He  held  also  the  naval  p<irtfolio  from
April  till  July.  1798,  was  created  a  senator  in  1799,
and  given  the  grand  cross  of  the  order  of  the  Legion
of  honor  bv  Napoleon  in  1804.

PLUMfi,  Joseph,  pioneer,  b.  in  Paris,  Oneida
CO.,  N.  Y.,  27  June,  1791  ;  d.  in  Cattaraugus.  N.  Y.,
25  May,  1870.  He  settled  in  Fredonia.  N.  Y.,  in
1816,  and  after  removing-  to  New  York  city,  and
subsequently  to  Ithaca  and  Geneva,  he  finally
established  himself  in  Gowanda,  Erie  co.,  N.  Y.,  on
the  border  of  the  Cattaraugus  reservation  of  Seneca


42


PLUMB


Indians.  He  was  active  in  benevolent  and  educa-
tional enterprises  in  Iwhalf  of  this  tril»e,  and
orRnnizi-ii  the  first  scht>ols  and  church  in  that
coniinunity.  He  wjis  a  founder  of  the  Liljerty
iiarty  in  1840,  and  its  candidate  for  lieutenant-
governor  in  1844.  He  owned  the  land  u\wn  which
the  town  of  ('attaraugiis  was  built,  and  disjwsed  of
it  on  condition  that  no  intoxicatin^j  li<|uors  should
l)e  sold  thereon.  In  one  case  the  matter  was  carried
to  the  court  of  appeals,  and,  after  years  of  litigation,
was  diH-idcd  in  i8(H)  in  favor  of  Mr.  Plumb,  the
court  sustaining  the  temperance  restriction.  He
was  an  early  men>ljer  of  the  anti-slavery  party,
and  «leclined'a  nomination  to  congress  in  18.W,  and
the  oJHce  of  circuit  judge.  See  his  "Memorial"
(i)rintetl  privately,  1870).— His  son.  Edward  Lee,
diplomatist,  b.  in  Gowanda.  N.  Y.,  17  .Iu.lv,  1827,
has  been  secretary  of  legation  and  charge  d  affaires
in  Mexico,  ccmsul-general  at  Havana,  and  was  the
agent  in  procuring  the  charter  of  the  International
railwav  of  Mexico.

PLt'MB,  Josiah  Bnrr,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  Kast  Haven,  Conn.,  25  March,  1810:  d.  in  Niag-
ara, Out.,  12  March,  1888.  His  father  was  rector
of  the  Episcopal  church  at  East  Haven.  The  son
was  for  many  years  nninager  of  the  State  bank  at
All>any.  N.  V.,  and  a  director  in  several  banks  in
Buffalo  and  Oswego.  He  was  one  of  a  committee
that  was  apjM)inted  by  the  Democnits  of  New  York
state  to  confer  with  the  slave  states  on  the  north-
ern l)order,  with  a  view  to  prevent  the  civil  war.
He  subsequentlv  removed  to  Canada,  and  was
elected  U>  the  Oominion  parliament  for  Niagara
in  1874.  iH'ing  an  active  debater  on  the  Conserva-
tive side.  He  was  unseated  on  petition  the  same
year,  and  re-elected  shortly  afterward  for  the  same
constituency.  Through  the  disfpiaiification  of  his
opponent,  who  received  the  majority  of  votes,  he
was  declared  elected  again  in  1878.  In  1877-'8
he  accompanied  Sir  John  Macdonald  during  his  na-
tional iM)lity  campaign,  rendering  efficient  service
to  his  party.  He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for
North  Wellington  in  1882,  and  was  called  to  the
senate,  6  Feb.,  1883.  He  presided  over  the  senate
during  most  of  the  session  of  1886,  owing  to  the
illness  of  Sir  Alexander  Campbell,  and  was  ap-
fKiinted  sjieaker  of  that  Ixxly  in  April,  1887,  which
office  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.

PLl'.MB,  Preston  B.,  senator,  b.  in  Delaware
county.  Oliio,  12  Oct.,  1837.  After  receiving  a
c<)mmoti-sfh(H»l  education  he  became  a  printer,  and
in  18o<)  removed  to  Kansjis.  He  studied  law.  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1861,  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  in  1862,  subsequently  reporter  of  the
Kansa.s  supreme  court,  and  in  the  latter  part  of
that  year  entered  the  National  army  as  a  lieuten-
ant. He  served  throughout  the  civil  war,  and  at-
tainetl  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was
again  in  the  legislature  in  1867-'8,  was  its  speaker
the  latter  vear,  and  in  1876  was  elected  U.  S.  sena-
tor as  a  Republican.  He  was  re-elected  for  the
term  that  will  end  in  1889.  Mr.  Plumb  has  edited
and  adapted  a  work  entitled  "  Practice  Ix'fore  Jus-
tice Courts  in  Kansjis  "  (New  York,  1875).

PLUMER,  WUHain  (plum'-mer).  senator,  b.  in
Newburjport,  Mass..  25  June,  1759;  d.  in  Kpping,
N.  H.,  22  June,  1850.  His  ancestor.  Francis,  emi-
grated from  England  in  1634,  and  was  one  of  the
original  grantees  of  Newbury.  William  removed
to  Epping,  N.  H.,  at  eight  years  of  age,  received  an
academical  education,  was  admitte<I  to  the  bar  in
1787,  and  soon  established  a  reputation  as  an  ml-
vocate.  He  also  took  an  active  part  in  state  poli-
tics, was  solicitor  for  RfK;kingham  county  for  many
years,  served  in  the  legislature  for  eight  terms,  dur-


PLUMER

ing  two  of  which  he  was  speaker,  and  was  president
of  the  state  senate  in  1810-'ll.  In  1792  lie  was  a
member  of  the  New  Hampshire  constitutional  con-
vention, and  was  active  in  the  revision  of  the  stat-
utes. He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  in  1802  to  fill
the  vacancy  occasioned  by  the  resignation  of  James
Sheaf e,  served  till  1807,  and  was  g'overnor  of  New
Hampshire  in  1812-'16,  and  again  in  1817-'18.  He
was  a  presidential  elector  in  1820,  casting  the  only
vote  in  opposition  to  the  re-election  of  President
Monroe,  to  whom  he  objected  on  account  of  his
financial  embarrassments.  This  was  his  last  pub-
lic service.  For  the  remaining  thirty  years  of  his
life  he  devoted  himself  to  literary  nursuit.s,  and
contributed  regularly  to  the  press  under  the  signa-
ture of  "Cincinnatus."  He  published  "Appeal  to
the  Old  Whigs"  (Washington,  1805)  and  "  Address
to  the  Clergy  "  (1814),  and  left  valuable  historical
and  biographical  manuscripts.  See  his  life,  by  his
son,  witli  a  memoir  of  the  latter,  edited  by  Andrew
P.  Peabody  (Boston,  1857).— His  son,  William,
congressman,  b,  in  Epping,  N.  H.,  9  Oct.,  1789;  d.
there,  18  Sept.,  1854,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
180J),  studied  law  under  his  father,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1812.  He  was  U,  S.  commis-
sioner of  loans  in  181()-'17.  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  1818,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  serving  by  re-election  from  1819  till
1825.  He  was  an  ardent  Abolitionist,  and  delivered
several  speeches  in  congress  in  opposition  to  the
admission  of  Missouri  into  the  Union  as  a  slave
state.  He  was  in  the  New  Hampshire  senate  in
1827-'8,  and  declined  a  re-election  in  1830,  and  the
appointment  of  district  attorney.  He  subsequently
devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuits,  and  his  last
public  service  was  as  a  member  of  the  State  consti-
tutional convention  in  1850.  Mr.  Plumer  was  an
accomplished  speaker  and  writer.  He  gave  much
time  to  historical  and  biographical  research,  and
was  an  active  member  of  the  New  England  historic-
genealogical  society.  Two  volumes  of  his  poems
were  printed  privately  (Boston,  1841  and  1843),  and
he  published  "  Lyrica  Sacra"  (1845)  and  "Pas-
toral on  the  Story  of  Ruth  "  (1847),  and,  in  part,
edited  the  life  of  his  father,  mentioned  above.

PLUMlR,  William  Swan,  clergyman,  b.  in
Griersburer  (now  Darlington),  Beaver  co.,  Pa.,  25
July,  1802;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  22  Oct.,  1880.
He  was  graduated  at  Washington  college,  Va.,  in

1825,  studied  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in

1826,  was  ordained  the  next  year,  and  organized
the  first  Presbyterian  church  in  Danville,  Va.,  in

1827,  He  then  removed  to  Warrenton,  N.  CL
where  he  also  organized  a  church,  and  afterward

S reached  in  Raleigh,  Washington,  and  New  Berne,
I.  C,  and  in  Prince  Edward  and  Charlotte  coun-
ties, Va.  He  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Petersburg,
:  Va.,  in  1831-4.  and  in  Richmond  in  1835-'46.  He
founded  the  "  Watchman  of  the  South,"  a  religious
weekly,  in  1837,  and  for  eight  years  was  its  sole
editor.  In  1838  he  was  instrumental  in  establish-
ing the  Deaf,  dumb,  and  blind  institution  in
Staunton.  Va.  He  was  pastor  of  churches  in  Bal-
timore. Md.,  in  1847-54,  and  in  Alleghany,  Pa.,  in
1855-'62,  at  the  same  tfrae  serving  as  professor  of
didactic  and  pastoral  theology  in  Western  theologi-
cal seminary  there.  He  resided  in  Philadelphia  for
the  next  three  years,  was  in  charge  of  a  Presbyte-
rian church  in  Pottsville,  Pa,,  in  1865-6,  and  at
that  date  became  professor  of  didactic  and  polemic
theology  in  the  Theological  seminary  in  Columbia,
S.  C.  lie  was  transferred  to  the  chair  of  historic,
casuistic,  and  pastoral  theology  in  1875,  and  held
that  office  until  a  few  months  previous  to  his
death. He  was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly


PLUMIER


PLUMSTED


48


of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  1838,  and  of  the
soulliern  branch  of  that  b«xly  in  1S71.  He  received
the  decree  of  1).  I),  from  Princeton,  Ijjifayette,  and
Washinjjton  collejfes  in  IWW,  ami  that  of  LL.  I),
from  the  University  of  Mississippi  in  IHo?.  Dr.
Plunier  was  an  interesting  flijure  in  the  history  of
the  Prest)yterian  church.  lie  was  not  an  orator,
but  he  exercised  a  strong  personal  inJUienco  over
his  audiences,  and  possesse<l  a  gift  for  teaching.
Ilis  writings  were  practical,  didactic,  and  of  the
extreme  Calvinistic  .school.  They  inchide  "Sub-
stance of  an  Argument  against  the  Indiscrilninate
Incorporation  of  Chun-hes  and  Religious  Societies"
(New  York,  1847):  "The  Bible  True,  and  Infidelity
Wicked "(1848);  "Plain  Thoughts  for  Children''
(Philadelphia.  184'.));  "Short  Sermons  to  Little
Chiltlren^'  (1*50);  "Thoughts  Worth  Rememljer-
ing"  (New  York,  18.50);  "The  Saint  and  the  Sin-
ner" (Philadelphia,  1851);  "The  Grace  of  Christ"
(185.3);  "Rome  against  the  Bible,  and  the  Bible
against  liome"  (1854);  "Christ  our  Theme  and
Glory"  (18.5.5);  "The  Church  and  her  Enemies"
(1856) ;  "  The  Ijaw  of  God  as  contained  in  the  Ten
Commandments  "  (1864) ;  "  Vital  Godliness  "  (New
York.  1865) ;  "  Jehovah  Jireh  "  (Philadelphia,  1866) ;
"Studies  in  the  Book  of  Psalms"  (1866);  "The
Rock  of  Our  Salvation  "  (1867) ;  "  Words  of  Truth
and  Love"  (18(58);  "Commentaries  on  the  P^pistle
to  the  Romans"  (1870);  "Commentaries  on  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews"  (1870);  more  than  fifty
tracts  that  were  published  by  religious  societies ;
and  many  occasional  sermons.

PLUMlER,  Charles,  French  botanist,  b.  in
Marseilles,  France,  in  1646;  d.  in  Santa  Maria,  near
Cadiz.  .Spain,  in  1704.  He  entered  the  order  of
Minimes  in  1662,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  phys-
ical sciences,  mathematics,  and  painting.  He  at-
tended botanical  lectures  in  Rome,  and  was
selected  by  the  government  in  1689  to  accompany
Surian  to  the  French  possessions  in  the  Antilles.
The  two  botanists  quarrelled  at  the  end  of  eighteen
months,  and  Plumier  published  his  results  sepa-
rately on  his  return  to  France.  Owing  to  the  inter-
est that  was  excited  among  scientists,  the  king  sent
him  on  a  second  mission  to  the  same  colonies.  Its
success  induced  him  to  make  a  third  voyage,  on
which  he  visited  Guadeloupe  and  Santo  Domingo,
as  well  as  Martinique.  He  also  went  to  the  neigh-
boring coast  of  the  main-land,  where  he  made  many
valuable  collections.  He  sailed  for  Santa  Maria,
intending  to  embark  at  that  port  for  Peru,  but  was
attacked  by  pleurisy  shortly  after  landing.  Plumier
renderinl  great  services  to  the  natural  sciences,  and
particularly  to  botany.  His  works  are  "  D&serip-
tion  des  plantes  de  rAmcrique"  (Paris.  1693);
"  Nova  plantarum  Americanarum  genera  "  (1703);
and"Traite  des  fougeres  de  I'Ameriques"  (170.5).
Plumier  also  published  some  other  works,  and  left
an  immense  collection  of  manuscripts,  which  are  in
the  library  of  Paris  and  in  that  of  the  Jardin  des
Plantes.  Among  them  are  '  Botanographia  Ameri-
cana," "  Descriptiones  plantarum  ex  America,"
"  De  naturalibus  Antillarum,"  "  Solum,  salum
Americanum.  sen  plantarum.  piscium,  volucrum-
que  insnlis  Antillis  et  San-Dominicana  naturalium
icones  et  descriptiones,"  "  Poissons  de  I'Ame-
rique."  and  "Ornithographia  Americana,  quadru-
pedia  et  volatilia  continens."  There  are  altogether
more  than  4,300  designs  of  plants  and  more  than
1,200  of  other  objects  in  natural  history,  drawn  by
Plumier.  probably  a  larger  number  than  were  exe-
cuted by  any  other  artist.  Sevend  dissertations  by
Plumier  were  published  in  scientific  periodicals.
In  the  "Journal  des  savants"  of  1694,  and  in  the
"M^moires  de  Trevoux"  of  September,  1703,  he


gave  the  first  correct  accounts  of  the  origin  of
cochineal.  The  name  Pluineria  was  given  by
Tournefort  to  a  class  nf  trees  in  the  West  Indies.

PLUMLEY,  Ueiijamin  Rush,  author,  b.  in
Newton.  Bucks  CO.,  Pa..  10  March,  1816;  d.  in  Gal-
veston. Tex.,  9  DiH'.,  1887.  He  was  earlv  a«s<K'iated
with  William  Lloyd  Garrison  in  alxtlition  move-
ments. sul)se«|uently  engaged  in  literary  pursuits,
and  contribute*!  ^)rose  and  poetical  sketches  to  the
marazines.  During  the  civd  war  he  serve<l  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont,  and  suljsequently
he  was  on  that  of  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks.  He
afterward  settled  iti  Galveston,  Tex.  His  works  in
manuscript,  to  Iks  issued  in  book -form,  include
"  Kathaleen  Mc  Kin  ley,  the  Kerry  Girl,"  "  liachel
Lockwoo<l,"  "  Lavs  of  the  Quakers,"  which ap-

B?ared  in  the  "  Knickerbocker  " ;  and  "  Oriental
allads,"  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly."

PLUMMER,  Joseph  B,  soldier,  b.  in  Barre.
Mass.,  10  Aug.,  1820;  d.  near  Corinth,  Miss.,  9
Aug.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1841,  served  in  Florida,  on  the
western  frontier,  and  in  the  Mexican  war,  became
lieutenant  in  1848,  and  captain  in  1852.  He  ren-
dered imjjortant  service  to  Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon
in  the  capture  of  Camp  Jackson,  Mo.,  and  was
severely  wounded  at  Wilson's  Creek  in  August,
1861.  He  became  colonel  of  the  11th  Missouri  vol-
unteers in  September  of  that  year,  defeated  the
Confederates  at  Fredericktown.  Mo.,  on  12  Oct.,
and  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
the  next  day.  He  sub«;quentTv  participated  in  the
battles  of  New  Madrid  and  Island  No.  10.  He  Ije-
came  major  of  infantry  in  April,  1862,  served  in
the  Mississippi  camjmign.  at  tne  siege  and  battle
of  Corinth,  and  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  to  Boon-
ville  from  1  till  11  June.  His  death  was  the  re-
sult of  exposure  in  camp.

PLUMSTED,  Clement,  mavor  of  Philadelphia,
b.  in  1680;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  26  May.  1745.  He
is  believed  to  have  been  a  native  of  Norfolk,  Eng-
land, and  this  belief  is  supported  by  the  fact  that
his  son  William  had  marked  on  his  silver  the  crest
that  was  granted  to  Nathaniel  Plumsted,  of  that
county,  in  the  15th  year  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  He
was  no  doubt  a  kinsman,  perhaps  a  son,  of  Clement
Plumsted,  citizen  and  dra[)er  of  London,  who  was
among  the  proprietors  of  East  Jersey,  associated
with  William  Penn.  He  came  to  Philadelphia
about  the  time  he  attained  his  majority,  became  a
merchant,  and  was  nearly  all  his  life  one  of  the
wealthiest  citizens.  He  was  made  a  common
councilman  in  1712.  afterward  became  an  alder-
man, and  in  1723  succeeded  James  Logan  as  mayor,
to  which  ofllce  he  wjvs  again  chosen  in  1736  and  in
1741.  He  was  commissioned  in  1717  one  of  the
justices  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  quarter
sessions,  and  orphans'  court,  and  was  continued  by
subsequent  appointments  utitil  his  death.  From
1727  till  his  death  he  was  an  active  member  of  the
provincial  council,  and  in  1730  l)ecame  a  master  in
chancery.  In  company  with  David  French  and
two  gentlemen  from  Maryland,  he  was  commis-
sioned by  the  English  court  of  chancery  in  1740  to
examine  witnesses  in  Pennsylvania  and  the  Lower
counties  in  the  case  of  Penn  vs.  Lortl  Baltimore.
He  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Andrew  Hamilton,
and  was  concerned  with  him  in  extensive  and  prof-
itable land  speculations,  and,  no  doubt,  through
Hamilton's  infiuence.  Plumsted.  although  a  Quak-
er, came  to  show  little  sympathy  with  the  "  Norris
party,"  as  the  stricter  Friends  came  to  be  calle<l,  in
the  bitter  contests  between  this  party  and  the
governor.  In  1727  he  was  one  of  those  that  pur-
chased the  Durham  tract  in  Bucks  county,  Pa.,


44


PLYMPTON


FOE


formed  a  stock-company  for  the  manufacture  of
iron,  and  built  the  Durham  funuice,  where  the
mnnufjK-ture  has  since  U-en  continued.  The  prop-
erty was  purchjised  in  1WJ4  by  Eilwanl  Cooj»erand
Abnun  S,  Hewitt.  By  his  will  he  left  £50  to  be
divided  between  ten  ptHjr  housekee[)ers.  five  of
them  to  be  Friends  and  five  of  other  denomina-
tions, lie  also  gave  five  shillin|ip«  to  everj'  poor  ])er-
son  in  the  almshouse. — His  son,  ^Villiain,  mavor
of  Philadelphia,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  7  Nov.,  1708:
d.  there,  10  Auk.,  17Go,  became  his  father's  partner
in  business,  and  continued  in  trade  after  the  lat-
ter's  death.  In  1739  he  was  chosen  to  the  city
council.  In  1741,  on  his  return  from  a  voyajre  to
England,  it  being  suggested  that  he  should  be
called  to  the  provincial  council,  (lov.  Thomas
wrote  to  William  Penn  :  "  Will  Phimsted  is  a  very
worthy  young  man,  but  as  his  father  is  in  the  coun-
cil he  will  be  always  looked  upon  as  under  his  in-
fluence, and  so  can  give  no  reputation  to  the  board.
Besi<les,  it  is  lx)th  your  brother's  opinion  and  mine
that  he  would  not  accept  of  it."  On  the  death  of
Peter  Evans,  a  lawyer  of  the  Inner  Temple,  in
1745,  the  office  of  register-general  for  the  nrovince
became  vacant,  and,  at  Clement  Plumsted  s  solici-
tation, it  was  given  to  William,  who  held  the  of-
fice until  his  death.  He  was  also  many  years  a
county  judge.  When  about  middle  age  he  re-
nounced (Quakerism.  In  174H  he  was  a  subscriber
to  the  Dancing  assembly,  the  first  that  was  held  in
Phila4lelphia.  Subsetjuently  he  became  one  of  the
founders  of  St.  Peter's  church,  and  in  1701,  when
its  housi'  for  worship  was  finished,  he  was  elected
a  vestryman,  and  Wcame  the  first  accounting
warden.  He  was  one  of  the  original  trustees  of  the
college  that  has  since  grown  to  be  the  University  of
Pennsylvania.  He  was  three  times  chosen  mayor
of  Philadeljihia — in  1750,  1754,  and  1755 — and  at
the  end  of  the  first  term  gave  to  the  city  £75  in-
stead of  giving  the  entertainment  that  was  expected
from  a  retiring  mayor.  In  1757,  although  he  re-
sided at  that  time  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  he
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  assembly  from  North-
ampton county.  Ilisdaughter,  Elizabeth,  a  lady  of
noted  l)eauty,  became  the  wife  of  Andrew  Elliott,
and  his  granddaughter,  Elizabeth,  daughter  of
Andrew  and  Elizabeth  (Plumsted)  Elliott,  became
lady  of  the  bed-chaml)er  to  the  queen  of  P^ngland,
antl  wife  of  William  Schaw  Cathcart,  who  was  cre-
ated Earl  Cathcart  in  1814.

PLYMPTON,  (ieorge  Washington,  civil  en-
gineer, b.  in  Walt  ham,  Mass.,  18  Nov.,  1827.  He
learned  the  machinist's  trade,  and  then  wjis  gradu-
ated with  the  degree  of  C.  E.  at  Rensselaer
polvtechnic  institute  in  1847.  For  a  time  he  re-
mamed  at  the  institute  as  instructor  in  mathemat-
ics, but  in  1850  he  turned  his  attention  to  profes-
sional work  in  New  York  state,  and  later  in  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  and  in  1852  he  held  the  chair  of
engineering  and  architecture  in  Cleveland  univer-
sity. In  1853-'5  he  taught  mathematics  in  the
St-ate  normal  sc1kx)1  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  in
1857-9  he  had  charge  of  physics  and  engineering
in  the  Normal  sch(K>l  in  Trenton,  N.  J.  He  was
called  in  1803  to  the  chair  of  physical  science  in
the  Brooklyn  polytechnic  institute,  and  in  1809
was  appointed  to  that  of  physics  and  engineering
at  Cooper  Union,  New  York'  city,  from  which  he
was  advanced  in  1879  to  the  post  of  director  of  the
Cooper  Union  night-school.  In  1844-'5  he  was
nrofessor  of  chemistry  and  toxicology  in  the  Long
Island  college  hospital,  and  in  1867-8  he  was  chief
engineer  of  the  water  board  of  Bergen,  N.  J.,  hav-
ing charge  of  the  drainage  of  that  place.  Prof.
Plympton  was  appointed  commissioner  of  electrical


subways  of  Brooklyn,  and  has  been  very  prompt
in  placing  the  wires  underground.  He  received
the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1854  from  Hamil-
ton college,' and  in  1877  that  of  M,  D.  from  the
Long  Island  college  hospital.  He  is  a  member  of
the  American  society  of  civil  engineers,  and  of
other  scientific  associations.  From  1870  till  1886
he  edited  "  Van  Nostrand's  Engineering  Magazine,"
and  he  has  |jublished  "  The  Blowpipe,  a  Guide  to
its  Use  in  the  Determination  of  Salts  and  Minerals  "
(Cincinnati,  1858) :  "  The  Star  Finder,  or  Plani-
sphere with  a  Movable  Horizon  "  (New  York,  1878) ;
"  The  Aneroid,  and  how  to  use  it "  (1880) ;  and  a
translation  of  Jannettaz's  "  Guide  to  the  Determi-
nation of  Rocks"  (1877).

PLYMPTON,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Sudbury,
Mass..  24  March,  1787;  d.  on  Staten  island,  N.  Y.,
5  June,  1800.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the
4th  infantrj^  at  the  begmning  of  the  war  with
Great  Britain  in  1812,  and  served  on  the  northern
frontier  until  1815.  He  became  captain  in  1821,
major  in  1840,  and  in  1842  commandea  during  an  at-
tack on  the  Seminole  Indians  near  Dunn's  lake,  Fla.
He  became  lieutenant-colonel  in  1846,  led  his  regi-
ment through  the  campaign  under  Gen.  Winfleld
Scott  in  Mexico,  received  the  brevet  of  colonel  for
gallant  service  at  the  battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  and
was  mentioned  in  the  official  report  for  bravery  at
that  of  Contrcras.  In  1853  he  was  promoted  colo-
nel of  the  1st  U.  S.  infantry.

POE,  Edgar  Allan,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
19  Jan.,  1809;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  7  Oct.,  1849.
His  great-grandfather,  John,  who  came  from  the
north  of  Ireland  to  Pennsylvania  about  1745,  was
a  descendant  of  one  of  Cromwell's  officers.  John's
son,  David,  was  an  ar-
dent patriot,  served  in
the  Revolution  and  the
war  of  1812,  and  was
commonly  given  the
title  of  general.  His
son,  of  the  same  name,
was  educated  for  the
law,  but  went  upon  the
stage,  and  in  1805  mar-
ried Elizabeth  Arnold,
an  actress.  Edgar  was
born  while  his  parents
were  regular  members
of  the  company  at  the
Federal  street  theatre,
Boston.  He  was  left
an  orphan  in  early
childhood,  and  adopt-
ed by  John  Allan,  a
wealthy  tobacco  merchant  in  Richmond,  Va.,  whose
young  childless  wife  had  taken  a  fancy  to  the
boy.  In  Mr.  Allan's  house  he  was  brought  up  in
luxury.  He  was  precocious,  and  could  read,  draw,
dance,  and  declaim  poetry  at  six  years  of  age.  In
1815  he  accompanied  the  Allans  "to  England,  and
was  placed  at  a  school  in  Stoke  Newington,  which
he  afterward  described  in  his  tale  of  "  William
Wilson."  Here  he  remained  five  years.  On  his
return  to  Richmond  he  attended  a  private  school
in  that  city,  where  he  was  a  bright  student  and
active  in  out-door  sports,  one  of  his  feats  being  a
swim  of  six  miles  against  the  tide  and  in  a  not
June  sun.  But  he  had  few  companions,  and  kept
much  to  himself.  In  his  fifteentn  year  he  became
warmly  attached  to  the  mother  of  one  of  his  school-
mates. She  was  his  confidant  and  friend,  and
when  she  died  a  few  months  later  the  boy  visited
her  grave  nightly  for  a  long  time.  '£o  this  inci-
dent Poe  was  wont  to  ascribe  much  influence  over


POE


POE


45


his  mind.  On  14  Fob..  1K2(1.  ho  was  matriculato<l
at  thp  Univprsity  of  Virpinin,  whoro,  thoujjh  a  fair
st mien t.  lie  s|K>nt  niueli  tiine  at  tin*  pamiuff-taMo,
but  he  wjis  not  expelled  by  the  faculty. as  has  U'en
said,  nor  was  he  even  a<imonish«l  by  them.  He
had  incurred  heavy  pimbliii^  d»'bts,  which  his  fos-
ter-father refused  to  jmy.  and  takin;;  the  l)oy  from
collejre  at  the  end  of  the  first  year,  ho  placed  him
in  his  own  countinfr-room  ;  but  shortly  afterward
Poe  left  Hichmond  to  seek  his  fortune.  He  first
went  to  lioston.  when>,  alH)ut  midsummer i)f  1H27,
he  made  his  first  literary  ventun*.  the  publication
of  "  Tamerlane  and  other  P<K'ms."  which  he  said  in
the  pri'face  had  been  written  in  1821-'2.  But  his
means  were  soon  exhaustwl.  and  on  20  May,  182S,
he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  U.  S.  army,  under
the  name  of  Kdfjar  A.  Perry.  He  won  the  pood-
will  of  his  superiors,  and  on  1  Jan..  1820.  was  pro-
moteti  serjroant -major  for  merit,  but  a  little  later
he  made  his  whereal)outs  known  to  Mr.  Allan,  who,
with  others,  procured  his  discharjre  and  appoint-
ment to  a  cadetship  at  the  U.  S.  military  aca<lemy.
Before  the  latter  had  been  obtained  Poe  published
a  new  edition  of  his  poems  with  some  additions,
entitled  "  Al  Aaraaf,  Tamerlane,  and  Minor  Poems  "
(Baltimore,  1829),  which,  like  the  first,  possessed
little  merit,  and  met  with  no  favor.  On  1  Jjily,
1830,  he  enteretl  on  his  cadetship  at  West  Point.
And  at  the  end  of  the  first  half-vear  stood  third  in
French  and  seventeenth  in  matliematics  in  a  class
of  eighty-seven,  but  he  became  dissatisfied,  and,  as
his  foster-father  refused  to  sanction  his  resigna-
tion, he  purposely  neglected  his  duties  and  was
cashiered  early  in  1831.  Before  this  he  had  ob-
tained the  subscriptions  of  his  fellow-students  to  a
third  collection  of  "Poems"  (New  York,  1831),
which  met  with  nothing  but  ridicule.

Ue  now  sought  literary  employment  in  Baltimore,
but  with  little  success  till  in  1833  he  was  awarded
a,  prize  of  $100,  which  had  been  oflferetl  by  the  Bal-
timore "Saturday  Visitor,"  for  his  tale  "  A  Manu-
script found  in  a  Bottle,"  the  judges  being  Dr.
James  H.  Miller,  John  H.  B,  Latrobe,  and  John  P.
Kennedy.  A  prize  of  $50  for  the  best  poem  was
also  won  by  his  "Coliseuu),"  but  it  was  ruled  out
as  Iteing  by  the  author  of  the  successful  tale.  Poe
had  been  in  destitution,  but  he  was  relieved  by
Mr.  Kennedy,  who  also  procured  him  literary  work,
and  on  Kennedy's  recommendation  he  was  engaged
as  editor  of  the  "  Southern  Literary  Messenger  "  at
Richmond.  Here  he  wrote  some  of  his  liest  tales,
developing  the  gloomy  and  mystical  vein  for  which
he  afterwani  became  noted,  but  he  gained  more
attention  by  his  trenchant  criticisms,  which  made
him  unpopular.  es[)ecially  in  New  York.  While
here  he  als<j  became  engaged  to  his  cousin.  Virginia
Clemm,  then  a  girl  of  thirteen  years,  and  on  22
Sept.,  1835,  he  obtained  a  marriage  license  in  Bal-
timore, but  the  ceremony  was  not  performed  pub-
lii^ly  till  the  following  year.  His  prospects  were
now  excellent,  but  in  January.  1837,  he  re.signe<l
his  post  and  went  to  New  York.  This,  as  well  as
the  sudden  termination  of  Poe's  other  editorial
engagements,  has  l)cen  the  subject  of  much  con-
troversy, some  authorities  saying  that  his  dissipated
habits  were  the  cause,  and  others  ascribing  it  to
feeble  health  or  to  an  invitation  that  he  received
from  Dr.  Francis  L.  Hawks  to  become  a  contribu-
tor to  the  newly  established  •'  New  York  Review."
He  furnished  only  one  article  for  this,  a  review  of
a  book  of  travels,  and  then  worked  on  his  "  Narra-
tive of  Arthur  (tordon  Pvm,"  a  tnle  of  adventure
in  antarctic  regions,  which  hml  been  partially  pub-
lished in  the  "Messenger"  (New  York,  1838).  At
this  time  the  principal  income  of  the  family  was


obtained  from  the  Iwanlers  that  Mn«.  Clemm,  Poe's
mother-in-law,  rweive<l.  Among  these  was  Will-
iam Gowans,  the  bibliophile,  who  has  testifie<l  to
Poe's  uniformly  solM»r  and  courteous  ilemeanor.
In  the  summer  of  1838  he  went  to  Philadelphia
and  compiled  the  "Conchologist's  First  B<K»k "
(Philadelphia,  IKMI),  which  has  raised  against  him
many  charges  of  plagiarism.  It  was  said  during
his  lifetime  that  the  text-liook  was  a  sinifde  reprint
of  t'apt.  Thomas  Brown's  "  (^onchology,"  an  Kng-
lish  work;  but  this  is  untrue.  It  has  recently  be-
come known  that  it  was  condensed  and  otherwise
altered  from  Thomas  Wvatfs  "  Manual  of  Con-
chology."  at  the  desire  of  the  author,  whose  pub-
lishers decline<l  to  issue  a  smaller  edition  of  his
work.  In  July.  18JJ9,  he  l)ecame  associate  e<litor
of  William  E.  Burton's  "  (}entleman's  Magazine"
in  Phila<lelphia,  and  shortly  afterward  he  issued  a
collection  of  his  prose  stories,  entitled  "Tales  of
the  Grotesfjue  and  the  Aratestjue"  (2  vols..  lioston,
\HiHt).  Though  these  contain  some  of  his  finest
work,  he  received  nothing  from  them  but  the  copy-
right and  twenty  copies  for  private  distribution,
and  the  sale  was  small.  His  connection  with  the
"Gentleman's  Magazine  "  lasted  until  the  follow-
ing year,  when  he  quarrelled  with  Burton.  Poe
had  previously  issued  the  prospe<'tus  of  a  new
perio<lical,  "  I'he  Penn  Magazine."  but  it  was  at
first  postponed  temporarily  by  his  illness,  and
then  mdefinitely  by  liis  engagement  as  etlitor-in-
chief  of  "Graham's  Magazine,"  which  ha<l  Ix'en
formed  bv  the  purchase  of  the  "Gentleman's"  by
George  ft.  Graham  and  its  consolidation  with
Graham's  "  Casket."  About  this  time  he  beean  to
take  an  interest  in  unravelling  difilcult  problems.
He  had  asserted  in  an  article  on  "  Cryptography  "
that  human  ingenuity  could  constnict  no  crj-pto-
graph  that  could  not  Ijc  solved.  The  result  was
that  compositions  of  this  kind  were  sent  to  him
from  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  he  solved  all
that  he  received,  to  the  numl)er  of  more  than  100.
Not  long  afterward  he  wrote  his  tale  "  The  Gold-
Bug,"  which  was  founded  on  the  solution  of  a
cryptograph,  and  for  which  he  obtained  a  prize  of
$100  that  had  been  offered  by  the  "  Dollar  Maga-
zine." In  May,  1841,  he  publishe<l  a  prediction  of
the  plot  of  "bamaby  Rudge"  from  the  intro<luc-
tory  chapters,  which  is  said  to  have  caused  Dickens
to  ask  Poe  if  he  was  the  devil.  In  April  he  had
published  his  "Murders  in  the  Rue  Morgue,"  the
motlel  of  many  subsequent  detective  stories.  The
tale  was  afterward  stolen  by  two  rival  French
journals,  and  a  libel  suit  followed,  in  the  course  of
which  the  true  author  was  discovered.  This  was
the  beginning  of  Po<>'s  popularity  in  France,  which
became  wide  and  lasting.  Meanwhile  he  cf)ntinued
his  critical  articles,  which,  if  not  always  correct,
and  often  apparently  spiteful  and  cok)red  by  Poe's
peculiar  ideas  concerning  the  literary  art,  were
certainly  independent.

During  his  stay  in  Philatlelphia.  Poe's  wife,  who
had  l)een  alwavs  delicate,  ruptured  a  blootl-vessel
in  singing,  and  she  never  fully  recovered.  To  his
anxiety  for  her  Poe  attributed  his  failure  to  with-
stand his  appetite  for  stimulants.  However  this
may  be,  his  habits  grew  more  and  more  irreeular,
and  in  the  snring  of  1842  he  lost  the  eilitorship  of
"  Graham's.  lie  had  not  abandoned  the  scheme
of  issuing  a  magazine  of  his  own,  and  early  in  1843
appeared  the  prospectus  of  "  The  Stylus."  in  which
Poe  was  to  be  associated  with  Thomas  C.  Clarke.
This  was  .subsequently  alwindoned.  and,  after  doing
some  desultory  literary  work,  delivering  a  few  lec-
tures, and  suffering  much  from  poverty,  Poe  re-
turned with  his  wife  and  her  mother  to  New  York


46


POE


POE


in  April,  1844.  His  first  publication  here  was  his
"  Balloon-Hoax,"  a  circumstantial  account  of  a
ballooii-voyajje  over  the  Atlantic,  which  appeared
in  the  news  columns  of  the  "Sun."  He  soon  be-
came connected  with  the  "Evening  Mirror,"  in
which,  on  29  Jan.,  1845.  first  appeared  his  poem  of
"The  Haven,"  from  the  advance  sheets  of  the
"  Whig  Review  "  for  Fei)ruary.  The  iMjpularity  of
this  was  immediate  and  wide-spread.  In  April,
Ixjcoming  dissatisfied  with  work  on  a  daily  paper,
ho  wiihdrew,  and  soon  afterward  was  associated
with  ciiarles  F.  Uriggs  in  the  management  of  the
"  Hroa<lway  Journal,"  a  newly  f  stablished  weekly.
His  connection  with  this  was  marked  by  a  series
of  harsh  criticisms  of  the  poet  Longfellow,  whom
he  accused  of  gross  plagiarism.  Poe  afterward  be-
came solo  editor  of  tne  "  Journal,"  and  was  endeav-
oring to  get  it  entirely  under  his  control  when
financial  troubles  caused  its  suspension  in  Decem-
ber, 1845.  In  Octoljer  of  that  year  he  was  invited
to  deliver  an  original  poem  before  the  Boston
lyceum.  and  in  resjK)nse  read  "Al  Aarajif,"  one  of
his  earliest  efforts.  There  was  much  dissatisfaction,
and  Poe  on  his  return  to  New  York  asserted  in  his
"Journal"  that  his  action  had  been  intentional,
and  that  he  had  thought  that  the  poem  "  would
answer  suflficientlv  well  for  an  audience  of  tran-
scendentalists."  'The  incident  was  the  cause  of
much  unfavorable  comment.  At  the  close  of  this
year  Poe  issued  a  new  collection  of  his  poems,
"The  Raven  and  other  Poems"  (New  York,  1845).
Early  in  184G  he  removed  to  a  cottage  in  Fordham,
now  a  part  of  New  York  city.  His  chief  work  at
this  time  was  a  series  of  papers  in  "Godey's  Lady's
Book  ■'  on  "  The  Literati  of  New  York."  One  of
these,  on  Dr.  Thomas  Dunn  English,  provoked  a
reply  of  such  a  nature  that  Poe  sued  the  "  Mirror,"
in  which  it  appejired,  and  recovered  $225  and  costs.
For  several  weeks  Ijefore  this  he  had  lx>en  ill.  His
constitution  had  teen  shattered  by  overwork,  dis-
appointment, and  the  use  of  stimulants,  and  before
the  end  of  the  year  the  family  was  reduced  to  such

()overtv  that  a  public  appeal  was  made  in  its  be-
mlf.  On  30  Jan.,  1847.  Mrs.  Poe  died,  but,  after
his  life  had  been  endangered,  Poe  partially  re-
covered before  the  following  summer.  He  tried  to
revive  his  plan  of  a  new  magazine,  this  time  to  be
called  "  Literary  America,"  and  to  aid  it  lectured,
on  3  Feb.,  1848,  in  the  New  York  society  library
on  the  "'Cosmogony  of  the  Universe."  a  subject  on
which  he  had  speculated  during  his  recovery.  The
lecture  was  elaborated  into  "  Eureka,  a  Prose
Poem"  (New  York,  1848),  which  he  considered  his
greatest  work,  but  this  judgment  was  not  that  of
the  public  nor  of  his  critics.  Its  physical  and
metaphysical  speculations  have  little  value,  and  its
theology  is  a  mixture  of  materialism  and  pantheism.
Shortly  after  this  Poe  entered  into  a  conditional
engagement  of  marriage  with  Mrs.  Sarah  Helen
Whitman,  of  Providence,  R.  I.,  but  it  was  broken
off.  His  health  was  still  feeble,  but  he  now  pre-
pared for  a  southeni  trip,  durine:  which  he  lectured
several  times  and  canvassed  for  his  proposed  maga-
zine. While  he  was  in  Richmond  he  offered  mar-
riage to  a  widow  of  whom  he  had  been  enamore*!  in
youth,  and  was  accepted.  Shortly  afterward,  prob-
ably on  30  Sept.,  1849,  he  set  out  for  the  north  to
make  arrangements  for  the  wedding.  Of  his  move-
ments after  this  nothing  is  known  with  certainty.
On  3  Oct.,  the  day  of  a  municipal  election,  he  was
found  unconscious  in  Baltimore  in  a  liquor-saloon
that  had  been  used  as  a  polling-place,  and  was
removed  to  a  hospital,  where  he  died  of  delirium
tremens.  It  has  been  reported  that  he  had  dined
with  some  old  military  friends,  became  intoxicated.


and  in  this  state  was  fonnd  by  politicians,  who
drugged  him  and  made  him  vote  at  several  places.

Poe's  personal  apfwarance  was  striking.  He  was
erect,  with  a  pale  face,  and  an  expression  of  melan-
choly. His  conversation  is  said  to  have  been  fas-
cinating. His  tales  and  poems,  though  the  ability
and  power  that  they  display  are  universally  ac-
knowledged, have  been  very  differently  estimated.
The  former  have  been  praised  for  their  artistic
construction,  their  subtle  analysis,  and  their  vivid
descriptions,  and  condemned  for  their  morbid  sub-
jects and  absence  of  moral  feeling.  The  poems  are
admired  for  melody  and  for  ingenious  versification,
and  objected  to  because  they  appeal  to  the  imagina-
tion and  not  to  the  intellect.  The  author's  theory
of  poetry,  which  he  finally  formulated  in  his  lec-
ture on  "  The  Poetic  Principle,"  was  peculiar,  inas-
much as  he  contended  that  beauty  was  its  sole
object.  He  asserted  that  a  "  long  poem  is  a  con-
tradiction in  terms."  Says  his  latest  biographer :
"  In  his  prose  tales  he  declares  repeatedly  that  he
meant  not  to  tell  a  story,  but  to  produce  an  effect.
In  poetry  he  aimed  not  to  convey  an  idea,  but  to
make  an  impression.  He  was  not  a  philosopher  nor
a  lover ;  he  never  served  truth  nor  knew  passion ;
he  was  a  dreamer,  and  his  life  was,  warp  and  woof,
mood  and  sentiment,  instead  of  act  and  thought."

The  first  collection  of  Poe's  works  was  that  by
Rufus  W.  Griswold,  preceded  by  a  memoir  (3  vols.,
New  York,  1850;  4  vols.,  1856).  There  are  also
several  British  editions,  of  which  two  of  the  latest
are  those  with  memoirs  by  Richard  Henry  Stod-
dard (London,  1873)  and  John  H.  Ingram  (4  vols.,
Edinburgh,  1874).  There  is  a  later  American  edi-
tion with  the  sketch  by  Ingram  (4  vols.,  New  York,
187G) ;  a  "  Diamond  "  "edition  in  one  volume,  with
a  sketch  by  William  Fearing  Gill  (Boston,  1874);
and  a  limited  edition  with  the  memoir  by  Stoddard
(8  vols.,  New  Y'ork,  1884).  Several  volumes  of  his
tales  have  been  translated  into  French  by  Charles
Baudelaire  and  William  Hughes.  There  have  ap-
peared also  collections  of  his  poems,  with  memoirs,
respectively,  by  James  Hannay  (London,  1852) ;  Ed-
mund F.  Blanchard  (1857) ;  and  Charles  F.  Briggs
(New  York,  1858) ;  and  many  illustrated  editions
of  single  poems,  notably  of  "  The  Raven."  The
memoir  by  Griswold  contains  errors  of  fact,  and  is
written  in  a  hostile  spirit.  Its  accusations  have
been  replied  to  by  Mrs.  Sarah  Helen  Whitman  in
"  Edgar  A.  Poe  and  his  Critics  "  (New  York,  1859)
and  by  William  Fearing  Gill  in  his  "  Life  of  Edgar
Allan  Poe  "  (1877).  There  is  also  a  life  by  Eugene
L.  Didier  (1876),  and  various  magazine  articles,  in-
cluding one  in  "  Scribner's  Monthly  "  for  October,
1875,  by  Francis  G.  Fairfield,  in  which  he  attempts
to  show  that  Poe's  peculiarities  were  due  to  epilepsy.
The  latest  and  most  impartial  biography  is  that  by
George  E.  Woodberry  in  the  "  American  Men  of
Letters  "  series  (Boston,  1885).

On  17  Nov.,  1875,  a  monument,  erected  by  the
school-teachers  of  Baltimore,  was  publicly  dedicated
to  Poe's  memory  in  that  city.  It  is  of  Italian  mar-
ble in  the  form  of  a  pedestal  eight  feet  in  height,
and  bears  a  medallion'  of  the  poet.  A  memorial
volume  containing  an  account  of  the  dedication
ceremonies  was  issued  by  Sarah  S.  Rice  and  Will-
iam Hand  Browne  (Baltimore,  1877).  In  May,
1885,  the  actors  of  the  United  States  erected  in  the
Metropolitan  museum,  New  York  city,  a  memorial
to  Poe,  at  whose  dedication  an  address  was  made
bv  Edwin  Booth,  and  William  Winter  read  a  poem.
Inhere  has  recently  been  discovered  a  large  amount
of  manuscript  material  relating  to  Poe,  including
a  life  by  Dr.  Thomas  HoUev  Chi  vers,  "which  may  be
published  at  some  future  time.


POE


POEY


47


POE,  Orlando  Mt'tcalfe,  widier,  b.  in  Navarre.
Stark  CO.,  Ohio,  7  Marcii,  18J<2.  Ho  was  cnnluated
at  tho  U.S.  military  m-adi'iny  in  IbfllJ,  ana  assijrneil
to  tlje  topographical  engineers.  He  U'canie  1st
lieutenant  in  18(K),  and  wa.s  on  lake  survey  duty
till  the  iH'ginning  of  tho  civil  war,  when  he  en-
gaged in  the  organization  of  Ohio  volunteers.  He
was  chief  to|Kjgraphical  engineer  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Ohio  from  18  May  till  15  June,  1801,
being  engaged  in  reconnoissances  in  northeni  Ken-
tucky and  western  Virginia,  participated-  in  the
battle  of  Rich  Mountain,  on  the  statf  of  (ten.
George  B.  McC'lellan.  He  became  colonel  of  the
2d  Michigan  volunteers  in  SeptemU'r,  IHOl.  was  in
comman<l  of  his  regiment  in  the  defences  of  Wash-
ington, and  took  part  in  the  princinal  Iwttles  of  the
Virginia  jH'ninsuiar  campaign,  lie  was  appointed
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1802.  was
engaged  at  Fredericksburg,  commanded  a  divis-
ion of  tiie  JHh  army  corps  from  February  to
March.  1803.  and  Inicame  captain  of  U.  S.  engi-
neers in  that  month,  and  subsequently  chief  enj-i-
neer  of  the  23d  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio.
He  occupied  a  similar  post  in  the  army  of  Gen.
William  T.  Sherman  in  the  invasion  of  Georgia,
the  march  to  the  sea,  and  through  the  Carolinas,
until  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston.
He  receivetl  the  brevet  of  major  for  gallant  service
at  the  siege  of  Knoxville  on  6  July,  1804,  that  of
lieuteruint-colonel  for  the  capture  of  Atlanta  on
1  Sept.,  18(J4,  and  that  of  colonel  for  Savannah  on
21  Dec.  1864.  In  March.  1865,  he  was  brevet  ted
brigadier-general  for  "  gallant  and  meritorious  ser-
vice in  the  campaign  terminating  in  the  surrender
of  the  insurgent  army  under  Gen.  Joseph  E.  John-
ston." He  was  engineer  secretary  of  the  U.  S.
light-house  board  in  1865-'70,  commissicmed  major
in  the  latter  year,  constructed  the  light-house  on
Spectacle  reef.  Lake  Huron,  in  1870-'3,  and  be-
came a  member  of  the  light-house  lx)ard  in  1874.
He  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman
in  1873-'84,  and  at  the  same  time  was  iji  charge  of
the  river  and  harlxir  works  from  Lake  Erie  to
Lake  .Superior.  In  1882  he  was  commissioned  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  engineers.

POEPPIG.  Eduard  (pup-pig),  German  natu-
ralist, b.  in  Plauen,  Saxony,  10  July.  1797;  d.  in
Leipsic,  4  S«'pt.,  18(58.  He  received  his  education
in  Leipsic,  and,  after  obtaining  a  medical  degree,
was  given  by  the  rector  of  the  university  a  botani-
cal mission  to  North  and  South  America.  He  re-
turned to  Germany  toward  the  close  of  1832  with
valuable  collections  in  zoology  and  botany,  and
was  appointed  in  the  following  year  professor  of
zoology  in  the  University  of  Leipsic,  which  post  he
held  till  his  death.  He  also  contributed  to  the  es-
tablishment of  a  scientific  museum  in  the  latter
city,  and  liequeathed  to  it  his  collections.  He  i)ub-
lished  "  Ileise  naeh  Chili,  Peru,  und  auf  dem
Amazonen-Flusse "  (2  vols.,  Leipsic,  1835):  "Nova
genera  ac  Species  plantarum  quas  in  regno,  Chi-
fiensi,  Peruviano,  ac  Terra  Amazonica.  anni  1827-
18:«  lectarunj "  (3  vols.,  1835-45) ;  "  Reise  nach  den
Vereinigten  Staaten "  (1837):  and  "  Landschaft-
liche  Ansichtcn  und  erlHuternde  Darstellungen "
(18^30).  Poeppig  also  wrote  most  of  the  American
articles  for  the  "  AUgeraeine  Encyclopaedie,"  edited
by  Ersch  and  Grlll)er.

POEY,  FeHpc  (|)o'-ay),  Cuban  naturalist,  b.  in
Havana,  26  May,  1799.  He  is  of  French  and  Span-
ish parentage.  He  made  his  preparatory  studies  in
his  native  city,  and  concludeA  them  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Madrid,  where  he  w»is  graduated  in  law.
Having  a  taste  for  natund  history,  he  gradually
abandoned  his  practice  &s  a  lawyer,  and  began  the


study  of  mollusks,  insects,  and  flshes.  In  182A  he
sailed  for  Cul»a,  and  thence,  with  a  collection  of
s|H?cimens,  f«)r  I'aris.  There  he  aideil  in  found-
ing, in  1827.  tho  "Soci^'t<5  entomologique,"  and
contribute<l  notes  and  drawings  to  the  "  Histoitu
naturelle  des  jM»isson»."
In  1833  he  returned  to
Havana  and  devoted  him-
s4'lf  to  the  study  of  natu-
ral history,  making  draw-
ings of  specimens  with
his  associate,  Juan  (iund-
lach  (q.  v.),  and  discover-
ing many  new  s|>ecies
which  are  included  in
Pfeiffer's  "  Monographia
Heliceorum  Viventium."
In  1842  P{)ey  was  appoint-
ed professor  of  compjira-
tive  anatomy  and  zMngy
in  the  University  of  ifii-
vana,  and  from  1851  till
1800  he  published  at  in-
tervals his  "  Historia  Na-
tural de  la  Isla  de  Cuba "
(2  vols..  1800).  In  1863  he  was  appointed  to  the
chair  of  botany,  mineralogv.  and  geologv.  and  from
1868  till  1875  he  publislied  in  the  ""ReiH-rtorio
Fisico-Natural  de  la  Isla  de  Cuba."  and  reprinted  in
the  *' Anales  de  la  Sociedad  de  Historia  Natural  de
Madrid,"  his  great  work  under  the  title  "Synoiwis
Piscicum  Cubensium,"  or  "Catalogo  razona<lo  do
los  Peces  Cubanos,"  an  atlas  of  10  volumes  with
more  than  1,(XK)  illustrations  drawn  by  himself,  and
the  description  of  alxiut  800  tropical  American
fishes.  This  work  was  purchased  by  the  Sjianish
government,  placed  in  the  *'  Biblioteca  de  Ciencias
Naturales"at  Madrid,  and  exhibitetl  by  the  gov-
ernment in  the  exposition  of  Amsterdam  in  188;J,
receiving  a  gold  medal  and  honomble  mention.  In
1873  I\>ey  was  appointed  professor  of  philosophy
and  belles-lettres,  and  he  has  held  all  his  chairs  in
the  university  till  the  present  time  (1888),  notwith-
standing his  advanced  age.  He  is  a  member  of
almost  every  scientific  soc-iety  in  Eurojie  and
America,  anil  many  of  his  new  specimens  in  life-
size  drawings  are  to  be  found  in  the  U.  S.  national
museum,  the  U.  S.  museum  of  comparative  zoiilogy,
and  the  Spanish  museum  of  Madrid.  His  other
works,  besides  the  two  mentioned  above,  are
"  Centurie  des  Ijcpidopteres  de  I'ile  de  Cuba  "  (Paris,
1832);  "Geografia  Universal"  (Havana,  1836);
"Corona  Poeyana "  (1844) ;  "Geografia  de  Culia"
(19  editions);  "Cartilla  de  (leografia"  (1855);
and  "Cartilla  de  Mineralogia"  (1878).  He  has
contributed  for  more  than  sixty  years  many
papers  on  natural  history  to  the  French.  Spanish,
and  Culwin  scientific  press,  and  some  of  his  paj>ers
occur  in  the  proceedings  of  the  Academy  of  natu-
ral science  of  Philadelphia,  the  annals  of  the  New
York  lyceum,  and  other  American  scientific  publi-
cations. He  also  wrote  poems,  of  which  "  hi  Ar-
royo" and  "A  Silvia"  are  best  known. — His  son,
Andres,  meteorologist,  b.  in  Havana  in  182().  was
educated  in  his  native  city  and  in  Paris.  In  1848
he  began  to  contribute  to  scientific  tmblications.
especially  on  meteorology  and  natural  philosophy.
To  his  efforts  was  due  the  creation  of  a  meteoro-
logical observatory  at  Havana,  and  during  the
reign  of  Maximilian  he  was  director  of  an  estab-
lishment of  the  same  kind  in  Mexico.  He  has
written  much  in  Spanish,  French,  and  English  on
scientific  subjects.  Among  his  writings  are  "Tra-
tado  de  Meteorolocia,"  "  Memoria  sobre  los  hura-
canes  de  las  Antulas,"  and "  Memoria  sobre  las


48


POHL


POINSETT


grranizmlas  en  Cuba "  (Havana,  1860-2);  "Cuban
Antiquities."  read  before  the  American  ethnolojfical
society ;  *'  Tableau  chronolofi:i(jiie  ties  treniblemonts
do  terre,"  "Travaux  sur  la  mctwrologie  et  la  phi-
sique  du  globe,"  "  Memoires  t<ur  Ics  tenipetes  elec-
triques,"  and  "  I^e  f>ositivisnie  "  (Paris,  1876).  The
last  is  an  exposition  of  the  principles  of  Auguste
Comte's  philosophical  system,  of  which  the  author
is  an  ardent  follower.

POHL,  Johann  Emannel,  Austrian  botanist,
b.  in  Vienna,  Austria,  in  1784;  d.  there.  22  May,
\8ii4.  He  was  educated  as  a  physician,  and  then
devoted  his  attention  to  Ijotany.  In  1817  he  ac-
companie<l  the  Archduchess  Leopoldine  to  Brazil  on
the  (K'casion  of  her  marriage  to  Dom  Pedro  I.,  and
then  sfjent  four  years  in  exploring  thiU  country
un<ier  onlers  from  his  government.  On  his  return
to  Vienna  he  was  appointed  curator  of  the  Brazil-
ian museum.  His  works  include  "Tentamen  florae
Bohemica^"  (2  vols..  Prague,  1814);  "  Kxpositio
anatomica  organi  auditus  per  classes  animalium  "
(Vienna,  181{>);  ••  Plantarum  Brasilia?  icones  et
desoriptiones "  (2  vols.,  1827-31);  "Beitrilge  zur
(lebirgskunde  Brasiliens"  (1832);  "  Brasiliens  vor-
zQglichste  Insekten  "  (1832) ;  and  "  Reise  ins  innere
Bnu^ilien  "  (1832).

POIN DEXTER,  Geoi^e,  senator,  b.  in  Louisa
county.  Va.,  in  1779;  d.  in  Jackson,  Miss.,  5  Sept.,
1853.  He  was  of  Huguenot  ancestry.  He  was  left
an  orphan  early  in  life,  and  became  a  lawyer  in
Milton.  Va.,  but  in  1802  removed  to  Mississippi
territory,  where  he  soon  attained  note,  both  at  the
bar  and  as  a  leader  of  the  Jeffersonian  party.  In
1803  he  was  appointed  attorney-general  of  the  ter-
ritory, and  in  this  capacity  he  conducted  the  prose-
cution of  Aaron  Burr  when  the  latter  was  arrested
bvthe  authorities  in  his  first  descent  to  New  Orleans.
llis  violent  denunciations  of  Federalists  resulted  in
a  challenge  from  Abijah  Hunt,  one  of  the  largest
merchants  in  the  southwest,  whom  Poindexter
killed  in  the  duel  that  followed.  Poindexter  was
accused  by  his  enemies  of  firing  before  the  word
was  given,  and  bitter  and  prolonged  controvei'sies
followed,  but  the  charge  was  never  substantiated.
He  l>ecame  a  memlier  of  the  territorial  legislature
in  1805.  and  in  1807  was  chosen  delegate  to  con-

gress,  where  he  won  reputation  as  an  orator.  Here
e  remained  till  1813,  when,  notwithstanding  the
remonstrance  of  the  majority  of  the  territorial  bar,
he  was  appointed  U.  S.  judge  for  the  district  of
Mississippi.  This  office,  contrary  to  gejieral  expec-
tation, he  administered  firmly  and  impartially,  do-
ing much  to  settle  the  controversies  that  had  arisen
from  conflicting  land  grants,  and  to  repress  the
criminal  classes.  He  had  assisted  to  prepare  the
people  of  the  territory  for  the  war  of  1812,  and
when  the  British  invaded  Louisiana  he  joined
Jackson  and  served  as  a  volunteer  aide  at  the  bat-
tle of  New  Orleans.  During  this  service  a  soldier
brought  to  him  a  pieceof  paper  bearing  the  British
countersign  "  Beauty  anil  Bo<ity,"  which  he  had
found  on  the  field.  Poindexter  took  it  to  Jackson,
and  it  was  the  cause  of  much  excitement  through
the  country.  The  Federalists  subsequently  claimed
that  the  paper  had  been  forged  by  Poindexter.  He
was  active  m  the  Mississippi  constitutional  conven-
tion of  1817,  being  chairman  of  the  committee  that
was  appointe<l  to  draft  a  constitution  for  the  new
state,  and,  on  its  admission  to  the  Union  in  that
year,  was  elected  its  first  representative  in  congress,
serving  one  term.  Here,  in  1819,  he  made  his  best-
known  speech,  defending  Gen.  Jackson's  conduct
in  the  execution  of  Arbuthnot  and  Ambrister.  and
in  the  occupation  of  the  Spanish  ports  in  Florida
(see  Jackso.v),  and  it  was  largely  due  to  his  efforts


that  Jackson  was  not  censured  by  congress.  At
the  end  of  his  term  he  was  elected  governor  of
Mississippi,  notwithstanding  attempts  to  show  that
he  had  been  guilty  of  gro.ss  cowardice  at  New
Orleans.  While  he  held  this  office  the  legislature
authorized  him  to  revise  and  amend  the  statutes,
and  the  result  was  the  code  that  was  completed  in
1822  and  published  as  "  Revised  Code  of  the  Laws
of  Mississippi"  (Natchez,  1824).  In  1821  he  re-
sumed his  practice  at  the  bar,  which  he  continued
till  his  appointment  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  Novem-
l)er,  1830.  in  place  of  Robert  H.  Adams,  deceased.
He  was  subsequently  elected  to  fill  out  the  term,
and  served  till  1835.  Here  he  gradually  became
estranged  from  Jackson,  occupying,  as  he  con-
tended, a  middle  ground  between  Henry  Clay  and
John  C.  Calhoun,  but  his  views  were  practically
those  of  the  latter.  He  especially  resisted  the  ap-
fKiintment  of  the  president's  personal  friends  to
office  in  Mississippi,  and  he  also  voted  for  Clay's
resolution  of  censure.  The  breach  widened,  and
Jjvckson  finally  suspected  Poindexter  of  complicity
in  the  attempt  that  was  made  on  his  life  at  the
capitol.  In  1835  he  removed  to  Louisville,  Ky.,
but  was  disappointed  in  his  hopes  of  political  pro-
motion there,  and,  after  being  commissioned  by
President  Tyler  to  investigate  frauds  in  the  New
York  custom-house,  returned  to  Mississippi,  where
he  affiliated  with  his  old  political  friends.  Poin-
dexter had  more  than  ordinary  ability,  but  his
career  was  marred  by  violent  personal  controver-
sies and  by  dissipation,  and  he  was  embittered  by
domestic  troubles  and  by  the  unpopularity  that  his
opposition  to  Jackson  aroused  against  him  in  Mis-
sissippi. See  a  "  Biographical  Sketch "  of  him
(Washington.  1835).

POINSETT,  Joel  Roberts,  statesman,  b.  in
Charleston.  S.  C,  2  March,  1779;  d.  in  Statesburg,
S.  C,  12  Dec,  1851.  He  was  of  Huguenot  de-
scent, and  the  last  of  his  family.  He  was  educated
at  Timothy  Dwight's  school  in  Greenfield,  Conn.,
and  in  England,  and
then  studied  medicine
at  Edinburgh  uni-
versity, and  military
science  at  Woolwich
academy.  His  father
induced  him  to  aban-
don his  intention  of
entering  the  army  and
become  a  student  of
law.  but  feeble  health
obliged  him  to  go
abroad  again,  and  he
travelled  widely  in
Europe  and  Asia
While  he  was  in  St.
Petersburg  the  czar
offered  him  a  commis-
sion  in  the  Russian

army.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States  in  1809
he  asked  President  Madison  for  military  employ-
ment, and  the  latter  was  about  to  make  him  quar-
termaster-general of  the  army,  but  the  secretary  of
war  objected,  and  Mr.  Poinsett  was  sent  by  the
government  to  South  America  to  inquire  into  the
condition  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  continent  and
their  prospects  of  success  in  their  struggle  with
Spain  for  independence.  While  he  was  in  Chili  the
Spanish  authorities  of  Peru,  hearing  that  war  had
begun  between  Spain  and  the  United  States,  seized
several  American  merchant  vessels,  and  then,  in-
vading Chilian  territory,  captured  others  at  Tal-
cahuano.  Poinsett  put  himself  at  th<*  head  of  a  con-
siderable force  that  was  placed  at  his  disposal  by  the


Cyy^. /^tk^i^^


POINTIS


POLAND


49


Republican  government  of  Chili,  and,  attacking  the  '
Spaniards,  retook  the  ships.  He  was  at  V'alfiaraiso  I
during  the  fight  between  the  "Kssex"  and  the
"Phcebe"  and  "Cherub"  (see  Porter,  David),  and
wished  to  return  home  at  once  to  enter  the  army,
but  the  British  ttaval  authorities  refused  to  let  him
go  by  sea,  and,  after  crossing  the  Andes  in  April
and  meeting  with  various  delays,  he  rt^ached  the
United  States  after  the  declaration  of  iKnice.  On
his  return  he  was  electwi  to  the  South  Carolina
legislaturt>,  where  he  interested  himself  in  projects
of  internal  improvement,  and  secured  the  construc-
tion of  a  road  over  the  Saluda  mountain.  He  was
afterward  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  and
servetl  two  terms  in  1821-'5,  advocating  the  cause
of  the  South  American  republics  and  that  of
Greek  indejKsndence.  In  1832  he  discharged  an
important  special  mission  to  Mexico  during  the
reign  of  Iturbide,  and  in  1825  he  returned  to  that
country  as  U.  S.  minister.  During  his  term  of
office,  which  lasted  till  1829,  he  negotiated  a  treaty
of  commerce,  and  maintained  his  independence
with  spirit  and  courage  in  the  midst  of  many  revo-
lutionary outbreaks.  He  was  accused  by  the  Church
party  of  interfering  against  them,  but  justified  his
course  in  a  pamphlet  after  his  return.  At  the
request  of  Freemasons  in  Mexico  he  sent  for  char-
ters for  their  lodges  to  the  Grand  lodge  of  New
York,  and  he  was  consequently  accused  of  intro-
ducing Masonry  into  the  country.  On  his  return
to  his  native  state  he  became  the  leader  of  the
Union  party  there  in  the  struggle  against  nullifi-
cation, opposing  it  by  his  speecnes  and  in  the  pub-
lic press,  and  has  been  cre<lited  with  the  military
organization  of  the  supporters  of  the  National  gov-
ernment in  Charleston.  He  was  authorized  by
President  Jackson  to  obtain  arms  and  ammunition
from  the  government  supplies  in  the  harbor,  and  it
was  said  by  some  that  he  had  been  secretly  com-
missioned a  colonel.  During  Van  Buren's  admin-
istration he  held  the  portfolio  of  war  in  the  cabi-
net. In  this  office  he  improved  the  field-artillery
of  the  army,  and  in  1840  strongly  recommended
that  congress  should  aid  the  states  in  reorganiz-
ing their  militia.  This  was  his  last  public  office,  and
he  afterward  lived  in  retirement.  He  was  an  ear-
nest opponent  of  the  Mexican  war.  Poinsett  was  the
author  of  various  essays  and  orations  on  manufac-
turing and  agricultural  topics,  and  of  a  discourse
on  the  "  Promotion  of  Science "  (in  1841)  at  the
first  anniversary  of  the  National  institution,  to
which  he  gave  a  valuable  museum.  He  took  much
interest  in  botany,  and  the  "  Poinsettia  Pulcher-
rina,"  a  Mexican  flower,  which  he  introduced  into
this  country,  was  named  for  him.  He  was  also  the
founder  of  an  academy  of  fine  arts  at  Charleston,
which  existed  for  several  years,  and  published
"  Notes  on  Mexico,  made  in  1822.  with  an  Histori-
cal Sketch  of  the  Revolution  "  (Philadelphia,  1824).
He  left  a  mass  of  correspondence  and  otner  papers,
which  remain  unpublished.  Columbia  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1825.  A  portrait  of  Poin-
sett, bv  John  Wesley  Jarvis,  w^as  presented  to  the
citv  of  Charleston  by  William  Courtcnav  in  1887.

POINTIS,  Jean  Bernard  Louis  Desjean
(pwan-tee).  Baron  de,  French  naval  officer,  b.  in
Brittany  in  1645 ;  d.  in  Champigny,  near  Paris,  24
April.  1707.  He  entered  the  navy  when  he  was
sixteen  years  old,  and  was  promoted  chef  d'escadre
in  1893.  In  169()  he  presentetl  a  memoir  to  Louis
XIV.,  in  which  he  proposed  an  attack  on  Cartha-
gena,  and  was  nutliorized  to  form  a  company  which
should  provide  for  the  exj)enses  of  the  ex|)edition
in  consideration  of  receiving  half  the  profits.  He  i
sailed  from  Bresr.  9  Jan.,  1697,  and  was  joined  in  |


Santo  Domingo  by  Ducasse,  the  governor  of  Tor-
ttiga,  at  the  head  of  600  buccaneers.  He  arrived
off  Carthagena  on  12  April,  and,  landing  three
miles  from  the  city,  summoned  it  to  surrender;  but
the  Spaniards  refused,  and  the  P'rench  were  driven
back  in  several  attacks.  But,  after  the  storming  of
the  fort  of  B<K;aChica  and  several  other  im|K)rtant
points  of  defence,  the  city  capitulated  on  condition
that  the  buccaneers  shoulu  not  enter.  Booty
amounting  to  f  15,0(X),(XX)  was  secured  by  Pointis,
who  also  im|K>sed  U{K)n  the  city  a  ransom' of  $600,-
(XX).  Duca8.se,  b«>ing  appouited  governor,  left  the
buccaneers  in  garrison  at  Boca  Chica;  but  they
learned  that  Pointis  tried  to  keen  them  out  of
their  share  of  the  plunder,  and,  altnough  Ducasse
restrained  them  for  some  time,  they  finally  entered
Carthagena,  ajid  pillaged  and  burned  for  three
days,  committing  all  kinds  of  atrocities.  After  de-
stroying the  fortifications  of  the  place,  the  F'rench
re-embarked  on  1  June,  and,  defeating  two  English
fleets,  anchored  in  Brest,  29  Aug.,  1697.  A  medal
was  struck  in  commemoration  of  the  expedition.
Pointis  afterward  commanded  a  fleet,  and  besieged
Gibraltar  in  1704-'5,  but  retired  from  active  service
toward  the  close  of  the  latter  vear.  He  published
"  Relation  de  I'expedition  de  (^'arthagene  faite  par
les  Francois  en  1697"  (Amsterdam,  1698).  The
historian  of  the  filibusters,  Charlevoix,  speaks  with

E raise  of  Pointis  as  a  humane  and  just  commander,
ut  he  deplores  his  severity  with  the  buccaneers,  as
it  caused  the  latter  to  distrust  France,  which  had
often  checked  their  tendency  to  commit  useless
cruelties,  but  was  thenceforth  unable  to  do  so.

POIRIER,  Pascal,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
Shediae,  New  Brunswick,  14  Feb.,  1852.  He  is  of
Acadian  descent.  He  completed  his  course  of
studies  at  St.  Joseph's  college,  Memramcook,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  l>ar  of  Que-
bec in  1876.  In  1872  Mr.  Poirier  was  appointed
postmaster  of  the  Dominion  parliament,  which
post  he  held  till  his  appointment  to  the  senate,  9
March,  1885.  At  an  early  age  he  contributed  to
the  press,  Iwth  French  and  English,  and  he  has  pub-
lished "L'Origine  des  Acadiens"  (Montreal,  1874).

P0I8S0N,  Modest  Jules  Adolplie,  Canadian
author,  b.  in  Gentilly.  province  of  Quebec,  14  March,
1849.  He  was  educated  at  the  Seminarv  of  Quel)ec,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1873.
Since  thatv-earhe  has  been  registrar  of  Arthabasca
county.  Pie  is  the  author  of  "  Chants  Canadiens  "
(Quebec,  1880),  and  has  frequently  contributed  to
French  Canadian  periodicals.

POLAND,  John  Scroggs,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince-
ton, Ind.,  14  Oct.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1861,  and  appointed  1st
lieutenant  of  the  2d  infantry  on  6  July.  1861.  Sub-
sequently he  served  with  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, engaging  in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  with
that  army  in  the  following  campaigns,  until  after
the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  when  tie  was  on  duty  in
the  defences  of  Washington.  Meanwhile  he  nad
been  promoted  captain,  and  had  received  the  bre-
vets of  major  and  lieutenant-colonel.  In  18(55  he
was  assigned  to  the  U.  S,  military  academy,  where
he  remained  for  four  years  as  assistant  professor  of
geography,  history,  ethics,  and  drawing.  During
the  ten  years  that  followed  he  served  principally
on  frontier  duty,  becoming,  on  15  Dec.,  1880,  major
of  the  18th  infantry,  and  in  1881-'6,  he  was  chief
of  the  department  of  law  at  the  U.  .S.  infantry  and
cavalry  school  in  Leavenworth,  Kansiis,  where  he
was  also  in  charge  in  1881-'3  of  the  department  of
military  drawing.  On  1  March,  1886.  tie  was  pro-
moted lieutenant-colonel  of  the  21st  infantry.  Col.
Poland  has  published  "■  Digest  of  the  Military  Laws


50


POLAND


POLK


of  the  United  States  from  1861  to  1868"  (Boston,
1868)  and  "The  Conventions  of  Geneva  of  1864
and  1H(>H,  nnd  St.  Petersburg  International  Com-
missitm  "  (Leavenworth.  1886).

POLAND,  Liike  Potter,  jtirist.  b.  in  Westford,
Vt..  1  Nov..  1815:  d.  in  Waterville,  Vt.,  2  July,
1887.  He  attended  the  common  schools,  was  em-
ploved  in  a  country  store  and  on  a  farm,  taught
at  Morristown,  Vt.,  studied  law,  and  was  mlmitted
to  the  bar  in  1*}6.  He  was  a  meinlxr  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  184;3.  and  prosecuting
at tornev  for  the  comity  in  1844-'5.  In  1848  he  was
soil  eWMpla'te  for  lieutenant-governor,
iio^^r  he  was  elected  a  judge  of  the
iino  court.  He  was  re-elected  each
Incoming  chief  justice  in  1800,  un-
stinted in  Novemlier,  1865,  on  the
'oUamer,  to  serve  out  his  unexpired
S.  senate.  On  its  conclusion  he  en-
of  representatives,  and  served  from
_^^__  Whde  in  the  senate  he  secured

tlicTpassage  of  the  bankrupt  law,  besides  originat-
ing a  l)ill  for  the  revision  and  consolidation  of  the
statutes  of  the  United  States.  As  chairman  of  the
committee  on  revision  in  the  house,  he  superin-
tended the  execution  of  his  scheme  of  codification.
He  was  chairman  of  the  committee  to  investigate
the  outmgcs  of  the  Ki-Klux  Klan,  and  of  the  in-
vestigation committee  on  the  Credit  mobilier  trans-
actions; also  of  one  on  the  reconstruction  of  the
Arkansas  state  government.  Several  times,  while
st>rving  on  the  committee  on  elections,  he  came  into
confliLt  with  other  Republicans  on  questions  re-
garding the  admission  of  Democratic  members
from  the  south.  He  was  chairman  of  the  Vermont
delegation  to  the  Republican  national  convention
of  1876,  and  presented  the  name  of  William  A.
Wheeler  for  the  vice-presidency,  for  which  office  he
himself  ha(l  been  brought  forward  as  a  candidate.
Air.  Poland  was  a  representative  in  the  state  legis-
lature in  187H.  He  was  elected  to  congress  again
in  1882,  and  served  from  1883  till  3  March,  1885.

POLETTE,  Antoine,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Pointe-aux-Trembles,  Quebec,  25  Aug.,  1807;  d.  in
Three  Rivers,  6  Jan.,  1887.  He  studied  law.  be-
cime  an  advocate  in  1828,  entered  parliament  in
1848,  and  was  appointed  queen's  counsel  in  1854.
He  was  made  a  commissioner  for  consolidating  the
laws  in  1856,  and  in  1860  puisne  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Quetec,  which  post  he  held  till  he
retired  in  1880.  He  was  a  royal  commissioner  in
the  Canadian  Pacific  railway  inquiry  of  1873.
POLHEMUS,  Abraham,  clergyman,  b.  in  As-
toria, Ijong  Island,
N.  Y.,  in  1812;  d.  in
Newburg,  N.  Y.,  in
October.  1857.  His  an-
cestor. Rev.  Johannes
T.  Polhemus,  a  native
of  Holland,  c;ime  to
this  country  in  1654.
Abraham  was  gradu-
ated at  Rutgers  in
1831,  and  at  New
Brunswick  theologi-
cal seminary  in  1835,
and  was  pastor  in
Hopewell,  N.  Y.,  till
1857.  and  in  Newark,
N.  J.,  from  May  of
that  year  till  *  his
death.  Mr.  Polhemus
was  very  popular  in
the  community  in  which  he  lived,  and  was  clear
and  logical  as' a  pulpit  orator. He  published  an


^!<^^i!p7^^^u>^


"  Address  before  the  Alumni  of  Rutgers  College"
(1852).  A  "  Memorial,"  containing  twelve  of  his
sermons,  the  address  at  his  installation  in  Newark,
bv  Dr.  David  H.  Riddle,  and  his  funeral  discourse,
bV  Dr.  John  Forsyth,  chaplain,  U.  S.  A.,  was  print-
etl  after  his  death.

POLICiNAC.  Camllle  Armand  Jules  Marie
(po-leen-vak).  Count  de,  soldier,  b.  in  France,  6  Feb.,
1832.  rie  is  a  descendant  of  the  Duchess  of  Poli-
gnac,  a  favorite  of  Marie  Antoinette.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  came  to  this  country,  offered
his  services  to  the  Confederate  government,  and
was  made  brigadier-general  on  10  Jan.,  1862,  and
attached  to  the  Army  of  Tennessee.  Subsequently
he  was  given  command  of  a  division  and  commis-
sioned major-general  on  13  June,  1864.  During  the
Franco-Prussian  war  of  1870-'l  he  served  with  his
countrvmen,  and  he  has  since  been  engaged  in
journalism  and  in  civil  engineering.  On  several
occasions  he  has  been  sent  to  Algiers  in  charge  of
surveying  expeditions  by  the  French  government,
and  his  work  has  received  special  recognition.

POLK,  James  Knox,  eleventh  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  Mecklenburg  county,  N.  C,  3
■Nov.,  1795;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  15  June,  1849.
He  was  a  son  of  Samuel  Polk,  whose  father,  Eze-
kiel,  was  a  brother  of  Col.  Thomas  {q.  v.\  grandson
of  Robert  Polk,  or  Pollock,  who  was  born  in  Ire-
land and  emigrated  to  the  United  States.  His
mother  was  Jane,  daughter  of  James  Knox,  a  resi-
dent of  Iredell  county,  N.  C,  and  a  captain  in  the
war  of  the  Revolution.  His  father,  Samuel,  a
farmer,  removed  in  the  autumn  of  1806  to  the  rich
valley  of  Duck  river,  a  tributary  of  the  Tennessee,
and  made  a  new  home  in  a  section  that  was  erected
the  following  year  into  the  county  of  Maury.  Be-
sides cultivating  the  tract  of  land  he  had  pur-
chased, Samuel  at  intervals  followed  the  occupa-
tion of  a  surveyor,  acquired  a  fortune  equal  to  his
wants,  and  lived  until  1827.  His  son  James  was
brought  up  on  the  farm,  and  not  only  assisted  in
its  management,  but  frequently  accompanied  his
father  in  his  surveying  expeditions,  duiing  which
they  were  often  absent  for  weeks.  He  was  in-
clined to  study,  often  busied  himself  with  his  fa-
ther's mathematical  calculations,  and  was  fond  of
reading.  He  was  sent  to  school,  and  had  succeeded
in  mastering  the  English  branches  when  ill  health
compelled  his  removal.  He  was  then  placed  with  a
merchant,  but  having  a  strong  dislike  to  commer-
cial pursuits,  he  obtained  permission  to  return  home
after  a  few  weeks'  trial,  and  in  July,  1813.  was  given
in  charge  of  a  private  tutor.  In  1815  he  entered
the  sophomore  class  at  the  University  of  North
Carolina,  of  which  institution  his  cousin,  William
{q.v.\  was  a  trustee.  As  a  student  young  Polk  was
correct,  punctual,  and  industrious.  At  his  gradua-
tion in  1818  he  was  officially  acknowledged  to  be
the  best  scholar  in  both  the  classics  and  mathemat-
ics, and  delivered  the  Latin  salutatory.  In  1847
the  university  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  In  1819  he  entered  the  law-office  of  Felix
Grundy,  who  was  then  at  the  head  of  the  Tennessee
bar.  While  pursuing'his  legal  studies  he  attracted
the  attention  of  Andrew  Jackson,  who  soon  after-
ward was  appointed  governor  of  the  territory  of
Florida.  An  mtimacy  was  thus  begun  between  the
two  men  that  in  after-years  greatlv  influenced  the
course  of  at  least  one  of  them.  In  1820  Mr.  Polk
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  and  established  himself  at
Columbia,  the  county-seat  of  Maury  county.  Here
he  attained  such  immediate  success  as  falls  to  the
lot  of  few,  his  career  at  the  bar  only  ending  with
his  election  to  the  governorship  in  kJ39.  At  times
he  practised  alone,  while  at  others  he  was  associated


/■;..;li*^


Qy,^^(^'tyux^^eyy  ^CV-  .J^c^--^i^


D  APV'.KTOJi  &C?
\


POLK


POLK


61


succewively  with  several  of  the  leadinf^  practition-
ers of  the  state.  Anionjf  the  latter  mav  lie  inen-
tione<l  Aaron  V.  Brown  and  (Jideon  J.  Pillow.

Hrought  up  lus  a  Jeflfersonian,  and  early  taking
an  interest  in  iKilitics,  Mr.  Polk  w>us  frequently
heard  in  public  as  an  exinment  of  the  views  of  his
partv.  So  popular  was  his  style  of  oratory  that  his
services  soon  came  to  be  in  great  demand,  and  he
was  not  lonjr  in  earning  the  title  of  the  "  Napoleon
of  the  Stump."  He  wa.s.  however,  an  argumenta-
tive rather  than  a  rhetorical  sjwaker,  and  convinced
his  hearers  by  plainness  of  statement  and  aptness
of  illustration,  ignoring  the  ad-cavtamliim  effects
usually  resorted  to  in  political  harangues.  His
first juiblic  employment  was  that  of  chief  clerk  to
the  Tennessee  house  of  representatives,  and  in  182tJ
he  canvassed  the  district  to  secure  his  own  election
to  that  body.  During  his  two  years  in  the  legisla-
ture he  was'  regarded  as  one  of  its  most  promising
memlwrs.  His  ability  and  shrewdness  m  debate,
his  business  tju-t,  combined  with  his  firmness  and
industry,  secured  for  him  a  high  reputation.  While
a  ineml)er  of  the  general  assembly  he  obtained  the
passage  of  a  law  to  prevent  the  then  common  prac-
tice of  duelling,  ami,  although  he  resided  in  a  com-
munity where  that  mode  of  settling  disputes  was
generally  approvetl,  he  was  never  concerned  in  an
•'  affair  of  honor,"  either  as  principal  or  as  second.
In  August.  1825,  he  was  elected  to  congress  from
the  Duck  river  district,  in  which  he  resided,  by  a
flattering  majority,  and  re-elected  at  every  succeed-
ing election  until  1839,  when  he  withdrew  from  the
contest  to  liecome  a  candidate  for  governor.  On
taking  his  seat  as  a  member  of  the  19th  congress,
he  found  himself,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,  the
youngest  member  of  that  botly.  The  same  habits
of  latorious  application  that  had  previously  charac-
terized him  were  now  displayed  on  the  floor  of  the
house  and  in  the  committee-room.  He  was  promi-
nently connected  with  evety  leading  question,  and
U|)on  all  he  struck  what  proved  to  be  the  key-
note for  the  action  of  his  party.  During  the  whole
period  of  President  JacKson's  administration  he
was  one  of  its  leading  supporters,  and  at  times,  on
certain  Issues  of  paramount  importance,  its  chief
reliance.  His  maiden  speech  was  made  in  defence
of  the  proposed  amendment  to  the  constitution,

fiving  the  choice  of  president  and  vice-president
irectly  to  the  people.  It  was  distinguished  bv
clearness  and  force,  copiousness  of  research,  wealth
of  illustration,  and  cogency  of  argument,  and  at
once  placed  its  author  in  the  front  rank  of  con-

fressional  debaters.  During  the  same  session  Mr.
oik  attracted  attention  by  his  vigorous  opposi-
tion to  the  appropriation  for  the  Panama  mission.
President  Aaains  had  appointed  commissioners  to
attend  a  congress  proposed  to  be  held  at  Panama
by  delegates  appointed  by  different  Spanish-Ameri-
can states,  which,  although  they  had  virtually
achieved  their  independence,  were  still  at  war  with
the  mother-country.  Mr.  Polk,  and  those  who
thought  with  him,  contended  that  such  action  on
the  part  of  this  government  would  tend  to  involve
us  in  a  war  with  Spain,  and  establish  an  unfor-
tunate precedent  for  the  future.  In  Deceml)er,
1827,  he  was  placed  on  the  committee  on  foreign
affairs,  and  some  time  afterward  was  also  ap-
p(Mnte<l  chairman  of  the  select  committee  to  which
was  referred  that  portion  of  the  message  of  Presi-
dent Adams  calling  the  attention  of  congress  to
the  probable  accumulation  of  a  surplus  in  the
treasury  after  the  anticipated  extinguishment  of
the  national  debt.  As  the  head  of  the  latter  com-
mittee, he  made  a  re|>ort  denying  the  constitu-
tional pyower  of  congress  to  collect  from  the  people


for  distribution  a  surplus  beyond  the  wantfl  of  the
government,  and  maintaining  that  the  revenue
should  Ui  reduce<l  to  the  requirements  of  the  pub-
lic service.  F]arly  in  18JW,  as  a  member  of  the
ways  and  means  committee,  he  made  a  minority  re-
port unfavorable  to  the  Hank  of  the  United  States,
which  aroused  a  storm  of  op(x)sition,  a  meetinf?  of
the  friends  of  the  l)ank  being  held  at  Nashville.
During  the  entire  contest  lietween  the  bank  and
President  Jackson,  caused  by  the  removal  of  the
deposits  in  Octol)er,  1833,  Mr.  Polk,  now  chairman
of  the  committee,  supported  the  executive.  His
s|)eech  in  of)ening  the  debate  summari/.(>d  the
material  facts  and  arguments  on  the  Democratic
side  of  the  question.  George  McDuflle,  lemier  of
the  opposition,  bore  testimony  in  his  c<mcluding
remarks  to  the  boldness  and  manliness  with  which
Mr.  Polk  had  assumed  the  only  position  that  could
he  judiciously  taken.  Mr.  Polk  was  elected  .speaker
of  the  house  of  representatives  in  Deceml)er,  1835,
and  held  that  office  till  1839.  He  gave  to  the  ad-
ministration of  Martin  Van  liureii  the  same  un-
hesitating support  he  had  accorded  to  that  of
President  JacKson,  and,  though  taking  no  part  in
the  discussions,  he  approved  of  the  leading  meas-
ures recommended  by  the  former,  including  the
cession  of  the  public  lands  to  the  states,  the  pre-
emption law,  and  the  proposal  to  establish  an  in-
dependent treasury,  and  exerted  his  influence  to
secure  their  adoption.  He  was  the  speaker  during
five  sessions,  ana  it  was  his  fortune  to  preside  over
the  house  at  a  period  when  partv  feelings  were
excited  to  an  unusual  degree.  Notwithstanding
the  fact  that  during  the  first  session  more  apf)eals
were  taken  from  his  decisions  than  were  ever  known
before,  he  was  uniformly  sustained  by  the  house,
and  frequently  by  leading  members  of  the  Whig
party.  Although  he  was  opposed  to  the  doctrines
of  the  anti-slavery  reformers,  we  have  the  testimony
of  their  leader  in  the  house,  John  Quincy  Adams,
to  the  effect  that  Speaker  Polk  uniformly  extended
to  him  "every  kindness  and  courtesy  imaginable."
On  leaving  congress  Mr.  Polk  became  the  candidate
of  the  Democrats  of  Tennessee  for  governor.  They
had  become  disheartened  bv  a  series  of  disasters
and  defeats  caused  primarily  by  the  defection  of
John  Bell  and  Judge  Hugh  L.  White.  Under
these  circumstances  it  was  evident  that  no  one  but
the  strongest  man  in  the  party  could  enter  the
canvass  with  the  slightest  prospect  of  success,  and
it  was  doubtful  whether  even  he  could  carry  off
the  prize.  On  being  asked,  Mr.  Polk  at  once  cheer-
fully consente<l  to  allow  his  name  to  be  used.  He
was  nominated  in  the  autumn  of  1838.  but,  owing
to  his  congressional  duties,  was  unable  fairly  to
enter  upon  the  canvass  until  the  spring  of  i839.
His  opi)onent  was  Newton  Cannon,  also  a  Demo-
crat, who  then  held  the  office.  The  contest  was
spirited,  and  Mr.  Polk  was  elected  by  over  2.500
majority.  On  14  Oct.  he  took  the  oath  of  office.
In  his  inaugural  address  he  touched  upon  the  rela-
tions of  the  state  and  Federal  governments,  de-
clared that  the  latter  had  no  constitutional  |)ower
to  incorporate  a  national  bank,  took  strong  ground
against  the  creation  of  a  surplus  Federal  revenue
by  taxation,  asserted  that  "the  agitation  of  the
Abolitionists  can  bv  no  iwssibility  pnKluce  goofl  to
any  portion  of  the  iJnion,  but  must,  if  itersisttni  in,
lea[d  to  incalculable  mischief,"  and  discussed  at
length  other  topics,  especially  l)earing  uyon  the
internal  policy  of  Tennessee.  In  1841  Mr.  Polk
was  again  a  candidate  for  the  governorship,  al-
though his  defeat  was  a  foregone  conclusion  in
view  of  the  political  whirlwind  that  had  swept  over
the  country  in  1840  and  n-sulted  in  the  election  of


52


POLK


POLK


William  Henry  Harrison  to  the  presidency.  In
Tennessee  the  Harrison  electoral  ticket  had  re-
ceive<l  more  than  12.0()0  majority.  Althouph  to
overconu'  this  was  injpossible,  Mr,  Polk  euteri'd
njKjn  the  canvass  with  his  usual  energy  and  ear-
nestness. Uv  could  not  secure  the  defeat  of  .James
C.  Jones,  the  op|)osinjr  Whij;  candidate,  one  of  the
most  popular  meml)ers  of  his  party  in  the  state,
hut  he  did  succeed  in  cutting  down  the  opposition
majority  to  about  3,000.  In  1848  Mr.  Polk  was
once  more  a  candidate :  but  this  time  Gov.  Jones's
majority  was  nearly  4,000.

In  1K}»  Mr.  Polk  hatl  been  nominated  by  the
legislature  of  Tennessee  as  its  candidate  for  vice-
president  on  the  ticket  with  Martin  Van  Buren,
and  other  states  hiul  followed  the  example:  but
Richanl  ^i.  Johnson,  of  Kentucky,  seemed  to  be
the  choice  of  the  great  IkxIv  of  the  Democratic
party,  and  he  was  accordingly  nominated.  From
the  (iate  of  Van  Buren's  defeat  in  1840  until  within
a  few  weeks  of  the  nieeting  of  the  National  Demo-
cratic convention  at  Baltimore  in  1844,  public
opinion  in  the  party  undoubtedly  pointed  to  his
renomination,  but  when  in  April  of  the  latter  year
Presitlent  Tyler  concluded  a  treaty  between  the
government  of  the  United  States  and  the  republic
of  Texas,  providing  for  the  annexation  of  tne  lat-
ter to  the  Union,  a  new  issue  was  introduced  into
American  politics  that  was  destined  to  change
not  only  the  platforms  of  parties,  but  the  future
history  and  topography  of  the  country  itself.  On
the  question  whether  Texivs  should  be  admitted,
the  greatest  divergence  of  opinion  among  public
men  prevailed.  The  Whig  party  at  the  north  on-
iM>sed  annexation,  on  the  grounds  that  it  would
be  an  act  of  bml  faith  to  Mexico,  that  it  would  in-
volve the  necessity  of  assuming  the  debt  of  the
f'oung  republic,  amounting  to  ten  or  twelve  rail-
ions  of  dollars,  and  that  it  would  further  increase
the  area  of  slave  territory.  At  the  south  the
Whigs  were  divided,  one  section  advocating  the
new  policy,  while  the  other  concurred  with  their
party  friends  at  the  north  on  the  first  two  grounds
of  objection.  The  Democrats  generally  favored
annexation,  but  a  {wrtion  of  the  party  at  the  north,
and  a  few  of  its  members  residing  in  the  slave-
states,  opposed  it.  Mr.  Van  Buren  and  Mr.  Clay
agreed  very  nearly  in  their  opinions,  teing  in  favor
of  annexation  if  the  American  people  desired  it,
provided  that  the  consent  of  Mexico  could  be  ob-
tained, or  at  least  that  efforts  should  be  made  to
obtain  it.  In  this  crisis  Mr.  Polk  declared  his
views  in  no  uncertain  tones.  It  being  understood
that  he  would  l)e  a  candidate  for  vice-president,  a
letter  was  addressed  to  him  by  a  committee  of  the
citizens  of  Cincinnati,  asking  for  an  expression  of
his  sentiments  on  the  subject.  In  his  reply,  dated
22  April,  1844,  he  said :  "  I  have  no  hesitation  in
declaring  that  I  am  in  favor  of  the  immediate  re-
annexation  of  Texas  to  the  government  and  terri-
tory of  the  United  States.  The  proof  is  fair  and
satisfactory  to  my  own  mind  that  Texas  once  con-
stituted a  part  of  the  territory  of  the  United
States,  the  title  to  which  I  regard  to  have  been  as
indisputable  as  that  to  any  portion  of  our  territory."
He  also  added  that  "  the  country  west  of  the  Sabine,
and  now  calle<l  Texas,  was  [in  1819]  most  unwisely
cede<l  away  " ;  that  the  people  and  government  of
the  republic  were  most  anxious  for  annexation,  and
that,  if  their  prayer  was  rejected,  there  was  danger
that  she  might  become  "a  dependency  if  not  a
colony  of  Great  Britain."  This  letter,  strongly  in
contra-st  with  the  hesitating  phnuses  contained  in
that  of  ex- President  Van  Buren  of  20  April  on  the
same  subject,  elevated  its  author  to the  presi-


dency. When  the  Baltimore  convention  met  on
27  May,  it  was  found  that,  while  Mr.  Van  Buren
could  not  secure  the  necessary  two-third  vote,  his
friends  nuinlx^red  more  than  one  third  of  the  dele-
gates present,  and  were  thus  in  a  position  to  dictate
the  name  of  the  successful  candidate.  As  it  was
also  found  that  they  were  inflexibly  opposed  to
Messrs.  Cass,  Johnson,  Buchanan,  and  the  others
whose  names  had  been  presented,  Mr.  Polk  was  in-
troduced as  the  candidate  of  conciliation,  and
nominated  with  alacrity  and  unanimity.  George
M.  Dallas  was  nominated  for  vice-president.  In
his  letter  of  acrceptance,  Mr.  Polk  declared  that,  if
elected,  he  should  enter  upon  "  the  discharge  of
the  high  and  solemn  duties  of  the  office  with  the
settletf  purpose  of  not  being  a  candidate  for  re-
election." After  an  exciting  canvass,  Mr.  Polk  was
elected  over  his  distinguished  opponent,  Henry
Clay,  by  about  40.000  majority,  on  the  popular
vote,  exclusive  of  that  of  South  Carolina,  whose
electors  were  chosen  by  the  legislature  of  the  state ;
while  in  the  electoral  college  he  received  175  votes
to  105  that  were  cast  for  Mr.  Clay.

On  4  March,  1845,  Mr.  Polk  was  inau^i rated.
In  his  inaugural  address,  after  recounting  the
blessings  conferred  upon  the  nation  by  the  Federal
Union,  he  said :  "  To  perpetuate  them,  it  is  our
sacred  duty  to  preserve  it.  Who  shall  assign  limits
to  the  achievements  of  free  minds  and  free  hands
under  the  protection  of  this  glorious  Union  t  No
treason  to  mankind,  since  the  organization  of  so-
ciety, would  be  equal  in  atrocity  to  that  of  him
who  would  lift  his  hand  to  destroy  it.  He  would
overthrow  the  noblest  structure  of  human  wisdom
which  protects  himself  and  his  fellow-man.  He
would  stop  the  progress  of  free  government  and
involve  his  country  either  in  anarchy  or  in  despo-
tism." In  selecting  his  cabinet,  the  new  president
was  singularly  fortunate.  It  comprised  several  of
the  most  distinguished*  members  of  the  Democratic
party,  and  all  sections  of  the  Union  were  repre-
sented. James  Buchanan,  fresh  from  his  long  ex-
perience in  the  senate,  was  named  secretary  of  state ;
Kobert  J.  Walker,  also  an  ex-senator  and  one  of  the
best  authorities  on  the  national  finances,  was  secre-
tary of  the  treasury ;  to  William  L.  Marcy,  ex-
governor  of  New  York,  was  confided  the  war  port-
folio ;  literature  was  honored  in  the  appointment
of  George  Bancroft  as  secretary  of  the  navy  ;  Cave
Johnson,  an  honored  son  of  Tennessee,  was  made
postmaster-general ;  and  John  Y.  Mason,  who  had
been  a  member  of  President  Tyler's  cabinet,  was
first  attorney-general  and  afterward  secretary  of
the  n&vy.  When  congress  met  in  the  following
December  there  was  a  Democratic  majority  in  both
branches.  In  his  message  the  president  condemned
all  anti-slavery  agitation,  recommended  a  sub-
treasury  and  a  tariff  for  revenue,  and  declared  that
the  annexation  of  Texas  was  a  matter  that  con-
cerned only  the  latter  and  the  United  States,  no
foreign  country  having  any  right  to  interfere.
Congress  was  also  informed  that  the  American
army  under  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  had  been  ordered
to  occupy,  and  had  occupied,  the  western  bank  of
Nueces  river,  beyond  which  Texas  had  never
hitherto  exercised  jurisdiction.  On  29  Dec,  Texas
was  admitted  into  the  Union,  and  two  days  later
an  act  was  passed  extending  the  United  States
revenue  system  over  the  doubtful  territory  beyond
the  Nueces.  Even  these  measures  did  not  elicit  a
declaration  of  war  from  the  Mexican  authorities,
who  still  declared  their  willingness  to  negotiate
concerning  the  disputed  territory  between  the
Nueces  and  the  Rio  Grande.  These  aegotiations,
however,  came  to  nothing,  and  the  president,  in


POLK


POLK


08


aceonlanoe  with  Gen.  Taylor's  sugjrestion,  oniered
a  forwiinl  moveinent,  in  olnHlienct'  to  which  thnt
onicfi' ii<lvHiic<>(i  from  his  camp  at  Corpus  Christ i
toward  thu  Hio  (initide,  aiul  occupietl  the  district
in  dolMitf.  Thus  brought  fa<'e  t«-fuce  with  Mexican
troops,  he  was  attticked  early  in  May  with  O.tMX)
men  by  (ten.  Arista,  who  was  liadly  Iwaten  at  Palo
Alto  with  less  tiian  half  that  numU>r.  The  next
day  Taylor  attacke<l  Arista  at  U4?saca  de  la  Palnia,
anil  drove  him  across  the  Kio  (Jrande.

On  n-ceijit  of  the  news  of  these  events  in  VV'ashinjj-
ton.  President  Polk  sent  a  messjij^e  to  coiijjress.  in
which  he  «leclared  that  Mexican  tnjops  hml  at  last
shed  the  bloo<l  of  American  citizens  on  American
soil,  and  asked  for  a  formal  declaration  of  war.  A
bill  was  accordingly  introduced  and  passed  by
both  houses,  recognizing  the  fact  that  hostilities
had  been  tn^gun,  and  appropriating  1 10,000,000  for
its  i>ros»H'Ution.  Its  preamble  read  as  follows:
"  Wnereas,  by  the  act  of  tlie  republic  of  Mexico,  a
state  of  war  exists  l)etween  that  government  and  the
United  States."  The  Whigs  protested  against  this
statement  a»  untrue,  alleging  that  the  president
had  provoked  retaliatory  action  by  ordering  the
army  into  Mexican  territory,  and  Abraham  Lincoln
introduced  in  the  house  of  representatives  what  be-
came known  as  the  "  spot  resolutions,"  calling  upon
the  president  to  designate  the  spot  of  American
territory  whereon  the  outrage  hatl  been  committed.
Nevertheless,  the  Whigs  voted  for  the  bill  and  gen-
erally supwrted  the  war  until  its  conclusion.  On
8  Aug.  a  second  message  was  received  from  the
presiclent,  asking  for  money  with  which  to  pur-
chase territory  from  Mexico,  that  the  dispute  might
be  settknl  by  negotiation.  A  bill  appropriating
$2,000,000  for  this  purpose  at  once  brought  up  the
question  of  slavery  extension  into  new  territory,
and  David  Wilmo't,  of  Pennsylvania,  in  behalf  of
many  northern  Democrats,  otferetl  an  amendment
applying  to  any  newly  acquired  territory  the  pro-
vision of  the  ordinance  of  1781,  to  the  efifect  that
"neither  slavery  nor  involuntary  servitude  shall
ever  exist  in  any  part  of  said  territory  except  for
crime,  whereof  the  party  shall  first  be  duly  con-
victed." The  Whigs  and  northern  Democrats
united  secured  its  passage,  but  it  was  sent  to  the
senate  too  lat«  to  be  acted  upon.

During  the  same  session  wtfr  with  England  re-
garding the  Oregon  question  seemed  imminent.
By  the  treaties  of  1803  with  Prance,  and  of  1819
with  Spain,  the  United  States  had  acquired  the
rights  of  those  powers  on  the  Pacific  coast  north
of  California.  The  northern  boundary  of  the  ceded
territory  was  unsettled.  The  United  States  claimed
that  the  line  of  54°  40'  north  latitude  was  such
boundary,  while  Great  Britain  maintained  that  it
followed  the  Columbia  river.  By  the  convention
of  1827  the  disputed  territory  hacf  been  held  joint-
ly by  both  countries,  the  arrangement  being  ter-
minable by  either  country  on  twelve  months'  no-
tice. The  Democratic  convention  of  1844  had  de-
manded the  reoccupation  of  the  whole  of  Oregon
up  to  .54°  40',  "  with  or  without  war  with  Eng-
land," a  demand  ix>pularly  summarized  in  the
campaign  rallying-cry  of  "  F'ifty -four -forty  or
fight ! "  The  annexation  of  Texas  having  been  ac-
comj)lished,  tlu^  Whigs  now  began  to  urge  the
Denxxrats  to  carry  out  their  promise  regarding
Oregon,  and,  against  the  votes  of  the  extreme
soutrieni  Democrats,  the  president  was  directed  to
give  the  requisito  twelve  months'  notice.  Further
negotiations  ensue<l.  which  resulted  in  the  offer  by
Great  Britain  to  yield  her  claim  to  the  uncx'cupied
territory  Ixitween  the  49th  parallel  and  Columbia
river,  and  acknowledge  that  parallel  aa  the  north-


em  boundary.  As  the  president  ha<l  sub«cril»ed  to
the  platform  of  the  Baltimore  convention,  he  threw
upon  the  senate  the  res|)onsibility  of  deciding
whether  the  claim  <»f  the  Unitetl  Status  t<»  the
whole  of  Oreg<»n  should  Ifc  insisted  ujx)n,  or  the
compromise  proposed  by  her  majesty's  govemnicnt
accepted.  'Fne  senate,  by  a  vote  of  41  to  14,  de-
cided in  favor  of  the  latter  alternative,  and  on  15
June,  184(5,  the  treaty  was  signed.

Two  other  im[K)rtant  (juestions  were  acted  u[K>n
at  the  first  session  of  the  UtilU  congress,  the  tarifT
and  internal  imj)rovements.  The  fornier  hml  lK?en
a  leading  issue  in  the  presidential  contest  of  1844.
The  act  of  1842  ha<l  violated  the  principles  of
the  compromise  bill  of  18:^^,  and  the  opinions  of
the  two  candidates  for  the  presidency,  on  this
issue,  were  supposed  to  Ix"  well  defined  previous  to
the  termination  of  their  congressif)nal  career.  Mr.
Polk  was  committed  to  the  policy  of  a  tariff  for


revenue,  and  Mr.  Clay,  when  the  compromise  act
was  under  discussion,  had  ple<lged  the  party  favor-
able to  pn)tection  to  a  reiluction  of  the  im|)orts
to  a  revenue  standard.  Previous  to  his  nomina-
tion, Mr.  Clay  made  a  speech  at  Raleigh,  N.  C..  in
which  he  advocated  discriminating  duties  for  the

f)rotection  of  domestic  industry.  This  was  fol-
owed  by  his  letter  in  September,  1844.  in  which
he  gave  in  his  adhesion  to  the  tariff  of  1842.
Probably  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  losing  votes
at  the  south  through  his  opposition  to  the  annexa-
tion of  Texas,  and  seeing  defeat  certain  unless  he
could  rally  to  his  support  the  people  of  the  north,
Mr.  Clay  made  one  concession  after  another,  until
he  had  virtually  abandoned  the  ground  he  occu-
pied in  1833,  and  made  himself  amenable  to  his
own  rebuke  uttered  at  that  time:  "Whatman,"
he  ha<i  then  asked,  *'  who  is  entitled  to  deserve  the
character  of  an  American  statesman,  would  stand
up  in  his  place  in  either  house  of  congress  and
disturb  the  treaty  of  peace  and  amity f"  Mr.
Polk,  on  the  other  hann.  had  courted  criticism  by
his  Kane  letter,  dated  19  June,  1844,  which  was
so  ambiguously  worded  as  to  give  ground  for  the
charge  that  his  position  was  identical  with  that
held  by  Henry  Clay.  In  his  first  .innual  message,
however,  he  explained  his  views  with  precision  and
ability.  The  principles  that  would  govern  his  a«l-
ministration  were  proclaime*!  with  great  lx)ldness,
and  the  objectionable  featun^s  of  the  tariff  of  1842
were  investigated  and  exj>osed,  while  congress  was
urged  to  substitute  ad  valorem  for  s|)ecific  and
minimum  duties.  "  The  terms  '  protection  to
American  industrj'.' "  he  went  on  to  say,  "  are  of
popular  import,  but  they  should  apply  under  a
^ust  system  to  all  the  various  brunches  of  industry'
in  our  country.  The  farmer,  or  planter,  who  toils
yearly  in  his  fields,  is  engaged  in  'domestic  indus-
try,' and  is  as  much  entitlwl  to  have  his  laljor
'protected'  as  the  nranufucturer,  the  man  of  com-
merce, the  navigator,  or  the  mechanic,  who  are


64


POLK


POLK


Pngajjed  also  in  *  domestic  industry '  in  their  dif-
ferent piirsuitii.  The  joint  lalxjiij  of  all  these
classes  constitute  the  aggregate  of  the  '  domestic
industry' of  the  nation,  and  they  are  equally  en-
titled to  the  nation's  '  protection.'  Nooneof  them
can  justly  claim  to  be  the  exclusive  recipients  of
•  jimtection,'  which  can  only  Xh*  aflfortled  by  increas-
ing burdens  on  the  'domestic  industry  '  of  others."
In  accordance  with  the  president's  views,  a  bill
providing  for  a  purely  reveime  tariff,  and  based  on
a  plan  prepare*!  by  Sec.  Walker,  was  introduced  in
the  house  of  representatives  on  15  June.  After  an
unusually  able  discussion,  a  vote  was  reached  on  H
July,  when  the  measure  wasatlopted  by  114  ayes  to
95  nays.  liut  it  was  nearly  defeated  in  the  senate,
where  the  vote  was  tied,  and  only  the  decision  of
Vice-President  Dallas  in  its  favor  saved  the  bill.
The  occasion  was  memorable,  party  spirit  ran  high,
and  a  cmwdwl  .senate-chamber  hung  on  the  lips  of
that  official  as  he  announced  the  reasons  for  his
course.  In  conclusion  he  sjiid  :  "  If  by  thus  acting
it  be  my  misfortune  to  offend  any  pf)rtion  of  those
who  honored  me  with  their  suffrages,  1  have  only
to  say  to  them,  and  to  my  whole  country,  that  I
prefer  the  dee|)est  obscurity  of  private  life,  with  an
unwounded  conscience,  to  the  glare  of  official  emi-
nence spotteii  by  a  s^>nse  of  moral  delinquency  !"

Itt'ganlinK  the  (luestion  of  internal  improve-
ments, Mr.  Polk's  administration  was  signalized  by
the  struggle  Ijetween  the  advocates  of  that  {>olicv
and  the  executive.  A  large  majority  in  both
houses  of  congress,  including  members  of  both
parties,  were  in  favor  of  a  lavish  expenditure  of
the  public  money.  On  24  July,  1846.  the  senate
passed  the  bill  known  as  the  river-and-harbor  im-
provenient  bill  precisely  as  it  had  passed  the  house
the  previous  March,  but  it  was  vetoed  by  the  presi-
dent in  a  message  of  unusual  power.  The  au-
thority of  the  general  government  to  make  internal
improvements  within  the  states  was  thoroughly
examined,  and  reference  was  made  to  the  corrup-
tions of  the  system  that  expended  money  in  par-
ticular sections,  leaving  other  parts  of  the  country
without  government  assistance.  Undaunted  by  the
opposition  of  the  executive,  the  house  of  representa-
tives, on  20  Feb.,  1H47,  passed,  by  a  vote  of  89  to
72,  a  second  bill  making  ap[)ropriatioiis  amounting
to  $600,000  for  the  same  j)Ui"pose.  It  was  carried
through  the  senate  on  the  hist  day  of  the  second
session.  Although  the  president  could  have  de-
feated the  objectionable  measure  by  a  "  t)ocket  veto,"
in  spite  of  the  denunciations  with  which  he  was
assailed  by  the  j)oliticians  and  the  press,  he  again
boldly  met  the  f|uestion,  and  sent  in  a  message
that,  for  thoroughness  of  investigation,  breadth  of
thought,  clearness  and  cogency  of  argument,  far
excels  any  of  the  state  papers  to  which  he  has  put
his  name.

The  conflict  Ijetween  the  friends  and  opponents
of  slavery  was  also  a  prominent  feature  of  Presi-
dent Polk's  administration,  and  was  being  con-
stantly waged  on  the  floor  of  congress.  During
the  second  session  of  the  39th  congress  the  house
attached  the  Wilrnot  proviso  to  a  bill  aj)propriat-
ing  $3.(X)0.000  for  the  purchase  of  territory  from
Mexico,  as  it  ha<l  l)een  appended  to  one  appro-
priating $2,000,000  for  the  same  purpose  at  the
pi-evious  session.  The  senate  passed  the  bill  with-
out the  amendment,  and  the  house  was  compelled
to  concur.  A  bill  to  organize  the  territory  of  Ore-
gon, with  the  proviso  attached,  passed  by  the  latter
IxKly.was  not  acted  upon  by  the  senate.'  A  motion
made  in  the  house  of  represenUitives  by  a  southern
meml)er  to  extend  the  Mis.souri  compromise-line
of  36'  30'  to  the  Pacific  was  lost  by  a  sectional


vote,  north  against  south,  81  to  104.  A  treaty
of  peace  having  been  signed  with  Mexico,  2  Feb.,
1848,  after  a  series  of  victories,  a  bill  was  passed
by  the  senate  during  the  first  session  of  the  SOih
congress,  establishing  territorial  governments  in
Oregon,  New  Mexico,  and  California,  with  a  pro-
vision that  all  questions  concerning  slavery  in  those
territories  sliould  l)e  referred  to  the  U.  S.  supreme
court  for  decision.  It  rec-eived  the  votes  of  the
members  from  the  slave-states,  but  was  lost  in
the  house.  A  bill  was  finally  passed  organizing
the  territory  of  Oregon  without  slavery.  During
the  second  session  a  bill  to  organize  the  territories
of  New  Mexico  and  California  with  the  Wilmot
proviso  was  passed  by  the  house,  but  the  senate
refused  to  consider  it.  Late  in  the  session  the
latter  body  attached  a  bill  permitting  such  organi-
zation with  slavery  to  the  general  appropriation
bill  as  a  "  rider."  but,  as  the  house  objected,  was
compelled  to  strike  it  off. In  his  message  to  con-

fress  approving  the  Oregon  territorial  bill  Mr.
oik  said  :  "  I  have  an  abiding  confidence  that  the
sober  reflection  and  sound  patriotism  of  all  the
states  will  bring  them  to  the  conclusion  that  the
dictate  of  wisdom  is  to  follow  the  example  of  those
who  have  gone  before  us,  and  settle  this  dangerous
question  on  the  Missouri  comj)romiseorsome  other
e(|uitable  compromise  which  would  respect  the
rights  of  all,  and  prove  satisfactory  to  the  different
portions  of  the  Union."  President  Polk  was  not
a  slavery  propagandist,  and  consequently  had  no
pro-slavery  policy.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  settle-
ment of  the  Oregon  question,  he  did  all  in  his
power  to  secure  the  exclusion  of  slavery  from  that
territory,  and,  although  the  final  vote  was  not
taken  until  within  a  few  days  after  his  retirement,
the  battle  was  fought  and  the  decision  virtually
reached  during  his  administration.

Mr.  Polk,  in  a  letter  dated  19  May.  1848,  reiterated
his  decision  not  to  become  a  candidate  again  for
the  presidency,  and  retired  at  the  close  of  his  term
of  office  to  his  home  in  Nashville  with  the  inten-
tion not  to  re-enter  public  life.  His  health,  never
robust,  had  been  seriously  impaired  by  the  un-
avoidable cares  of  office  and  his  habit  of  devoting
too  much  time  and  strength  to  the  execution  of
details.  Within  a  few  weeks  after  his  permanent
return  to  Tennessee  he  fell  a  prey  to  a  disease  that
would  probably  have  only  slightly  affected  a  man
in  ordinary  health,  and  a  few  hours  sufficed  to
bring  the  attack  to  a  fatal  termination.  Thus
ended  the  life  of  one  of  whose  public  career  it  may
still  be  too  soon  to  judge  with  entire  impartiality:
Some  of  the  questions  on  which  he  was  called
upon  to  act  are  still,  nearly  forty  rears  after  his
death,  party  issues.  Mr.  Polk  evidently  believed
with  Mr.  Clay  that  a  Union  all  slave  or  all  free
was  an  impossible  Utopia,  and  that  there  was  no
good  reason  why  the  north  and  the  south  should
not  continue  to  live  for  many  years  to  corneas  they
had  lived  since  the  adoption  of  the  constitution.
He  deprecated  agitation  of  the  slavery  question  by
the  Abolitionists,  and  believed  that  the  safety  of
the  commonwealth  lay  in  respecting  the  compro-
mises that  had  hitherto  lurnished  a  modus  invendi
between  the  slave  and  the  free  states.  As  to  the
annexation  of  Texas  and  the  war  with  Mexico,  his
policy  was  undoubtedly  the  result  of  conviction,
sincerity,  and  good  faith.  He  believed,  with  John
Quincy  Adams  and  Andrew  Jackson,  that  Texas
had  been  unwisely  ceded  to  Spain  in  1819,  and  that
it  wa.s  desirable,  from  a  geographical  point  of  view,
that  it  should  be  re-annexed,  seeing  that  it  formed
a  most  valuable  part  of  the  valley  of  .the  Missis-
sippi. He  was  also  of  opinion  that  in'  a  military


POLK


POLK


05


[K)int  of  view  its  acquisition  was  desirable  for  the
proteftion  of  New  Orleans,  the  ^reat  eoinincrcial
mart  of  the  southwestt^rn  stK-tion  of  the  Union,
which  in  time  of  war  would  be  endangered  by  the
close  proxiujity  of  a  hostile  {)ower  having  control
of  the  upi)er  waters  of  Ited  river.  Holding  these
views  and  having  been  elevated  to  the  iiresidency
on  a  platform  that  expressly  deinHnde<I  that  they
should  l)e  embodied  in  rnrtion,  and  Texas  again
made  apart  of  the  national  donuiin,  he  would  have
indeed  U>en  recreant  to  his  trust  had  he  att(;mpted
to  carry  out  as  president  any  policy  antagonistic
to  that  he  had  advocated  when  a  canilidate  for  that
office.  The  war  in  which  he  became  involved  in
carrying  out  these  views  was  a  detail  that  the
nation  was  com|X!lled  to  leave  largely  to  his  judg-
ment. The  president  believed  that  the  representa-
tions and  promises  of  the  Mexican  authorities
could  not  l)e  trusted,  and  that  the  only  argument
to  which  they  would  pay  attention  was  that  of
force.  Regarding  his  famous  order  to  Uen.  Taylor
to  march  toward  the  Kio  Grande,  it  was  suggested
by  that  officer  himself,  and  for  his  gallant  action
in  the  war  the  latter  was  elected  the  successor  of
President  Polk.  TM  settlement  of  the  Oregon
boundary-line  was  made  equally  obligatory  upon
the  new  president  on  taking  office.  He  offered
Great  Britain  the  line  that  was  finally  accepted;
but  when  the  British  minister  hjvstily  rejected  the
offer,  the  entire  country  applauded  his  suggestion
to  that  jK>wer  of  what  the  boundary  might  pos-
sibly be  m  case  of  war.

But  whatever  the  motives  of  the  executive  as  to
Texas  and  Oregon,  the  results  of  the  administra-
tion of  .lames  K.  Polk  were  brilliant  in  the  extreme.
He  was  loyally  upheld  by  the  votes  of  all  parties  in
congress,  abundantly  supplied  with  the  sinews  of
war,  and  seconded  by  gallant  and  comjietent  offi-
cers in  the  field.  For  |15,000,(XX),  in  addition  to
the  direct  war  expenses,  the  southwestern  boundary
of  the  country  was  carried  to  the  Rio  Grande,  while
the  provinces  of  New  Mexico  and  Upper  California
were  added  to  the  national  domain.  What  that
cession  meant  in  increased  wealth  it  is  perhaps
even  yet  too  soon  to  compute.  Among  the  less
dazzling  but  still  solid  advantages  conferred  upon
the  nation  during  Mr.  Polk's  term  of  office  was  the
adoption  by  congress,  on  his  recommendation,  of
the  public  warehousing  system  that  has  since
proved  so  valuable  an  aid  to  the  commerce  of  the
country  ;  the  negotiation  of  the  35th  article  of  the
treaty  with  Grenada,  ratified  10  June,  1848,  which
secured  for  our  citizens  the  right  of  way  across  the
Isthmus  of  Panama;  the  postal  treaty  of  15  Dec.,
1848,  with  Great  Britain,  and  the  negotiation  of
commercial  treaties  with  the  secondary  states  of
the  Germanic  confederation  by  which  reciprocal
relations  were  established  and  growing  markets
reached  upon  favorable  terras.

Mr.  Bancroft,  the  only  surviving  member  of
Polk's  cabinet,  who  has  revised  this  article,  in  a
communication  to  the  senior  editor  of  the  "Cyclo-
pa>dia,"  dated  Washington,  8  Marc;h,  1888,  says:
"One  of  the  special  qualities  of  Mr.  Polk's  mind
was  his  clear  perception  of  the  character  and  doc-
trines of  the  two  great  parties  that  then  divided
the  country.  Of  all  our  public  men — I  say,  dis-
tinctly, of  all — Polk  was  the  most  thoroughly  con-
sistent representative  of  his  party.  He  had  no
equal.  Time  and  Again  his  enemies  sought  for
grounds  on  which  to  convict  him  of  inconsistency,
but  so  consistent  liad  been  his  public  career  that
the  charge  was  never  even  made.  Never  fanciful
or  extreme,  he  was  ever  solid,  firm,  and  consistent.
His  administration,  viewed  from  the  standpoint  of


results,  was  perhaps  the  greatest  in  our  national
history,  certandy  one  of  the  greatest.  He  succeetled
Ix'causo  ho  insistinl  on  Iteing  its  centre,  and  in  over-
ruling and  guiding  all  his  secretaries  to  act  so  as
to  pr«Mluce  unity  and  harmony.  Those  who  study
his  administration  will  acknowledge  how  sincere
and  successful  were  his  efforts,  as  did  those  who
were  contemjiorary  with  him."

Mr.  Polk,  who  wtis  a  patient  student  and  a  clear
thinker,  steadfast  to  opinions  once  formed,  and  not
ea.sily  moved  by  |>o|)ular  o|>inion,  laln^red  faithfully,
from  his  entrance  into  public  life  until  the  day  when
he  left  the  White  House,  to  di.sseminate  the  iK>litical
opini(ms  in  which  he  had  been  educated,  and  which
commended  themselves  to  his  judgment.  His  pri-
vate life  was  upright  and  blameless.  Simple  in  his
habits  to  abstetniousness,  he  found  his  greatest
happiness  in  the  pleasures  of  the  home  circle  rather
than  in  the  gay  round  of  public  annisemeiits.  A
fiank  and  sincere  friend,  courteous  and  affable  in
his  demeanor  with  strangers,  generous  and  benevo-
lent, the  esteem  in  which  he  was  held  as  a  man  and
a  citizen  was  quite  as  high  as  his  official  reputation.
In  the  words  of  his  friend  and  associate  in  office,
Vice-President  Dallas,  he  was  "  temperate  but  not
unsocial,  industrious  but  accessible,  punctual  but
patient,  moral  without  austerity,  and  devotional
though  not  bigoted."  See  "  Eulogy  on  the  Life  and
C'haracter  of  the  Late  James  K.  Polk,"  by  George
M.  Dallas  (Philadel|)liia,  1849) ;  "  Eulogy  on  the  Life
and  Character  of  James  Knox  Polk,''  by  A.  0.  P.
Nicholson  (Nashville,  1849);  "James  Knox  Polk,"
by  John  S.  Jenkins  (Buffalo,  1850) ;  and  "History
of  the  Administration  of  James  K.  Polk,"  by  Lu-
cien  B.  Chase  (New  York,  1850). — His  wife,  Sarah
Childress,  b.  near  Murfreesl^oro,  Rutherford  to.,
Tenn.,  4  Sent.,  1803,  is  the  daughter  of  J(k>I  and
Elizabeth  Childress.  Her  father,  a  farmer  in  easy
circumstances,  sent
her  to  the  Moravian
institute  at  Salem,
N.  C,  where  she
was  educated.  On
returning  home  she
married  Mr.  Polk,
who  was  then  a
member  of  t  he  legis-
lature  of  Tennessee.
The  following  year
he  was  elected  to
congress,  and  dur-
ing his  fourteen  ses-
sions in  Washing-
ton Mrs.  Polk's  \'ti-J'
courteous  manners,

sound judgment, /  . n (^  jj

and many  attain- jBi/AA^cLy^ ^. ^/^-^%1-
ments  gave  her  a

high  place  in  society.  On  her  return  as  the  wife
of  the  president,  having  no  children,  Mrs.  Polk
devoted  herself  entirely  to  her  duties  as  mistress
of  the  White  House.  She  held  weekly  rweptions,
and  abolished  the  custonj  of  giving  refreshments
j  to  the  guests.  She  also  forbade  dancing,  as  out  of
keeping  with  the  character  of  these  entei-tain-
ments.  In  spite  of  her  n'forms.  Mrs.  Polk  was
extremely  popular.  "  Madam."  said  a  prominent
South  Carolinian,  at  one  of  her  receptions,  "there
is  a  woe  pronounced  against  you  in  the  Bible."  On
her  inquiring  his  meaning,  he  added  :  "The  Bible
says,  '  Woe  unto  vou  when  all  men  shall  speak  well
of  you.'"  An  English  lady  visiting  Washington
thus  descril)e'l  the  president's  wife:  "Mrs.  Polk
is  a  very  handsome  woman.  Her  hair  is  very
black,  and  her  dark  eyes  and  complexion  remind


66


POLK


POLK


one  of  the  Spanish  donnas.  She  is  well  read,  has
much  talent  for  conversation,  and  is  highly  popu-
lar. Hor  excellent  tai*te  in  dress  presi'rves  the
siilxhu'd  thouK'h  elegant  costume  that  characterizes
the  lady."  Mrs.  I'olk  Ix'came  a  communicant  of
the  Pri'shyterian  church  in  1I<J4,  and  hits  main-
tained her  connection  with  that  denomination  un-
til the  present  tin>e  (188«).  Since  the  death  of  her
inishand  she  ha-s  resided  at  Nashville,  in  the  house
»Oi'u  in  the  illustration  and  known  as  "  Polk  Phwe."
In  the  foregniund  is  seen  the  tomh  of  her  huslmnd.
—President  Polk's  brother,  William  Hawkins.
lawver,  I),  in  Maury  countv,  Teun..  24  May,  1H15;
d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  1«'  Dec,  1H«2,  was  gnidu-
ated  at  the  University  of  Tennes.see,  admitte<l  to
the  \mr  in  IKJl),  and  Wean  to  practise  at  Colum-
bia, Maurv  co.,  Tenn.  He  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature in'lH41  and  again  in  184^1  In  1845  he
wjis  appointed  minister  to  Naples,  holding  the
office  fn)ui  V.i  March  of  that  year  till  31  Aug..
1847.  when  he  was  commissioned  major  of  the  3d
dragoons,  and  sjiw  service  in  Mexico.  He  resigned.
20  July,  1848.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Nashville
convention  of  \H!W,  and  was  chosen  a  member  of
the  32d  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  1
Dee.,  1851,  till  3  March,  1853.  Maj.  Polk  was  a
strong  opponent  of  secession  in  18G1.

POLK,  Thomas,  patriot,  b.  alwut  1732;  d.  in
Charlotte,  N.  C,  in  1793.  He  was  the  great-grand-
son of  Robert  Polk,  or  Pollock,  who  emigrated  to
this  country  from  Ireland  and  settled  in  Maryland.
Thomas's  father,  William,  removed  from  Maryland
to  Pennsylvania,  while  the  former,  in  1753,  left  his
parents,  and,  travelling  through  Maryland  and  Vir-
ginia, made  his  home  in  Mecklenburg  county,  N.  C.
By  enterprise  and  industry  he  acquired  a  large
tract  of  land,  which  enabled  him  to  keep  his  family
in  comfort.  Personal  qualities  made  Polk  a  lender
in  the  S<'otch-Irish  settlement  in  which  he  lived,
and  in  1769  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  pro-
vincial assembly,  where  he  procured  the  passage  of
an  act  to  establish  Queen's  college  in  the  town  of
Charlotte.  In  1771  he  was  again  a  member  of  the
assembly,  and  thenceforward  he  took  an  active
part  in  the  movements  that  resulted  in  the  Revolu-
tion. At  the  date  of  the  Mecklenburg  convention
in  May,  1775,  he  was  delegated  to  issue  a  call  for
the  convention  whenever,  in  his  opinion,  such  ac-
tion was  necessary.  After  the  resolutions  had  been
adopted,  Polk  read  them  from  the  steps  of  the
court-house  to  the  people.  He  was  subsequently  a
member  of  the  committee  that  on  24  Aug.,  1775,
prepared  a  plan  for  securing  the  internal  peace  and
safety  of  the  provinces.  A  few  months  later  he
was  appointed  colonel  of  the  second  of  two  bat-
talions of  minute-men  in  the  Salisbury  district.
Soon  afterward  the  South  Carolina  Tories  attacked
Gen.  Andrew  Williamson  and  drove  him  into  a
.stockatle  fort  at  Ninety-Six,  but  were  defeated,
with  the  assistance  of  700  militia  from  North  Caro-
lina under  Col.  Polk  and  Col.  Griffith-Rutherford.
By  the  Provincial  congress  held  at  Halifax,  N.  C,
4  April,  1776,  Polk  was  made  colonel  of  the  4th
regiment,  which  formetl  part  of  a  force  that  under
Brig. -Gen.  Nash  joined  the  army  under  W^ashing-
ton.  In  November,  1779,  the  North  Carolina
troops  were  sent  to  re-enforce  the  southern  army
under  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln  at  Charleston.  Af-
ter the  fall  of  the  latter  city  Gen.  Horatio  Gates
offered  Polk  the  double  office  of  commissary-general
for  North  Carolina  and  commissary  of  purchase
for  the  army,  which  he  accepted.  His  mities  as
comnus.sHry  brought  him  into  antagonism  with
Gates,  on  a  question  of  supplying  the  militia  with
rations. Gen.  Gates  suggested  that  he  be  onlered


to  Salisbury  to  answer  for  his  conduct.  Polk  of-
tered  his  resignation,  but  it  was  not  at  first  accepted.
Afterward  he  ix'came  district  commissary.  After
the  action  at  Cowan's  Ford,  Gen.  Greene  otfered  the
command  of  the  militia  of  Salisbury  district  to  Col.
Polk,  with  the  commission  of  brigadier-general,
but,  in  spite  of  a  j)ersonal  request  by  Gen.  Greene,
the  latter  was  not  confirmed  by  the  governor  and
council,  and  Col.  Polk  was  superse<led  in  May,
1781.  After  the  Revolution  he  engaged  in  the
purchase,  from  the  disbanded  soldiers,  of  land
warrants  that  had  been  issued  to  them  by  the  state
for  their  services,  and  died  possessed  of  "princely
estates,"  which  his  sons  inherited  but  did  not  im-
prove.— His  son,  William,  patriot,  b.  in  Mecklen-
burg county,  N.  C.,  9  July,  1758;  d.  in  Raleigh,  N.  C,
4  Jan.,  1834,  entered  Queen's  college,  CTiarlotte,
N.  C,  where  he  remained  until  the  beginning  of
the  Revolutionary  war.  In  April,  1775,  while  he
was  yet  a  student,  he  was  appointed  a  2d  lieuten-
ant and  assigned  to  the  3d  South  Carolina  regi-
ment. His  company  and  another  were  at  once  or-
dered to  South  Carolina  to  keep  the  Tories  in
check,  and  Polk  afterward  commanded  several  ex-
peditions. During  one  of  these  he  made  Col.
Thomas  Fletcher,  a  noted  Tory  leader,  a  prisoner,
and  subsequently,  in  attempting  to  capture  a  party
of  loyalists  in  December,  1775,  he  was  severely
wounded.  On  26  Nov.,  1776,  he  was  elected  ma^or
of  the  9th  regiment  of  North  Carolina  troops,  with
which  he  joined  the  army  under  Washington.
Maj.  Polk  was  in  the  battles  of  the  Brandywine
and  Germantown.  Near  the  close  of  the  latter  ac-
tion, October,  1777,  he  was  again  wounded.  The
following  March,  through  the  consolidation  of  the
nine  North  Carolina  regiments  into  four,  Polk  lost
his  command.  Returning  to  the  south,  he  was
given  a  position  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Richard
Caswell,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Camden.
He  next  fought  under  Gen.  William  Davidson,  and
was  sent  as  an  envoy  to  Gov.  Thomas  Jefferson,  of
Virginia  On  his  return  he  joined  Gen.  Andrew
Pickens,  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
4th  South  Carolina  cavalry,  attached  to  the  com-
mand of  Gen.  Thomas  Sumter,  and  saw  much
active  service,  notably  at  the  battle  of  Eutaw
Springs.  He  remained  on  duty  in  that  section
until  the  end  of  the  war.  In  1783  Col.  Polk  was
appointed  by  the  legislature  surveyor-general  of
the  "  middle  district,  now  a  part  of  I'ennessee.  and
took  up  his  residence  at  French  Lick  fort,  which
occupied  the  site  of  the  city  of  Nashville.  He  re-
mained there  until  1786,  and  was  twice  chosen  a
member  of  the  house  of  commons  from  Davidson
county.  During  this  period  all  field  operations  by
the  surveyors  were  rendered  impracticable  by  the
hostile  attitude  of  the  Indians.  The  following
year  he  was  elected  to  the  general  a'^sembly  from
his  native  county,  which  he  continued  to  represent
until  he  became  supervisor  for  the  district  of  North
Carolina.  This  office  he  retained  for  seventeen
years,  until  the  internal  revenue  laws  were  repealed.
From  1811  till  1819  he  served  first  as  director  and
subsequently  as  president  of  the  State  bank  of
North  Carolina,  and  then  resigned  in  order  to  de-
vote more  of  his  time  and  personal  attention  to  his
lands  in  Tennessee,  which  comprised  an  area  of
100,000  acres.  On  25  :\Iarch,  1812.  he  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Madison,  with  the  consent  of
the  senate,  a  brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army.
This  commission  he  declined  on  personal  and  politi-
cal grounds,  being  a  Federalist  and  not  approving
the  policy  of  the  administration.  When  Lafayette
returned"  to  the  United  States  in  l«i24,  Polk  was
named  one  of  the  commissioners  to  receive  him  in


POLK


POLK


57


behalf  of  his  native  sUto.  Referring  to  William
Polk's  influenro  on  the  rii^ine  fortunes  of  the  slate
of  Tennessee,  it  has  Ix'oii  saio  thiit  as  "the  personal
friend  and  assofiale  of  Andrew  Jackson  he  j;reatlv
a«lvaiiL'tHl  the  interests  and  enhan(;e<l  the  wealth
of  the  hero  of  New  Orleans  by  furnishing  him
information,  taken  fn)m  his  ftefd  notes  as  a  sur-
veyor, that  enabled  Jackson  to  secure  valuable
tracts  of  land  in  the  state  of  Tennessee;  that
to  Samuel  P«)lk,  father  of  the  president,  he  gave
the  agi'iicy  for  renting  and  selling  portions  of  his
(William's)  estate;  and  that,  »is  first  president  of
the  Bank  of  North  Carolina,  he  miule  Jacob  John-
son, the  father  of  President  Andrew  Johnson,  its
first  {Kirter :  so  that  of  the  three  native  North  Caro-
linians who  entereil  the  White  House  through  the
gate  of  Tennessee,  all  were  indebted  for  benefac-
tions and  promotion  to  the  same  individual."  At
his  death  Col.  Polk  was  the  last  surviving  field-
officer  of  the  North  Carolina  line. — William's  son,
Leoiiidas,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Raleigh,  N.  C,  10
April,  180G;  d.  on  Pine  mountain.  Ga.,  14  June,
1864,  was  educated  at  the  University  of  North  Caro-
lina, and  at  the
U.  S.  military
academy,  where
he  was  gradu-
ated in  1827,and
at  once  brevet-
ted  2d  lieuten-
ant of  artillery.
Having,  in  the
mean  time,  been
induced  bv  Rev.
(afterward  Bish-
op) Charles  P.
Mcllvaine,  then
chaplain  at  the
acatiemy,  to
study  for  the
ministry,  he  re-
signed his  com-
mission the  fol-
lowing Decem-
ber, was  made
deacon  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1830,
and  ordained  priest  in  1831.  He  served  in  the  Mon-
umental church.  Richmond,  Va.,  as  assistant  for  a
year,  when,  his  health  failing,  he  went  to  Europe
to  recujx'rate.  Soon  after  his  return  he  removed
to  Tennessee,  and  Ix'came  rector  of  St.  Peter's
church.  Columbia,  in  1833.  In  1834  he  was  clerical
deputy  to  the  general  convention  of  the  Episcopal
church,  and  in  1835  a  member  of  the  standmg
committee  of  the  diocese.  In  1838  he  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia,  and  the  same
year  he  was  elected  and  consecrated  missionary
bishop  of  Arkansas  and  the  Indian  territory  south
of  3(5''  30'.  with  provisional  charge  of  the  dioceses
of  Alabama.  Mississippi,  and  Louisiana,  and  the
missions  in  the  republic  of  Texas.  These  charges
he  held  until  1841,  when  he  resigned  all  of  them
with  the  exception  of  the  diocese  of  Louisiana,  of
which  he  remained  bishop  until  his  death,  intend-
ing to  resume  his  duties  after  he  had  been  released
from  service  in  the  field.  In  1850  he  initiated  the
movement  to  establish  the  University  of  the  South,
and  until  1860  was  engaged  with  Bishop  Stephen
FJUiott,  and  other  southern  bishops,  in  perfe<-ting
plans  that  resulted  in  the  opening  of  that  institu-
tion at  Sewanee.  Tenn.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  was  a  strong  sympathizer  with  the
doctrine  of  secession.  His  birth,  education,  and
associations  were  alike  southern,  and  his  property,
which  was  very  considerable  in  land  and  slaves.


o^nC^


aided  to  identify  him  with  the  project  of  establish-
ing a  southern  (^onfederiK-y.  His  familiarity  with
the  vallev  of  the  .Mississippi  prompted  him  to  urge
u|»on  Jefterson  Ihivis  and  the  Confe<lerateauthori-
tie,s  the  impt)rtance  of  fortifying  and  hohling  its
strategical  {x>ints,  and  amid  the  excitement  of  the
time  tne  influence  of  his  ohi  military  training  be-
came u|)[)ermost  in  his  mind.  Under  these  cir-
cum.stances  the  ofTer  of  a  major-generalship  by
Davis  was  regarde<l  not  unfavorably.  He  applieil
for  advice  to  Bishop  William  Mcwle.  of  Virginia,
who  replied  that,  his  Ijcing  an  exceptional  case,  he
could  not  advisi'  against  its  acceptance.  His  first
command  extended  from  the  mouth  of  Red  river,
on  both  sides  of  the  Mississippi,  to  Paducah  on  the
Ohio,  his  headquarters  being  at  Memphis.  Under
his  general  direction  the  extensive  works  at  New
Madrid  and  Fort  Pillow.  Columbus,  Ky..  Island  No.
10,  Memphis,  and  other  points,  were  constructed.
On  4  Sept..  Gen.  Polk  transferre<l  his  headquarters
to  Columbus,  where  the  Confederates  had  massed
a  large  force  of  infantry,  six  field  batteries,  a  siege-
battery,  three  battalions  of  cavalrv,  and  three
steamboats.  Opposite  this  place,  at  belmont.  Mo.,
on  7  Nov.,  1861,  the  Iwittle  of  Belmont  was  fought.
Gen.  Polk  being  in  command  of  the  Confederate
and  Gen.  Grant  of  the  National  troops.  The  Con-
federates claimed  a  victory.  Gen.  Polk  remained
at  Columbus  until  March,  1862,  when  he  was  or-
dered to  join  Johnston's  and  Beauregard's  army  at
Corinth,  Miss.  As  commander  of  the  1st  corps,  he
took  part  in  the  battle  of  Shiloh.  Tenn..  and  m  the
subsequent  operations  that  ended  with  the  evacua-
tion of  Corinth.  In  SepteniV)er  and  October  he
commanded  the  Army  of  Mississippi,  and  fought
at  the  battle  of  Perryville,  during  the  Confederate
invasion  of  Kentucky.  In  the  latter  part  of  Octo-
l)er  and  Novemlxjr  he  was  in  command  of  the
armies  of  Kentucky  and  Mississippi  and  conducted
the  Confederate  retreat  from  the  former  state.  In
October  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
general,  and  commanded  the  right  wing  of  the
Army  of  Tennessee  at  the  battle  of  Stone  river.
In  the  Chickamauga  campaign,  he  also  led  the  right
wing.  According  to  the  official  report  of  Gen.
Braxton  Bragg,  it  was  only  through  Polk's  disobe-
dience of  orders  at  Chickamauga  that  the  National
army  was  saved  from  annihilation.  He  was  ac-
cordingly relieved  from  his  command,  and  ordered
to  Atlanta.  Subsequently  Jefferson  Davis,  with
Gen.  Bragg's  approval,  offered  to  reinstate  him,
but  he  declined.  He  was  then  appointed  to  take
charge  of  the  camp  of  Confederate  prisoners  that
h«ul  Deen  paroled  at  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.
In  December,  1803,  he  was  assigned  to  the  Depart-
ment of  Alabama,  Mississippi,  and  YmsX,  Ijouisiana,
in  place  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  who  was  as-
signeti  to  the  Army  of  Tennessee.  By  skilful  dis-
positions of  his  troops  he  prevented  the  junction
of  the  National  cavalry  column  under  Gen.  William
Sooy  Smith  with  Gen,  Sherman's  army  in  southern
Mississippi.  Gen.  Polk's  prestige  being  restored,
he  was  ordered  to  unite  his  command  (the  Army
of  Mississippi)  with  the  army  of  Gen.  Joseph  K
Johnston,  who  opposed  the  march  of  .Sherman  to
Atlanta. After  taking  part  in  the  principal  en-

fagements  that  occurred  pn>vious  to  the  middle  of
une,  he  was  killed  by  a  caimon-shot  while  recon-
noitring on  Pine  mountain,  near  Marietta,  Ga.
His  biography  is  in  course  of  preparation  (1888)
by  his  son,  I)r.  William  M,  Polk,  of  New  York.
— Ijeonidas's  son,  William  Merklenbnrgr,  physi-
cian, b.  in  Ashwoo<l,  Maury  co.,  Tenn..  15  Aug.,
1844.  was  graduated  at  Virginia  military  institute,
Lexington,  Va.,  4  J»dy.  1804,  and  at  theNew  York


58


POLK


POLLARD


collejje  of  physiciHns  and  surjreons  in  1809.  lie
entered  the  C'onfe<lerate  army  in  April.  1861.  as  u
cadet  of  the  military  institute,  was  commissioned
1st  lieutenant  in  Scott's  lottery  of  artillery  in  1802,
and  in  1803  was  promoted  assistant  chief  of  artil-
lery in  his  father's  cor|)8.  Army  of  the  Tennessee.
In  March,  18tio,  he  was  nuide  captain  and  a«ljutant
in  the  ins|)ector-generars  department.  After  his
graduation  as  a  physician  he  practised  in  New  Vork
city,  and  froui  ISo^i  till  187J>  he  was  professor  of
thera|)eutics  and  clinical  medicine  in  liellevue  col-
lege. He  then  accepted  the  chair  of  obstetrics  and
the  diseases  of  women  in  the  medical  dei)artmcnt
of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York,  which
he  still  (1888)  holds.  He  is  als<i  surgeon  in  the
department  of  obstetrics  in  Bellevue  hospital.  Dr.
Polk  has  contributed  to  medical  literature  "Origi-
nal Obsi^rvations  upon  the  Anatomy  of  the  Female
Pelvic  Organs,"  "  On  the  Gnivid  and  Non-Gravid
Uterus,"  and  "Original  Observations  upon  the
Causes  and  Pathology  of  the  Pelvic  Inflammations
of  Women." — Leonidas's  brother,  Thomas  GH-
Christ,  lawver.  b.  in  Mecklenburg  countv,  N.  C,
22  Feb..  17!K):  d.  in  Holly  Springs,  iMiss.,  in  18G9,
was  graduated  at  the  Univeitsity  of  North  Caro-
lina in  1810,  and  at  the  law-school  at  Litchfield,
Conn.,  in  1813.  He  soon  after  began  to  practise
his  profession,  and  for  several  years  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  lower  branch  of  the  North  Carolina
legislature.  He  was  also  at  one  time  in  command
of  the  militia.  In  18^39  he  reinoved  to  Tennessee,
where  he  purchased  a  large  plantation.  Being  a
stanch  Whig  in  politics,  he  took  an  active  part  in
the  presidential  campaign  of  1844  in  support  of
Ilenrv  Clay,  and  against  his  relative,  .Tames  K.  Polk.
— William's  grandson,  Lucius  Eugene,  soldier,  b.
in  Salisburv,  N.  C,  10  July,  1833,  was  the  son  of
William  J.  t*olk.  He  was  gratluated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia  in  1852.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  a
private  under  Gen.  Patrick  11.  Cleburne,  but  was
soon  commis^^ioned  1st  lieutenant,  and  as  such
fought  at  Shiloh.  where  he  was  wounded.  He  was
rapidly  promoted  until  he  was  made  brigadier-
general  in  December.  18G2,  and  joined  his  brigade
in  time  to  take  part  in  the  battle  of  Murfrecsboro,
where  his  command  made  a  charge,  for  which  he
was  complimented  by  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg  in  his
report  of  the  engagement.  Gen.  Polk  Wfus  also
present  at  Ringgold  gap.  Ga.,  in  18G3.  and  at
many  other  actions.  At  Kenesaw  mountain,  Ga.,
in  the  summer  of  18G4,  he  was  severely  wounded
bv  a  cannon-ball  and  disabled  for  further  service.
He  then  retired  to  a  {)lantation  in  Maury  county,
Tenn.,  where  he  has  since  resided.  In  1884  he  was
a  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  convention
at  Chicago,  and  he  is  at  present  (1888)  a  member  of
the  senate  of  the  state  of  Tennessee,  having  been
elected  on  1  Jan..  1887.

POLK,  Trusten,  senator,  b.  in  Sussex  countv,
Del.,  29  May,  1811 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo..  16  April,
1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1831,  and  then
began  the  study  of  law  in  the  olfice  of  the  attorney-

feneral  of  Delaware,  but  completed  his  course  at
'ale  law-schof)l.  In  1835  he  removed  to  .St.  Louis,
Mo.,  and,  establishing  himself  there  in  the  practice
of  his  profession,  soon  rose  to  a  high  place  at  the
bar.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional
convention  in  1845,  and  in  1848  a  i)residential
elector.  He  was  elected  governor  of  Missouri  as  a
Democrat  in  18.56,  and  soon  after  his  accession  to
office  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,  serving  from  4
Marcli,  1857,  until  his  expulsion  for  disloyalty  on
10  Jan.,  1802.  McAnwliile  he  had  joined  the  Con-
federate government  and  tilled  various  offices  of


responsibility  within  its  jurisdiction.  In  1864  he
was  taken  prisoner,  and  after  his  exchange  held
the  office  of  military  judge  of  the  Department  of
Mississippi.  At  the  close  of  the  war  lie  returned
to  St.  Louis,  and  there  devoted  himself  to  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession  until  his  death.

POLLAKI),  Edward  Albert,  journalist,  b.  in
Nelson  county,  Va.,  27  Feb.,  1828;  u.  in  Lynch-
burg, Va.,  12  Dec,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Virginia  in  1849,  and  studied  law  at
William  and  Mary,  but  finished  his  course  in  Balti-
more. Mr.  Pollard  then  emigrated  to  California
and  took  part  in  the  wild  life  of  that  country  as  a
journalist  until  1855,  after  which  he  spent  some  time
in  northern  Mexico  and  Nicaragua,  and  then  re-
turned to  the  eastern  states.  Subsequently  he
went  to  Europe,  and  also  travelled  in  China'  and
Japan.  During  President  Buchanan's  adminis-
tration he  became  clerk  of  the  judiciary  commit-
tee in  the  house  of  representatives,  and  he  was
an  open  advocate  of  secession  in  18(50.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  was  without  political
employment,  and  was  studying  for  the  Protestant
Episco[)al  niinistrv,  having  been  admitted  a  candi-
date for  holy  ordei-s  by  Bishop  William  Meade.
From  1861  till  1807  he  was  principal  editor  of  the
"  Richmond  Examiner,"  and,  while  an  earnest  ad-
vocate of  the  Confederate  cause  during  the  war,  he
was  nevertheless  a  merciless  critic  of  Jefferson
Davis.  Toward  the  close  of  the  war  he  went  to
England  in  order  to  further  the  sale  of  his  works,
and  was  then  captured,  but,  after  a  confinement  of
eight  months  at  Fort  Warren  and  Fortress  Monroe,
was  released  on  parole.  In  1807  he  began  the  pub-
lication in  Richmond  of  "Southern  Opinion,"
which  he  continued  for  two  vears,  and  also  in  1868
established  "  The  Political  t'amphlet,"  which  ran
for  a  short  time  during  the  presidential  canvass  of
that  year.  Mr.  Pollard  then  made  his  residence  in
New  York  and  Brooklyn  for  several  years,  often
contributing  to  current  literature.  His  books  in-
clude ''  Black  Diamonds  Gathered  in  the  Darkey
Homes  of  the  South  "  (New  York,  1859) ;  "  Letters
of  the  Southern  Spy  in  Washington  and  Else-
where" (Baltimore,  1*861);  "Southern  Historv  of
the  War"  (3  vols.,  Richmond,  1862-'4;  4th  vol.,
New  York,  1806) ;  "  Observations  in  the  North :
Eight  Months  in  Prison  and  on  Parole"  (Rich-
mond, 1805) ;  "  The  Lost  Cause :  A  New  Southern
History  of  the  War  of  the  Confederates"  (New
York,  1806 ;  written  also  in  French  for  Louisiana,
1807);  "Lee  and  his  Lieutenants"  (1807);  "The
Lost  Cause  Regained  "  (1808) ;  "  Life  of  Jeflersort
Davis,  with  the  Secret  History  of  the  Southern
Confederacy  "  (1869) ;  and  "  The  Virginia  Tourist "
(Philadelphia,  1870).— His  wife,  Marie  Antoinette
Nathalie  Graiiier-Dowell,b.  in  Norfolk, Va..  mar-
ried James  R.  Dowell,  from  whom  she  separated
during  the  civil  war  on  account  of  political  differ-
ences. She  then  made  her  way.  with  great  diffi-
culty, through  the  lines  of  the  armies,  to  her  broth-
er's residence  in  New  Orleans,  and  later  returned
to  Richmond,  where  she  met  Mr.  Pollard,  whom  she
married  after  the  war.  Subsequent  to  the  death  of
Mr.  Pollard,  she  became  a  public  speaker,  and  in
this  capacity  she  canvassed  California  for  the  Demo-
cratic presidential  ticket  in  1876.  She  has  also
lectured  on  the  Irish  and  Chinese  questions,  advo-
cating greater  liberty  to  these  people,  and  has  been
active  in  the  temperance  movement,  holding  the
office  of  deputy  grand  worthy  patriarch  of  the
states  of  New  York  and  New  Jersey.  Besides  con-
tributions to  the  newspapers,  she  has  published  oc-
casional poems. — His  brother,  Henry  Rives,  edi-
tor, b.  in  Nelson  county,  Va.,  29  Aug.,  1833 ;  d.  in


POLLARD


POLVEREL


69


Richmond,  Va.,  24  Nov.,  1868,  was  educatwl  at
Virginia  military  institute,  and  at  the  University
of  Virjrinia.  lijiter  he  publishetl  a  new|ia|)er  in
Ijeavenworth,  Kansas,  during  the  troubles  in  tliat
territory,  and  thence  went  to  Wasliin>fton,  where
he  was  employed  in  the  post-olllee  de|>artrncnt.
At  the  bejrinninj;  of  the  civU  war  he  was  news  edi-
tor of  the  **  IJaltimore  Sun,"  hut  remove<l  to  Kich-
mond,  where  he  iMK'anje  one  of  the  editors  of  the
"  Richmond  Kxaminer."  After  the  war  he  wasasw)-
ciatwl  in  the  founding  of  "The  Uichmond  Times,"
and  for  a  time  was  one  of  its  staff.  In  iHtJO  he  re-
viveil  the  "  Richmond  Kxaminer,"  and  control le<l
its  editorial  columns  until  18C7,  when  he  disposed
of  his  interest.  He  then  established,  with  his
brother,  "Southern  Opinion,"  of  which  he  contin-
ued until  his  death  one  of  the  editors  and  proprie-
tors. Mr.  Pollard  was  shot  at  and  killed  from  an
upper  window  on  the  op|>osite  side  of  the  street  by
James  Grant,  who  felt  himself  aggrieved  by  an  ar-
ticle that  WHS  published  in  Pollani's  pa|)er.

POLLARD,  Josephine,author,  b.  in  New  York
city  alK)ut  1840.  She  was  educated  in  her  native
city,  early  devoted  herself  to  literature,  and  ac-
quiretl  reputation  as  a  ^ymn-writer,  her  best-known
pnnluction  being  "  Outside  the  date."  Her  prose
writings  include  sketches  that  have  l)een  published
in  "  Hari)er's  Magazine"  and  other  f)erio<Jic4ils.
Miss  Pollard  has  written  "The  Gipsv  Books"  (6
vols..  New  York,  1873-'4)  and  "A  Piece  of  Silver"
(1876).  She  has  contributed  the  text  to  "  Decora-
tive Sisters"  (New  York,  1881);  "Elfin  Land"
(1882) ;  "  Boston  Teapartv  "  (1882) ;  "  Songs  of  Bird
Life  "  (188")) ;  "  Vagrant  Verses  "  (1886) ;  and,  with
John  n.  Vincent,  "The  Home  Book"  (1887).

POLLOCK,  JaiiiCH,  b.  in  Milton.  Pa.,  11  Sept.,
1810;  d.  in  Lock  Haven.  Pa.,  19  April,  1890.  lie
was  graduated  at  Princeton,  and,  after  studying
law,  was  tulmitted  to  the  bar  in  1833,  and  or)ened
an  office  in  Milton.  In  1835  he  was  chosen  district
attorney  for  his  county,  after  which  he  held  vari-
ous minor  offices.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Whig,  and  served  from  23  April,  1844,  to  3  March,
1849.  during  which  time  he  was  an  active  member
of  several  coitimittees.  On  23  June,  1848,  he  in-
troduced a  resolution  calling  for  the  appointment
of  a  special  committee  to  inquire  into  the  neces-
sity and  practicability  of  building  a  railroad  to
the  Pacific  coast.  As  chairman  of  that  committee
he  made  a  report  in  favor  of  the  construction  of
such  a  road.  This  was  the  first  favorable  official
act  on  this  subject  on  the  part  of  congress.  In
1850  he  was  appointed  president-judge  of  the  8th
judicial  district  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1854  he
was  elected  governor  of  Pennsylvania  as  a  Union-
Republican.  During  his  administration  the  whole
line  of  the  public  works  between  Philadelphia  and
Pittsburg  was  transferred  to  the  Pennsylvania
railroad  companv.  By  this  and  other  means  he
reduced  the  state  debt  by  nearly  $10,000,000,  and
this  s<K)n  le<l  to  the  removal  of  state  taxation.  He
convened  the  legislature  in  extraordinary  session
during  the  financial  crisis  of  1857,  and.  acting  on
his  wise  suggestions,  laws  were  enacted  whereby
public  confitlence  was  restored  and  the  community
was  saved  from  bankruptcy.  On  the  exftiration  of
his  term  of  office  he  resumed  his  law-practice  in
Milton.  He  was  a  delegate  from  his  state  to  the
Peace  convention  in  Washington  in  1H61,  and  after
the  inauguration  of  President  Lincoln  he  was  aj)-
pointe<l  director  of  the  U.  S.  mint  in  Philadelphia,
which  place  he  then  held  until  Octolwr,  1866.  By
his  efforts,  with  the  approval  of  Sjilnion  P.  Chase,
then  secretary  of  the  treasury,  the  motto  "  In  God
we  trust "  was  phRH*d  on  the  National  coins. In


1869  he  was  reinst«t«Hl  as  director  of  the  mint,
which  place  he  then  filled  for  manv  vears.  In  1880
he  wa.H  appointed  naval  officer  of  Pfiiitulelphia,  but
resigne<l  in  1884,  ancl  resumed  the  practice  of  his
profession.  Gov.  Pollock  was  very  active  in  vari-
ous movements  (ending  to  promote  educational
and  religious  reforms.  Ho  received  the  honorary
degree  of  LL,  I),  from  Princeton  in  1855,  and  from
Jefferson  college.  Pa.,  in  1857.

POLLOCK,  OMver,  merchant,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1737;  d.  in  Mississippi,  17  Dec,  1823.  He  came  to
this  country  with  his  father,  and  settled  in  Cum-
Ix^rland  county.  Pa.  He  cngageil  in  business  in
1762  at  Havana,  Cuba,  where  he  l>ecame  intimate
with  Gov.-Gen.  O'lieillv.  and,  when  the  latter  was
made  governor  of  Ijouisiana  by  the  king  of  Spain,
Pollock  moved  to  New  Orleans.  By  a  wise  and
generous  action,  during  the  scarcity  of  pn)vision3
in  that  city,  he  gained  a  reputati(m  that  iiuide  him
able  to  be  of  great  use  to  the  Americans  in  New
Orleans.  When  the  Revolutionary  war  o|)ened,
Pollock  was  in  possession  of  large  wealth  and  much
political  influence.  In  1777  the  secret  committee
of  the  Unite<l  States  appointed  him  "commercial
agent  of  the  United  States  at  New  Orleans."  which
post  he  held  until  the  close  of  the  war  with  great
credit  to  himself  and  greater  good  to  the  United
States.  He  became  to  the  west  what  Rot)ert  Mor-
ris was  to  the  east.  His  fortune  was  pledged  to
his  country.  To  his  financial  aid  the  United  States
owes  the  success  of  Gen.  George  Rogers  Clarke  in
the  Illinois  campaign  of  1778.  During  that  vear
he  Iwrrowed  from  the  royal  treasury,  thmugh  Oov.
Galvey,  $70,000,  which  he  spent  for  Clarke's  e\[)e-
dition  and  the  defence  of  the  frontier.  But  the
poverty  of  the  United  States  involved  him,  as  it
did  Morris,  in  severe  losses.  In  1783  he  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  agent  at  Havana,  where  lie  was  im-
prisoned in  1784  for  the  debts  of  the  United  .States,
amounting  to  $150,000.  Being  released  on  parole,
he  returned  to  this  country  in  1785.  In  1791  con-
gress discharged  this  debt,  but  failed  to  remunerate
Pollock  for  his  services.  He  retired  to  Cuml>erland
county.  Pa.,  in  1791,  impoverished.  In  1797,  1804,
and  1806  he  was  nominate<l  for  congress;  but,  al-
though he  received  the  {xipular  vote  of  his  county,
he  was  not  elected.  In  1800  he  was  an  inmate  of
the  debtors'  prison  in  Philadelphia,  but  within  a
few  years  he  accumulated  pro|)erty  again,  and  in
1815  he  moved  to  Mississippi,  where  he  died.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Friendly  S^ms  of  St.  Patrick
and  the  Hiliernian  society  of  Philadelphia,  See  a
sketch  of  him  bv  Rev.  Horace  E.  Havden  (1883).

POLVEREL,'^tIenne,  French  revolutionist,  b.
in  Beam.  France  in  1742;  d.  in  Paris,  6  April,  1795.
He  was  a  lawyer,and  was  sent  as  deputy  to  t  he  states-
^jeneral  in  1789.  He  belonged  to  the  extreme  party
in  the  revolution,  and  was  appointed  public  prose-
cutor in  1791.  In  1792  he  was  sent,  with  two  other
commissioners,  to  Santo  Domingo  to  reorganize
the  colony.  The  three  commissioners  were  invested
with  arbitrary  power,  and  soon  atlopted  measures
that  led  toa  war  of  extermination  lx»t  we«Mi  the  whites
and  negroes.  The  French  colonists  that  escaped
from  the  island  accused  the  commissioners  of  cruel
and  arbitrary  acts,  while  they  in  turn  accused  the
whites  of  conspiring  to  deliver  Santo  Domingo  to
the  English.  The  jicquittal  by  the  revolutionary
tribunal  of  Gen.  d'Estwrbes,  whom  they  had  sent
to  France  as  a  criminal,  created  nu)re  enemies,  who
accused  them  of  being  friends  of  the  Girondists.
An  order  for  the  arrest  of  Polverel  was  sent  out
in  1793,  but,  owing  to  the  distance  of  the  island
and  the  difficulty  of  communications,  he  was  not
brought  to  Paris  until  after  the  fall  of  Robespierre.


60


POM  BO


Although  he  was  set  at  liberty,  the  opposition  of
the  colonists  prevented  him  from  obtftininp  a  bill
of  indemnity  for  his  ac-titms  in  Sjinto  Domingo.

POM  BO,  Manuel  de  (pom -bo),  Colombian
patriot,  b.  in  Po|)ayan  in  1769:  d.  there  in  1829.
He  studiwl  in  the 'College  of  Rosario,  in  Bogota,
and  was  graduated  there  in  law  in  1790.  In  the
next  year  he  went  to  S|jain  to  practise,  and  in  1799
he  returned  to  ('olombia  as  judge  of  the  tribunal
of  commerce  of  Carthagena.  In  1807  he  was  a{)-
pointe<l  superintendent  of  the  mint  of  Bogota,  and
when  the  revolution  began  in  1810  he  was  elected
by  the  people  on  20  June  a  member  of  the  munici-
pal cor{)oratio]i.  He  was  an  ardent  natriot,  de-
fended his  ideas  in  the  press,  and  published  in  1812
his  '•  Carta  &  Jos^  Maria  Blanco,  satisfaciendo  a  los
principios  sobre  que  imnugna  la  indep-ndencia  ab-
solutade  Venezuela,"  wnich  liecame  famous.  After
the  arrival  of  (Jen.  Pablo  Morillo  (</.  r.)  in  1815.
Pomlx>  was  imprisoned,  and,  on  account  of  his
revolutionary  writings,  condemned  to  death  by  the
militiirv  tribunal.  The  influence  of  his  wife,  who
l)elonged  to  a  powerful  family  of  Spain,  saved  his
life,  and  he  was  sent  as  a  prisoner  to  the  peninsula.
The  constitutional  revolution  in  1820  liberated  him,
and  in  1822  he  returnetl  to  Colombia  and  w-as  ap-
pointed inspector  of  the  mint  in  Popayan,  in  which
em|)loy  he  died.  Pombo  was  an  excellent  linguist
and  geographer.  He  wrote  "Gramatica  Latina"
(Bogota,  182(5) ;  "  Compendio  de  Geografia  "  (1827) ;
and  an  exhaustive  "  Historia  de  los  paises,  que  for-
maron  el  antiguo  virevnato  de  Nueva  Granada,"
the  manuscript  of  which  disappeared  shortly  after
his  death,  and  has  not  vet  Ixjen  recovered.

POMEROY,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Suf-
field.  Conn..  19  Nov.,  1704 ;  d.  in  Hebron,  Conn.,
22  Dec,  1784.  He  was  graduated  at  the  head  of
his  class  at  Yale  in  1733,  and  he  and  his  classmate,
Eleazer  Wheelock,  who  l)ecame  his  brother-in-law,
were  the  first  to  remain  there  after  graduation
as  recipients  of  the  scholarships  that  had  l)een
founded  by  Bishop  Berkeley  for  superior  attain-
ments in  the  classics.  In  the  meantime  he  studied
theology,  and  in  1734  began  to  preach  in  Hebron,
where  he  was  ordained  pastor  on  16  Dec,  1735.  He
identified  himself  with  the  great  revival  of  1740,
and  labored  earnestly  to  promote  it.  In  June,
1742,  ho  was  accused  before  the  general  assembly
of  disorderly  conduct,  and  with  James  Davenport
(q.  r.)  was  tried  in  Hartford ;  but  he  was  dismissed
as  "comparatively  blameless."  He  was  again  called
to  answer  charges  of  violating  the  law  that  had  been
passed  to  correct  disorders  in  preaching,  was  found
guilty,  and  compelled  tobear  tne  costs  of  the  prose-
cution. About  this  time  he  preached  in  the  parish
of  Colchester  without  the  permission  of  the  resi-
dent minister,  and  was  in  consequence  deprived  of
his  salary  for  seven  years.  During  the  French
and  Indian  war  he  was  chaplain  to  the  American
army,  and  he  filled  a  like  omce  during  the  Revo-
lutionary war.  He  was  active  in  the  movement
that  led  to  the  founding  of  Dartmouth  college,
becoming  one  of  its  first  trustees,  and  in  1774  he
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  that  college.

POMEROY,  John  Norton,  lawyer,  b.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  12  April,  1828 ;  d.  in"  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.,  15  Feb.,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at
Hamilton  college  in  1847,  and,  after  studying  law,
was  admitted  in  1851  to  the  bar.  For  several  years
thereafter  he  followed  his  profession  in  Rochester,
but  in  1864  he  came  to  New  York  city  and  accepted
the  chair  of  law  in  the  University  of  the  city  of
New  York,  becoming  dean  of  the  legal  faculty,  and
also  for  a  time  delivering  lectures  f)n  political  sci-
ence. In  1869  he  returned  to  Rochester  and  con-


POMEROY

tinued  the  practice  of  law  until  1878,  when  he  was
called  to  the  professorship  of  law  in  the  University
of  California,  which  chair  he  held  until  his  death.
In  1865  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Hamilton.  Prof.  Pomeroy  was  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  "The  Nation,'' the  "North  American
Review."  and  the  "American  Law  Review"  on
topics  connected  with  international  law,  general
jurisprudence,  and  social  science,  and  in  1884-'5  he
edited  the  "  West  Coast  Reporter."  He  prepared
editions,  with  notes,  of  "Sedgwick's  Statutory
and  Constitutional  Law"  (New  York,  1874)  and
"Archlx)ld's  Criminal  Law"  (1876).  and  was  the
author  of  "An  Introduction  to  Municipal  Law"
(1865);  "An  Introduction  to  the  Constitutional
Law  of  the  United  States,"  which  is  used  a.s  a  text-
Ixjok  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  and  other  col-
leges (Boston.  1868) ;  "  Remedies  and  Remedial
Rights  according  to  the  Reformed  American  Pro-
cedure "  (Boston,  1876) ;  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Spe-
cific Performance  of  Contract "  (New  York,  1879) ;
"  A  Treatise  on  Equity  Jurisprudence  "  (San  Fran-
cisco, 1883) ;  and  "  A  Treatise  on  Riparian  Rights  "
(St.  Paul.  1884).

POMEROY,  Marcns  Mills,  journalist,  b.  in
Elmira,  N.  Y.,  25  Dec,  1833.  He  early  determined
to  be  a  printer,  and  subsequently  turned  his  atten-
tion to  journalism,  founding  his  first  paper  in  Com-
ing. N.  v.,  in  1854.  From  1857  till  1864  he  resided
in  Wisconsin,  and  there  published  the  "  La  Crosse
Democrat."  He  removed  to  New  York  in  1868,
and  founded  "  Brick  Poraeroy's  Democrat,"  which
gained  a  large  circulation  by  its  sensational  char-
acter. In  1875  he  settled  in  Chicago,  but  later  re-
turned to  New  York,  where,  in  1887,  he  merged  the
"  Democrat "  into  "  Poraeroy's  Advance  Thought,"
which  he  now  (1888)  edits.  He  has  published
"Sense"  (New  York,  1868);  "Nonsense"  (1868);
"  Gold  Dust "  (1872) ;  "  Brick  Dust "  (1872) ;  "  Our
Saturday  Night  "  (1873)  ;  "  Home  Harmonies  "
(1874) :  and  "  Perpetual  Money  "  (1878).

POMEROY,  Samuel  Clarke,  senator,  b.  in
Southampton,  Mass.,  3  Jan.,  1816.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Amherst,  and  then  spent  some  time  in
New  York.  Subsequently  he  returned  to  South-
ampton, and,  besides  holding  various  local  offices,
was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  in
1852-'3.  He  was  active  in  organizing  the  New
England  emigrant  aid  company,  of  which  he  was
financial  agent.  In  1854  he  conducted  a  colony  to
Kansas,  and  located  in  Lawrence,  making  the  first
settlement  for  that  territory.  Afterward  he  re-
moved to  Atchison,  where  he  was  mayor  in  1859.
He  was  conspicuous  in  the  organization  of  the  ter-
ritorial government,  and  participated  in  the  Free-
state  convention  that  met  in  Lawrence  in  1859.
During  the  famine  in  Kansas  in  1860-'l  he  was
president  of  the  relief  committee.  Mr.  Pomeroy
was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican  conven-
tions of  1856  and  1860.  He  was  elected  as  a  Re-
publican to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1861,  and  re-elected
in  1867.  He  was  candidate  for  a  third  term  in
1873,  but  charges  of  bribery  were  suddenly  pre-
sented before  the  Kansas  legislature,  and  in  conse-
quence he  failed  of  election.  A  committee  chosen
by  the  legislature  reported  the  matter  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  wnich  investigated  the  case,  and  a  majority
report  found  the  charges  not  sustained.  The  mat-
ter then  came  before  the  courts  of  Kansas,  and
after  some  months'  delay  the  district  attorney  en-
tered a  nolle  prosequi,  stating  to  the  court  that  he
had  no  evidence  upon  which  he  could  secure  con-
viction. Mr.  Pomeroy  then  made  Washington  his
place  of  residence.  He  is  the  autho|-  of  numerous
speeches  and  pQlitical  pamphlets.


-^


POMEROY


PONCE  DE  LEON


01


POMEROY,  Spth,  soldier,  b.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  2()  Mhv.  171MJ;  d.  in  Peekskill.  N.  Y.,  19
Feb..  1777.  Ilo  was  an  infjonious  and  skilful  me-
chanic, and  followed  the  tra<le  of  a  (gunsmith.
Early  in  life  he  enterwl  the  military  service  of  the
colony,  and  in  1744  he  held  the  rank  of  captain.
At  the  canturo  of  Louisburg  in  174r)  he  wa.s  a
mapor,  and  had  charj^i  of  more  than  twenty
smiths,  who  wen>  enjfajjetl  in  drilling  captured
cannon.  In  1755  he  was  lieutenant -colonel  in
Ephniim  Williams's  regiment.  On  the  .latter's
death  he  succeedwl  to  the  command  of  the  force
that  defeated  the  French  and  Indians  under  liuron
Dieskau,  and  his  rt>giment  was  the  one  that  suf-
fered most  in  gaining  the  victory  of  Lake  George.
Col.  Pomen)v  was  an  ardent  patriot,  and  in  1774-'5
served  as  a  delegate  to  the  Provincial  congress,  by
which  he  was  elected  a  general  olFicer  in  October,
1774.  and  brigadier-genenU  in  February,  1775.  At
the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  pre-
sented himself  as  a  volunteer  in  the  camp  of  Gen.
Artemas  Ward  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  from  whom  he
borrowed  a  horse,  on  hearing  the  artillery  at  Bun-
ker Hill,  and,  taking  a  musket,  set  oil  at  full
speed  for  Charlestown.  Reaching  the  Neck,  and
finding  it  enfiladed  by  a  heavy  fire  from  the  "  Glas-
gow" ship-of-war,  he  began  to  be  alarmed,  not  for
his  own  safety,  but  for  that  of  Gen.  Ward's  horse.
Too  honest  to  expose  the  borrowed  steed  to  the
'*  pelting  of  this  pitiless  storm,"  and  too  bold  to
shrink  from  it,  he  deliveretl  the  horse  to  a  sentry,
shouldered  his  gun,  and  marched  on  foot  across  the
Neck.  On  reaching  the  hill,  he  took  a  station  at
the  rail-fence  in  the  hott&st  of  the  battle.  He  was
soon  recognized  by  the  soldiers,  and  his  name  rang
with  shouts  along  the  line.  A  few  days  later  he
received  the  ap|x>intment  of  senior  brigadier-gen-
eral among  the  eight  that  were  named  by  congress,
but  as  this  action  caused  some  difficulty  in  the  ad-
justment of  rank,  he  declined  it,  and  soon  after-
ward retired  to  his  fann.  During  1776,  when  New
Jersey  was  overrun  by  the  British,  he  headed  a
force  of  militia  from  his  neighborhood,  and  marched
to  the  rescue  of  Washington.  He  reached  the
Hudson  river,  but  never  returned.

POMEROY,  Theodore  Medad,  lawyer,  b.  in
Cavuga,  N.  Y.,  31  Dec,  1834.  He  was  graduafe<i
at  "Hamilton  in  1842,  and  then  studied  law.  Set-
tling in  Auburn,  he  practised  his  profession  in  that
city,  and  was  in  1850-'6  district  attorney  for  Ca-
yuga county.  In  1857  he  was  elected  a  m'enjber  of
the  lower  branch  of  the  New  York  legislature.  He
was  then  sent  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  and
served,  with  re-elections,  from  4  March,  1801,  till
3  March,  1869.  On  the  resignation  of  Schuyler
Colfax  from  the  speakership  Mr.  Pomeroy  was
elected  on  3  March,  1869,  to  fill  the  vacancy.  Sub-
sequently he  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession
in  Auburn,  and  engaged  in  banking  business.

POMROY,  Rebecca  Rossignol,  nurse,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  16  July,  1817;  d.  in  Newton.  Mass.,
24  Jan.,  1884  She  was  the  daughter  of  Samuel
Holliday,  and  on  12  Sept.,  18Ji6,  married  Daniel  F.
Pomroy.  Sickness  in  ner  own  family  for  nearly
twenty  years  made  her  an  accomplished  nurse,  and
when  her  only  surviving  son  enlisted  in  the  National
army  she  offered  her  services  to  Dorothea  L.  Dix
{q.  v.).  She  was  at  once  called  to  Wiishington,  and
in  September,  1861,  assigned  to  duty  in  George-
town Hospital,  but  was  soon  transferred  to  the  hos-
pital at  Columbian  university.  J^jirly  in  1862  she
was  called  to  the  White  House  at  the'  time  of  the
death  of  Willie  Lincoln,  and  nurstnl  "Tad."  the
youngest  s<in,  then  very  ill,  and  Mrs.  Lincoln,  un-
til both  were  restored  to  health. President  Lincoln


said  to  her  at  that  time :  "  Tell  your  ^grandchildren
how  indebte<l  the  nation  was  Ut  you  in  holding  up
my  hands  in  time  of  trouble."  Mrs.  Pomroy  re-
turne<l  to  the  hospit-til  and  continue<l  in  her  work,
gaining  a  high  reputation.  In  1864.  when  the
president's  life  was  threatened  and  Mrs.  Lincoln
was  suffering  from  injuries  that  she  had  received
in  a  fall  from  her  carriage,  Mrs.  Pomroy  again  went
to  the  White  House.  Later  in  the  year  she  spent
some  time  at  the  West  hospital  in  Baltimore,  but
ultimately  returned  to  the  hospital  at  Columbian
university.  Itefusing  advantage<^us  offers  to  go
elsewhere,  she  remained  at  her  pnist  until  the  close
of  the  war,  and  then,  stricken  with  tynhoid  fever,
was  an  invalid  for  several  years.  She  oecame  ma-
tron in  1867  of  a  reformatory  home  for  girls  at
Newton  Centre,  Mass.,  and  then  of  the  Newton
home  for  orphans  and  destitute  girls,  which,  since
her  death,  has  become  the  Rebecca  Pomroy  home.
See  "  F]choes  from  Hospital  and  White  House,"  by
Anna  L.  Boyden  (Boston.  1884).

PONCE  1)E  LEON,  Jaan  (pon'-thay-day-lay'-
one).  Spanish  officer,  b.  in  San  Servas.  province  of
Campos,  in  1460 ;  d.  in  Cuba  in  July,  1521.  He  was
descended  from  an  ancient  family  oj  Aragon,  was  in
his  youth  page  of  the  infante,  afterward  rerdinand
VII..  and  served  with  credit  against  the  Moors  of
Granada.  According  to  some  authorities,  he  accom-
panied Columbus  in  his  second  voyage  to  Hispaui-
ola  in  1493,  but
Washington  Ir-
ving and  other
modern  histo-
rians .say  that
he  only  sailed
in  1503  with
Nicolas  de

Ovando  (q.  v.),
who  was  ap-
pointed govern-
or of  that  isl-
and. He  took
an  active  part
in  the  pacifica-
tion of  the
country,  and
became  govern-
or of  the  east-
em  part,  or  pro-
vince of  Hi-
guey,  where  the
natives  had  fre-
quent inter-
course with
those  of  the  isl-
and of  Borin-
quen  (Porto  Rico).  Prom  them  he  acquiretl  infor-
mation about  that  island,  and  hearing  that  it  con-
tained abundance  of  gold,  he  obtained  |>ermission  to
conquer  it.  In  1508  he  sailed  with  eighty  Spanish
adventurers  and  some  auxiliary  Indians,  and  in  a
few  days  he  landed  in  Borinquen,  where  he  was  well
received  by  the  natives.  The  principal  cacique,
Aguainaba  {q.  c),  accompanied  him  to  all  parts  of
the  island,  and  Ponce  collectetl  many  samples  of

fold,  and  was  astonished  at  the  fertility  of  the  soil,
n  1509  he  returne<l  to  Hispaniola  to  re|)ort,  and  in
quest  of  re-enforceraents,  but  the  new  'governor,
Diego  Columbus,  gave  the  command  of  the  expedi-
tion to  Diego  Ceron,  and  sent  Ponce  as  his  lieuten-
ant The  latter,  through  his  protector.  Ovando,  in
the  court  of  Spain,  claimed  the  appointment  of

fovemor  of  Borinouen.  and  in  1510  ne  obtained  it.
le  sent  Ceron  to  Hispaniola.  began  the  construc-
tion of  the  first  city,  calling  it  Caparra,  and  sent  his


62


POND


POND


lieutenant,  Cristoval  de  Sotomayor.  to  found  an-
other citv  in  the  southwest  near  the  Bay  of  Guanica.
Soon  he"befran  to  distribute  the  Indians  amonpr  his
odlccrs,  iLs  had  been  done  in  Ilispaniola,  and  Ajju-
ainalMi's  brother  and  successor,  of  the  same  name,
l)epan  a  war  of  extermination  against  the  invaders.
He  wius  defeated  in  successive  encounters,  and  the
natives  calle«l  the  Caribs  of  the  lesser  Antilles  to
their  help,  but  Ponce  conquered  the  whole  island.
In  the  Iwginning  of  1513  Ponce  was  deprived  of
his  government,  and,  broken  in  health  by  wounds,
resolved  to  go  in  search  of  the  fountain  of  eternal
youth,  which,  according  to  the  reports  of  the  na-
tives, existed  in  an  island  called  Bimini.  Ilegath-
ere<l  manv  of  his  former  followers  and  other  adven-
turers, sailed  on  3  March,  1512,  with  three  caravels
from  the  port  of  San  German,  and  visited  several
of  the  Bahama  islands,  but  was  told  that  the  land
in  ouestion  lay  farther  west.  On  27  March  he
landed  in  latitude  80°  N.,  a  little  to  the  north  of
the  present  city  of  St.  Augustine,  on  a  coast  which,
on  account  of  the  abundant  vegetation,  he  called
Florida  island.  He  sailed  along  the  coast  to  a
cape,  which  he  called  C'orrientes,  but.  disappointed
in  his  search  for  the  fountain  of  youth,  returned  to
Porto  Rico  on  5  Oct.  and  sailed  for  Spain,  where
he  obtained  for  himself  and  his  successors  the  title
of  adelantado  of  Bimini  and  Florida.  In  1515  he
returned  with  three  camvels  from  Seville  and
touched  at  Porto  Rico,  where,  finding  that  the
Caribs  had  nearly  overpowered  the  Spanish  garri-
son, ho  remained  to  expel  them,  and  founded  in  the
south  of  the  island  the  city  of  Ponce.  In  March,
1521,  he  made  a  second  attempt  to  conquer  Florida,
and.  sailing  with  two  ships  from  San  German,
reached  a  point  alwut  fifty  miles  to  the  south  of  his
former  iiinding-nlace.  He  began  to  explore  the  in-
terior, but  found  a  warlike  people,  and,  after  many
encounters  with  the  natives,  was  obliged  to  re-em-
bark, with  the  loss  of  nearly  all  his  followers.  Not
desiring  to  return  after  his  defeat  to  Porto  Rico,  he
retired  to  the  island  of  Cuba,  where  he  died  shortly
afterward,  in  consequence  of  a  wound  from  a  poi-
soned arrow.  His  remains  weresuVjsequently  trans-
ported to  the  city  of  San  Juan  de  Porto  Rico,  and
rest  in  the  church  of  San  Jose.  A  monument  has
been  erected  to  his  memory  recently  in  that  city.
His  autograph,  which  it  is  believed  has  never  be-
fore appeared  in  America,  was  obtained  from  Spain
through  tlie  courtesy  of  Gen.  Meredith  Read.

POND,  Enoch,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wrentham,
Norfolk  CO.,  Mass.,  29  July,  1791 ;  d.  in  Bangor,
Me.,  21  Jan.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1813,  studied  theology  with  Dr.  Nathaniel  Emmons,
was  licensed  to  preach  in  June,  1814,  and  ordained
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Ward  (now
Auburn).  Mass.,  1  March,  1815.  There  he  remained
until  1828,  when  he  was  dismissed  at  his  own  re-

Juest,  to  become  the  editor  of  "  The  Spirit  of  the
ilgrims,"  a  monthly  publication  that  had  just
been  established  at  Boston  in  the  interest  of  ortho-
dox Congregationalism.  After  editing  five  volumes,
he  became,  in  September,  1882,  professor  of  syste-
matic theology  in  the  seminary  at  Bangor,  Me.  In
185(5  he  resiifued  to  become  president,  professor  of
ecclesiastical  history,  and  lecturer  on  pastoral
duties  in  the  same" institution.  In  1870  he  was
made  emeritus  professor,  retaining  the  presidency.
In  18J15  he  received  the  degree  of  I).  D.  from  Dart-
mouth college.  Dr.  Pond's  first  publication  was  a
review  of  a  sermon  against  "  Conference  Meetings,"
issued  by  Dr.  Aaron  Bancroft,  of  Worcester,  Mass.
(1818),  which  led  to  a  reply  and  rejoinder.  The
same  year  he  reviewed  "  Judson  on  Baptism."  He
published  a  volume  of  "Monthly  Concert  Lec-


tures" (1824);  a  "Memoir  of  President  Samnel
Davies  "  (1829);  "Memoir  of  Susanna  Anthony"
(1830):  "Murray's  Grammar  Improved"  (Wor-
cester, 1882):  "Memoir  of  Count  Zinzendorf"
(18:i9);  "Wickliffe  and  his  Times"  (Philadelphia,
1841);  "Morning  of  the  Reformation"  (1842);
"  No  Fellowship  with  Romanism  "  and  "  Review  of
Second  Advent  Publications "(1843);  "The Mather
Family"  1844);  "Young  Pastor's  Guide"  (Port-
land, 1844):  "The  World's  Salvation"  (1845);
"  Pope  and  Pagan  "  (1846) ; "  Probation  " ;  "  Sweden-
borgianism  Reviewed"  (1846;  new  ed.,  entitled
"  Swedenborgianism  Examined,"  New  York,  1861) ;
"  Plato,  His  Life,  Works,  Opinions,  and  Influence"
(1846) ;  "  Life  of  Increase  Mather  and  Sir  William
Phipps"  (1847);  "The  Church"  (1848;  2d  ed..
1860);  "Review  of  Bushnell's  'God  in  Christ'"
(1849);  "The  Ancient  Church"  (1851);  "Memoir
of  John  Knox  "  (1856);  "  The  Wreck  and  the  Res-
cue, a  Memoir  of  Rev.  Harrison  Fairfield  "  (1858) ;
"  Prize  Essay  on  Congregationalism  "  (1867) :  and
"Sketches  of  the  Theological  History  of  New  Eng-
land "  (1880).  His  college  lectures  have  been  nrint-
cd  under  the  titles  "  Pastoral  Theology  "(Anaover,
1860);  "Christian  Theology "  (Boston,  1868);  and
"  History  of  God's  Church ''  (1871).  He  edited  John
Norton's  "  Life  of  John  Cotton  "  (Boston,  1832).

POND,  Frederick  Eugene,  author,  b.  in  Pack-
waukee,  Marquette  co.,  Wis.,  8  April,  1856.  He
received  a  common-school  education,  and  early
turned  his  attention  to  sporting  matters.  He  wan
among  the  first  to  urge  the  organization  of  a  Na-
tional sportsman's  association,  and  in  1874  was  the
prime  mover  in  forming  the  Wisconsin  sportsman's
association  for  the  protection  of  fish  and  game
From  1881  till  1886  he  was  field-editor  of  the  New
York  "  Turf,  Field,  and  Farm,"  with  the  exception
of  six  months  in  1888,  when  he  was  associate  editor
of  the  "American  Field,"  of  Chicago,  111.,  and  he
is  now  (1888)  editor  of  "  Wildwood's  Magazine  "  in
the  latter  city.  On  31  Jan.,  1882,  he  nearly  lost  his
life  in  the  fire  that  destroyed  the  "World"  build-
ing in  New  York  city,  tinder  the  pen-name  of
"  Will  Wildwood  "  he  has  published  "  Handlxwk
for  Y^oung  Sportsmen"  (Milwaukee,  1876):  "Me-
moirs of  Eminent  Sportsmen  "  (New  York,  1878) ;
and  "  The  Gun  Trial  and  Field  Trial  Records  of
America"  (1885).  He  has  edited  Frank  Forester's
"  Fugitive  Sporting  Sketches  "  (Milwaukee,  1879);
the  same  author's  "  Sporting  Scenes  and  Charac-
ters" (Philadelphia,  1880);  and  Isaac  McLellan's
"Poems  of  the  Rod  and  Gun"  (New  York.  1886).
He  has  also  written  an  introduction  to  "  Frank
Forester's  Poems,"  edited  by  Morgan  Herbert  (1887).

POND,  Oeor^e  Edward,  journalist,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  11  March,  1837.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1858,  and  served  in  the  National  army
in  1862-'3.  From  early  in  1864  till  1868,  and  sub-
sequently, he  was  associate  editor  of  the  New  York
"  Army  and  Navy  Journal."  He  was  afterward  an
editorial  writer  on  the  New  York  "Times,"  and
edited  the  Philadelphia  "  Record "  from  1870  till
1877.  Since  the  latter  date  he  has  been  engaged
in  writing  for  the  press.  For  nearly  ten  years  he
wrote  the  "  Driftwood "  essays,  which  were  pub-
lished in  the  "  Galaxy  "  magazine  under  the  signa-
ture of  "Philip  Quilibet."  They  were  begun  in
May,  1868.  He  contributed  the  account  of  the  en-
gagement between  the  "  Monitor  "  and  the  "  Merri-
mac"  to  William  Swinton's  "Twelve  Decisive
Battles,"  and  also  wrote  "  The  Shenandoah  Valley
in  1864"  (New  York,  1883)  in  the  series  of  "  Cam-
paigns of  the  Civil  War."

POND,  Hamnel  William,  mi^ionarv,  b.  in
Washington,  Litchfield  co.,  Conn..  10  April,  1808.


POND


PONTGRAVfi


68


H«»  rt»ocivpd  a  common-school  pclucation,  and  in
1831  Ixvamoa  profossinp  Christian.  In  May.  1834,
in  advanco  of  all  other  ortraniz*Ml  effort  on  the  part
of  the  churfhes.  and  having  no  connection  with
any  wK'iety,  he  and  his  hn>ther,  Oidkox  IIoi.mster
(b.'in  June,  1810;  d.  in  .January,  1878),  entered  the
Dakota  country,  now  the  state  of  Minnesota,  and
l)cpin  to  laljor  as  missionaries  to  the  Indians  of
that  tril)e  and  the  pirrison  at  Fort  Snellinjr.  Re-
turning to  Connecticut,  Sjimuel  was  ordained  a
minister  of  the  Conjrrefrational  church,  7  March.
18;}?.  and  the  following  OcIoIkt  became  connected
with  the  American  lK)ard.  Ho  was  subsequently
stationed  in  Minnes<4a  at  Lake  Harriet.  Fort  Knell-
ing, Oak  (trove,  and  Prarieville.  Inking  relejised  from
the  service  of  the  board  in  September,  1854.  He
has  since  held  pastorates  in  various  parts  of  the
same  state,  where  he  still  (1888)  resides.  The  Pond
brothers  were  the  first  to  reduce  the  Dakota  lan-
guage to  writing.  They  also  collated  the  majority
of  the  words  contained  in  the  Dakota  dictionary
by  Kev.  Stephen  R.  Riggs  (o.  v.).  They  had  pre-
viously studuHl  Hebrew.  OreeK,  Ijatin,  French,  and
German.  He  has  published,  in  connection  with  his
brother.  "The  History  of  .Joseph  in  the  Language
of  the  Dakota,  or  Sioux.  Indians,  from  Genesis"
(Cincinnati.  18Ji9);  "Wowapi  Inonpa,  the  Second
Dakota  Reading  Book  "  (Boston,  1842) ;  and  other
translations  into  the  same  language.  He  is  also  the
author  of  "  Indian  Warfare  in  Minnesota"  in  the
"  Collections  "  of  the  historical  society  of  that  state.

POND,  William  Adams,  music-publisher,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  G  Oct.,  1824 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
12  Aug.,  1885.  He  was  educated  in  private  schools
in  New  York  city,  and  at  an  early  age  entered  his
father's  music  business.  He  became  well  known  as
a  publisher,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  presi-
dent of  the  United  States  music  publishers'  asso-
ciation. Col.  Pond  performed  some  military  ser-
vice as  an  oflicer  during  the  civil  war,  and  was
for  many  years  colonel  of  the  veteran  corps  of  the
7th  New  York  regiment.

PONS,  Frainjois  Raymond  Joseph  de,  Fi-ench
traveller,  b.  in  Souston,  Santo  Domingo,  in  1751 ;
d.  in  Paris  about  1812.  He  studietl  in  Paris,  be-
came a  lawyer,  and  was  electetl  member  of  the
Academic  society  of  sciences.  He  went  to  Caracas,
in  South  America,  where  he  acted  as  agent  of  the
French  government  till  the  revolution,  and  then  to
England,  where  he  spent  several  years  in  preparing
his  works  for  publication.  He  appears  to  have
paid  a  second  visit  to  America  during  this  time,
lie  returned  to  France  in  1804,  and.  although  he
was  not  employed  by  the  imperial  government,  his
advice  was  constantly  sought  in  matters  relating
to  the  colonial  possessions  of  Fmnce.  He  wrote
"  Ijcs  colonies  f ranijaises " ;  "Observations  sur  la
situation  politique  de  St.  Domingue"(1702);  "  Voy-
age k  la  partie  orientale  de  la  terre  ferine,  daiis
r.\m^rique  meridionale,  fait  pendant  les  annees
18()1, 1803. 1804  "  (1806) ;  and  "Perspective  des  rap-
ixirts  politifiues  et  comnierciaux  de  la  France  dans
les  deux  In«ies.  sous  la  dvnastie  regnante"  (1807).

PONTBRIAND,  Hchrv  Mary  Da  Broil  de
(pom-bre-ong).  Canadian  bishop,  b.  in  Vannes,
France,  in  17()!»:  d.  in  Montreal.  Canada,  in  1700.
He  was  consecrated  bishop  of  C^iU'l)ec  in  Paris  in
1741,  and  arrived  in  Canada  the  same  year,  with
several  priests.  After  entering  QucIhh?,  he  found
himself  engaged  in  a  lawsuit  with  the  nuns  of
the  general  hospital,  who  claimed  the  episcopal
palace  as  |iart  of  the  legm-y  that  Saint- Valicr,  sec-
ond bishop  of  Quel)ec,  had  left  them.  He  ob-
tained a  royal  de<^ree  confirming  the  possession  of
the  palace  to  the  bishops  of  (Quebec,  which  was


followed  by  another  prohibiting  religious  congre-
gations from  holding  huuls  in  mortmain,  and  in
1744  by  a  letter  fn)m  the  minister.  .Maurejuus.  en-
joining him  U)  suppH'ss  a  |N>rtion  of  the  holiday."
ol)served  by  the  Canadian  iH-ople;  but  he  paid  no
attention  to  either.  After  tlie  captun*  of  Queltec  l>v
the  P^nglish  in  1759.  he  regulatwl  the  aflfairs  of  his
church  as  far  a.s  possible,  appointed  a  vicar-general,
recommended  his  clergy  to  submit  to  the  new  order
of  things  and  observe  the  terms  of  the  capitulation,
and  then  retired  to  Montreal.  He  was  not  able  to
survive  the  grief  which  the  captun»  of  Quel)ec
caused  him.  and  died  after  a  few  davs'  illness.

PONTEVftS-<aEN,  Henry  Jean  Baptiste
(pont-vay).  Viscount  de.  commonly  known  as
Count  de  PoNXEvfes.  Fi-ench  naval' officer,  b.  in
Aix,  Provence,  in  1740;  d.  in  Fort  Royal.  Martin-
ique#23  July,  175K).  He  entere<l  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman in  1755,  and  served  in  Canada  during  the
war  of  1756-'6JJ.  He  was  attache<l  afterward  to
the  station  of  Martinique,  and  in  1770  employed  to
make  soundings  along  the  Newfoundland  banks
and  the  coast  of  St.  Pierre  and  Mi(jiieIon  islands,
preparing  charts  of  those  regions.  When  France
took  part  in  the  war  for  American  independence
he  was  on  duty  at  Brest,  but,  requesting  to  be  em-
ployed in  more  active  service,  he  was  appointed  to
the  command  of  a  division,  with  which  he  de-
stroyed the  English  establishments  and  forts  on
the  coast  of  Guinea  t)etwcen  the  river  Gambia  and
Sierra  Leone.  Upon  his  return  he  was  promoted
"chef  d'escadre,"  and  charged  with  escorting  a
convoy  of  eighty  sail  to  the  United  States.  After-
ward he  participated  in  the  engagements  with  Lord
Byron,  assisted  Bouille  at  the  ca|)ture  of  Tobago,
was  with  De  Grasse  at  Yorktown  in  October,  1781,
and  served  under  De  Vaudreuilles  till  the  con-
clusion of  the  campaign.  He  commanded  the  sta-
tion of  the  Leeward  islands  in  1784-'90.  became  in
January.  1790.  governor  pro  tempore  of  Martin-
ique, and  during  his  short  administration  not  only
promoted  the  best  interests  of  the  colony,  but  ap-
peased all'the  troubles  that  had  lx»en  provoke<l  by
the  French  revolution,  leaving  Martinique  at  his
death  in  a  state  of  perfect  tranquillity,  while  all  the
other  French  possessions  in  the  West  Indies  were
in  insurrection.  By  public  subscription  his  statue
was  erected  in  one  of  the  scjuares  of  Fort  Roval.

PONTGRAVfi,  Sieurde(pong-grali-vay),  JVnch
sailor,  b.  in  St.  Malo.  France,  in  the  latter  half  ot
the  16th  century;  d.  there  probably  in  the  first  half
of  the  17th.  He  was  one  of  the  most  enterprising
merchants  in  St.  Malo,  and  a  skilful  navigator.
He  had  made  several  voyages  to  Tadousac.  C'ana-
da.  and  believed  that  the  development  of  the  fur-
trade  would  lead  to  great  wealth,  especially  if  it
were  under  the  control  of  a  single  jxTson.  With
this  object  he  proposed  to  Chauvin,  a  sea-captain,
to  obtain  exclusive  privileges  from  the  court  in  con-
nection with  this  branch  of  commerce,  and.  on  the
latter's  success.  Pontgrave  equipped  several  vessels
and  sailed  with  him  for  Canada  in  1599.  He  wished
to  form  a  settlement  at  Three  Rivers,  but,  Chauvin
objecting,  he  retunied  to  France  in  1000.  In  1603
the  king  granted  him  lettei*s-patent  to  continue  his
discf)veries  in  Canada  and  establish  colonies,  and
the  merchants  of  Rouen  fitted  out  an  exjHHlition
under  his  direction.  He  sailed  on  15  March,  Sam-
uel Champlain  lieing  on  Ixiard  one  of  his  ships,
and  he  accompanied  Champlain  in  his  voyage  up
St.  Ijawrence  river.  He  s»iile«l  again  to  Canada  the
same  year,  commanding  a  ship  under  De  Monts,
and  later  was  appointed  to.  transfer  the  latter  colo-
ny to  Port  Royal  in  Acadia.  Pontgrav^  devoted
hmiself  to  the  welfare  of  the  new  settlement,  and


64


PONTIAC


POOK


did  much  to  render  it  successful,  thouch  he  was
displaced  in  his  office.  He  returned  to  h  ranee,  but
was  sent  out  in  1008  to  establish  a  tradinij-post  at
Tadousiac  in  conjunction  with  Chaniplain.  He
retunuHl  with  the  latter  in  Septeml)er,  1609,  and
two  vess<'ls  were  fittetl  out,  one  of  which  was  con-
fided to  Pontjfrave,  who  reached  Canada  in  April.
He  was  apiin  in  France  early  in  1613,  and  com-
manded the  vessel  in  which  Champlain  sailed  from
France  in  March.  After  reaching  Montreal  he
separatwl  from  the  latter,  and  descended  to  Quebec.
He  is  sjiitl  by  Charlevoix  to  have  returne<l  to
France  in  the  following  year,  but  this  is  doubtful.
He  had  charge  of  the  interests  of  the  Sieur  de  Caen
for  some  time  in  Quebec,  but  ill  health  obliged  him
to  go  to  France  in  1623.  "  This  was  a  real  loss  to
New  France,"  says  Charlevoix,  "  which  owes  much
to  him."  He  wits  in  Quebec  in  1628  in  the  interest
of  De  Monts  and  his  society,  and  counselled  resist-
ance to  the  English.

PONTIAC,  chief  of  the  Ottawas,  b.  on  Ottawa
river  about  1720;  d.  in  Cahokia,  111.,  in  1769.  He
was  the  son  of  an  Ojibway  woman,  and,  as  the  Ot-
tawas were  in  alliance  with  the  Ojiljways  and  Pot-
tawattamies,  he  became  the  principal  chief  of  the
three  triU>s.  In  1746,  with  his  warriors,  he  de-
fended the  French  at  Detroit  against  an  attack  by
s<5me  of  the  northern  tribes,  and  in  1755  he  is  be-
lieved to  have  led  the  Ottawas  at  Braddock's  de-
feat. After  the  surrender  of  Quebec,  Maj.  Robert
Rogers,  of  New  Hampshire,  was  sent  to  take  pos-
session of  the  western  forts,  under  the  treaty  of
Paris,  but  in  Novemlx?r,  1760,  while  encamped  at
the  place  where  the  city  of  Cleveland  now  stands,
he  was  visited  by  Pontiac,  who  objected  to  his  fur-
ther invasion  of  the  territory.  Finding,  however,
that  the  French  hjul  been  driven  from  Canada,  he
acquiesced  in  the  surrender  of  Detroit,  and  per-
suaded 400  Detroit  Indians,  who  were  lying  in  am-
bush, to  relinquish  their  design  of  cutting  off  the
English.  While  this  action  was  doubtless  in  good
faith,  still  he  hated  the  English  and  soon  began  to
plan  their  extermination.  In  1762  he  sent  messen-
gers with  a  red-stained  tomahawk  and  a  wampum
war-belt,  who  visited  everj^  tribe  between  the  Otta-
wa and  the  lower  Mississippi,  all  of  whom  joined
in  the  conspiracy  The  end  of  May  was  deter-
mined upon  as  the  time  when  each  trite  was  to
dispose  of  the  garrison  of  the  nearest  fort,  and
then  ali  were  to  attack  the  settlements.  A  great
council  was  held  near  Detroit  on  27  April,  1763,
when  Pontiac  delivered  an  oration,  in  which  the
wrongs  and  indignities  that  the  Indians  had  suf-
fered at  the  hands  of  the  English  were  recounted,
and  their  own  extermination  was  prophesied.  He
also  told  them  of  a  tradition,  which  he  could  hard-
ly have  invented,  that  a  Delaware  Indian  had  been
admitted  into  the  presence  of  the  Great  Spirit,  who
told  him  his  race  must  return  to  the  customs  and
weapons  of  their  ancestors,  throw  away  the  imple-
ments they  hatl  acquired  from  the  white  man,  ab-
stain from  whiskey,  and  take  up  the  hatchet
against  the  English,  "  these  dogs  dressed  in  red,
who  have  come  to  rob  you  of  your  hunting-grounds
and  drive  away  the  game."  ^rhe  taking  of  Detroit
was  to  lie  his  special  task,  and  the  7th  of  May  was
appointed  for  the  attack  ;  but  the  plot  was  disclosed
to  the  commander  of  the  post  by  an  Indian  girl,
and  in  consec|uence  Pontiac  found  the  garrison
prepared.  Foiled  in  his  original  intention,  on  12
May  he  surrounded  Detroit  with  his  Indians;  but
he  was  unable  to  keep  a  close  siege,  and  the  garri-
son received  food  from  the  Canadian  settlers.  The
latter  likewise  supj)lied  the  Indians,  in  return  for
which  they  received  promissory  notes  drawn  on


birch-bark  and  signed  with  the  figure  of  an  otter,
all  of  which  it  is  said  were  subsequently  redeemed.
Supplies  and  re-enforcements  were  sent  to  Detroit
by  way  of  Lake  Erie,  in  schooners  ;  but  these  were
captured  by  the  Indians,  who  compelled  the  pris-
oners to  row  them  to  Detroit  in  ho{)e  of  taking  the
garrison  by  stratagem,  but  the  Indians,  concealed
in  the  bottom  of  the  boat,  were  discovered  before  a
landing  could  be  effected.  Subsequently  another
schooner,  filled  with  supplies  and  ammunition,
succeeded  in  reaching  the  fort,  and  this  vessel  the
Indians  repeatedly  tried  to  destroy  by  means  of
fire-rafts.  The  English  now  believed  themselves
sufficiently  strong  to  make  an  attack  upon  the  In-
dian camp,  and  250  men,  on  the  night  of  31  July,
set  out  for  that  purpose ;  but  Pontiac  had  been  ad-
vised of  this  intention  by  the  Canadians,  and,  wait-
ing until  the  English  had  advanced  sufficiently,
opened  fire  on  them  from  all  sides.  In  this  fight,
which  is  known  as  that  of  Bloody  Bridge,  59  of  the
English  were  killed  or  wounded.  A  desultory
warfare  continued  until  12  Oct.,  when  the  siege
was  raised  and  Pontiac  retired  into  the  country
that  borders  Maumee  river,  where  he  vainly  en-
deavored to  organize  another  movement.  Although
Pontiac  failed  in  the  most  important  action  of  the
conspiracy,  still  Fort  Sanduslcy,  Fort  St.  Joseph,
Fort  Miami,  Port  Ouatanon,  Mackinaw,  Presque
Isle,  Fort  Le  Boeuf.  and  Fort  Venango  were  taken
and  their  garrisons  were  massacred,  while  unsuc-
cessful attacks  were  made  elsewhere.  The  English
soon  sent  troops  against  the  Indians,  and  succeeded
in  pacifying  most  of  the  tribes,  so  that,  during  the
summer  of  1766,  a  meeting  of  Indian  chiefs,  includ-
ing Pontiac,  was  held  in  Oswego,  where  a  treaty
was  concluded  with  Sir  William  Johnson.  Al-
though Pontiac's  conspiracy  failed  in  its  grand  ob-
ject, still  it  had  resulted  in  the  capture  and  de-
struction of  eight  out  of  the  twelve  fortified  posts
that  were  attacked,  generally  by  the  massacre  of
their  garrisons,  it  had  destroyed  several  costly
English  expeditions,  and  had  carried  terror  and
desolation  into  some  of  the  most  fertile  valleys  on
the  frontiers  of  civilization.  In  1769  a  Kaskaskia
Indian,  being  bribed  with  a  barrel  of  liquor  and
promise  of  additional  reward,  followed  Pontiac
into  the  forest  and  there  murdered  him.  See  Fran-
cis Parkman's  "  History  of  the  Conspiracy  of  Pontiac
and  the  War  of  the  North  American  Tribes  against
the  English  Colonies  after  the  Conquest  of  Can-
ada" (Boston,  1851),  also  Franklin  B.  Hough's
"  Diary  of  the  Siege  of  Detroit  in  the  W^ar  with
Pontiac"  (Albany,  1860).

POOK,  Samuel  Moore,  naval  constructor,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  15  Aug.,  1804;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
2  Dec,  1878.  He  was  educated  in  the  Boston  pub-
lic schools,  and  from  1841  till  his  retirement,  15
Aug.,  1866,  was  naval  constructor  in  the  U.  S.  navy.
Among  other  vessels,  he  built  the  sloops-of-war
"Preble"  and  ''Saratoga,"  the  frigates  "Congress"
and  "  Franklin,"  and  the  steamers  "  Merrimack  "
and  "Princeton."  He  was  also  active  in  fitting
out  the  fleet  of  Admiral  Dupont  and  others  during
the  civil  war.  Mr.  Podk  was  tlie  inventor  of  nu-
merous devices  connected  with  his  profession,  and
wrote  "A  Method  of  comparing  the  Lines,  and
Draughting  Vessels  propelled  by  Sail  or  Steam,"
with  diagrams  (New  York,  1866). — His  son,  Samnel
Hartt,  naval  constructor,  b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  17
Jan.,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Portsmouth  academy,
N.  H.,  in  1842,  became  a  naval  architect,  and  on  17
May,  1866,  was  appointed  constructor  in  the  U.  S.
navy.  He  has  built  many  merchant  ships,  includ-
ing the  well-known  clip{)er  "  Red  Jacket."  When
the  introduction  of  iron-clad  vessels  into  the  navy


POOL


POOR


e»


was  proposed  he  was  one  of  the  party  that  railed  on
Se<'.  (fitleon  Welles  to  advocate  them,  and  he  was
nmih'  sii|K'rintfndent  of  the  first  that  was  built.

POOI>,  John,  senator  b.  in  Pas4{Uotank  c-ountv,
N.  C,  1«  June,  1826;  d.  in  Washington,  I).  C,  18
Aug.,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  North  Carolina  in  1847.  and  adniitteil  to  the
bar  in  the  ^sanle  vear.  He  was  chosen  to  the  state
senate  in  18r>«  and  1858,  and  in  1800  was  the  Whig
candidate  for  governor  of  the  state.  After  being
returned  to  the  state  senate  in  1864  as  a  peace  can-
didate, and  again  in  186.'),  he  was  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  of  the  latter  year,
and  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  but  not  ad-
mitte<l.  In  1808  he  was  re-elected,  and  he  then
served  till  the  extdration  of  his  term  in  1873.

POOLE,  Fitch,  journalist,  b.  in  Danvers,  Mass.,
13  June.  1803;  d.  in  Peabody,  Mass.,  10  Aug.,
1873.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
was  connected  with  the  press  for  many  years,  and
edited  the  Danvers  "  Wizard  "  from  its  establish-
ment in  1859  till  1868.  Mr.  Poole  was  the  founder
of  the  Mechanics'  institute  library,  which  afterward
be<-«me  the  Peabody  institute,  and  he  was  its  li-
brarian from  1856  till  his  death.  He  was  in  the
legislature  in  1841-'2,  and  held  several  local  offices.
He  was  the  author  of  numerous  .satirical  ballads
that  attained  popularity,  the  best  known  of  which
was  "  Giles  Corev's  Dream."

POOLE,  William  Frederick,  librarian,  b.  in
Salem.  Mass.,  24  Dec.,  1821.  He  is  descended  in
the  eighth  generation  from  John  Poole,  who  came
from  Reading,  England,  was  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
in  1632,  and  became
the  chief  proprietor
of  Reading,  Mass.,  in
1635.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1849,
and  while  in  college
was  librarian  of  the
"Brothers  in  Unity"
literary  society,  and
prepared  an  index  to
periodical  literature
containing  154  pages,
which  was  published
in  1848.  During  his
senior  year  he  pre-
pared a  new  edition  of
021  pages,  which  was
published  in  1853,  and
followed  in  1882  by
a  third  edition  of  1,469  pages,  prepared  with  the
co-operation  of  the  American  librarv  association
and  the  Library  association  of  the  United  King-
dom. He  was  assistant  librarian  of  the  Boston
athena?um  in  1851,  and  in  1852  became  librarian  of
the  Boston  mercantile  library,  where  he  remained
four  years,  and  printed  a  dictionary  catalogue  of  the
library  on  the  "  title-a-line "  principle,  which  has
since  been  followed  widely.  From  1856  till  1869
he  was  librarian  of  the  Boston  athenaeum.  He  or-
ganized the  Bronson  library.  Waterbury.  Conn.,  in
1869,  the  Athena'um  library  at  St.  Johnsburv,  Vt.,"
and  did  similar  work  at  Kewton  and  East  flamj)-
ton,  Mass..  and  in  the  library  of  the  U.  S.  naval
academy  at  Anna]X)lis.  He  began,  in  October.  1869,
as  librarian,  the  organization  of  the  public  library
of  Cincinnati,  and  in  Januar}',  1874,  t  he  organizat  ion
of  the  Chicago  public  library.  lie  resigned  this
position  in  August,  1887,  and  is  now  (1888)  en-
gaged in  the  organization  of  the  library  in  Chi-
cago founded  by  Walter  L.  NewlK-rry.  Mr.  Poole
has  devoted  much  attention  to  the  study  of  Ameri-
can history,  and  is  president  of  the  American  his-

VOL.  T. — 5


/^?779^


torical  association,  and  a  member  of  many  other
similar  societies.  He  was  president  from  1885  till
1887  of  the  American  library  aswx-iation,  and  vice-
president  of  the  international  conference  of  libra-
rians in  Ijondon  in  1877.  He  has  published  many
pai)ers  on  library  and  historical  topics,  including
the  construction  of  buildings  and  the  or^nization
and  management  of  public  libraries.  These  in-
clude "Cotton  Mather  and  Salem  Witchcraft."  the
chapter  on  "  Witchcraft"  in  the  "'Memorial  History
of  Boston,"  "  The  I\)pham  Colony,"  "  The  Ordi-
nance of  1787,"  and  "Anti-Slavery  Opinions  Ije-
fore  1800."  He  edited  "  The  Owl,"  a  literary  month-
ly, in  1874-'5  in  Chicago,  and  since  1880  has  been
a  con.stant  contributor  to  "  The  Dial."

POOLEY,  JameH  Henry,  physician,  b.  in  Cha-
teris,  Cambridgeshire,  England,  17  Nov.,  1839.  He
was  brought  to  this  countrv  in  early  childhood,
and  graduated  at  the  New  Vork  college  of  phy-
sicians and  surgeons  in  1860.  After  service  as  an
assistant  surgeon  in  the  regular  army  in  1861-'3  he
practised  in  Yonkers,  N.  \.,  till  1875,  when  he  re-
moved to  Columbus,  Ohio.  He  is  a  member  of
many  professional  societies,  was  a  delegate  to  the
International  medical  congress  of  1876,  and  pro-
fessor of  surgery  in  Starling  medical  college,  Onio,
from  1875  till  1880.  Since  1883  he  has  held  the
chair  of  surgery  in  Toledo  medical  college.  He
has  edited  the  "Ohio  Medical  and  Surgical  Jour-
nal "  since  1876,  and  has  been  a  voluminous  con-
tributor to  surgical  literature.  Several  of  his  arti-
cles have  been  reprinted  in  pamphlet-form,  includ-
ing "  Three  Cases  of  Imperforate  Anus  "  (1870) :
"Remarks  on  the  Surgery  of  Childhood"  (1872);
and  "Gastrotomy  and  Gastrostomy"  (1875).

POOR,  Charles  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  11  June,  1808;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  5  Nov.,  1882.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a
midshipman,  1  March,  1825,  and  was  promoted
lieutenant,  22  Dec,  1835,  commander,  14  Sept.,
1855,  captain,  16  July,  1862,  and  commodore,  2
Jan.,  1863.  After  serving  with  dififerent  squadrons,
and  in  the  Washington  and  Norfolk  navy-yards,
he  was  given  command  of  the  "St.  Louis,  of  the
home  squadron,  in  1860-'l,  and  in  the  latter  year
had  charge  of  an  expedition  that  was  sent  to  re-
enforce  Port  Pickens.  During  1861-'2  he  was  in
command  of  the  frigate  "  Roanoke,"  of  the  North
Atlantic  blockading  squadron.  He  was  ordered  to
use  the  steamer  "Illinois"  as  a  ram  against  the
"  Merrimac,"  but  did  not  have  an  opportunity  to
test  its  strength.  He  subsequently  passed  the
Confederate  batteries  under  fire  in  the  "  Roanoke,"
while  proceeding  from  Hampton  Roads  toward  New-
port News,  to  assist  the  "Congress"  and  "Cumber-
land." From  1863  till  1865  he  was  in  command  of
the  sloop-of-war  "  Saranac,"  of  the  Pacific  Siiuadron,
and  comj>elled  the  authorities  at  Aspinwall  to  re-
lease a  U.  S.  mail-steamer  that  had  been  detained
there  until  she  should  pay  certain  illegal  dues.  He
also  obliged  the  authorities  at  Rio  Hacha,  New
Granada,  to  hoist  and  salute  the  American  flag
after  it  had  l)een  insulted.  In  1866-*8  he  was  in
charge  of  the  naval  station  at  Mound  City,  111.,  and
he  was  made  rear-atlmiral,  20  Sept..  1868.  After
serving  as  commandant  of  the  Washington  navy-
yard  in  1869,  and  commanding  the  North  Atlantic
squadron  in  1869-70.  he  was  retired  on  9  June,
1870.  In  1871-2  he  was  a  member  of  the  retiring-
board.  Admiral  Poor  saw  twenty-three  years  and
six  months  of  sea-service,  and  was  employed  four-
teen years  and  five  months  in  shore  duty.

POOR,  Daniel,  missionary,  b.  in  Danvers,  Essex
CO.,  Mass.,  27  June,  1789  ;  d.'in  Manepy,  Ceylon,  3
Feb.,  1855. He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in


POOR


POORE


1811,  and  »t  Andover  theolopcal  seminary  in  1814.
He  wa-s  ordained  in  the  Presbyterian  church  at
Newburvfwrt.  Mjiss..  in  June,  1815,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing ("H'tolwr  sailed  with  his  wife  and  four  other
missionaries  for  t'eylon,  where  he  arrived  in  March,
181 K,  and  organized  a  mission-school.  He  went
to  Matura,  southern  India,  in  18:J«,  organized  thirty-
seven  M'hools.  whii'h  he  visited  in  succession,  and
frequent Iv  addresse<l  fmni  horse-biu-k  crowds  of
adult  natives.  Imi)aire<l  health  compelled  his  re-
turn to  the  UnitcHl  States  in  1849,  where  he  spent
two  years  in  addressing  meetings  on  missionary
work.  Returning  to  Ceylon  in  1851,  he  settled  at
Manepy,  and  lal)ored  incessantly  until  an  epidemic
of  cholera  terminated  his  labors.  Dr.  Poor  took
high  rank  as  a  scholar,  and  he  was  peculiarly  quali-
fied to  lalwr  among  the  religious  sects  of  Jndiaand
Ceylon.  He  was  given  the  degree  of  D.  D.  by
Dartmouth  in  1835.  He  published  numerous  re-
ligious, temperance,  and  other  tnicts  in  the  Tamil
and  English  languages,  and  was  a  contributor  to
the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra." — His  son.  Daniel  War-
ren, clergyman,  b.  in  Tillipally,  Ceylon,  21  Aug.,
1818,  was  grmiuated  at  Amherst  in  1837,  and  at
Andover  tneological  seminary  in  1842.  He  was
pastor  of  Presbyterian  churches  at  Fairhaven,
Mass.,  in  184;V8.  Newark,  N.  J.,  in  1849-'69,  and
Oakland,  Cal.,  in  1869-'72.  In  1871  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  and  church
government  in  San  Francisco  theological  seminary,
and  he  held  the  chair  until  1876.  when  he  became
corresponding  secretary  of  the  Presbyterian  board
of  education  at  Philadelphia.  Dr.  Poor  organized
the  church  of  which  he  was  pastor  in  Newark,
and  was  also  instrumental  in  building  up  three
German  churches  within  the  bounds  of  his  presby-
tery, and  in  organizing  one  in  Philadelphia.  lie
was  also  active  in  founding  the  German  theologi-
cal school  at  Bloomfield,  N.  J.  He  received  the
degree  of  I).  D.  from  Princeton  in  1857.  Besides
occasional  sermons  and  pamphlets,  he  has  published
"  Select  Discourses  from  the  French  and  German,"
with  Rev.  Henry  C.  Fish  (New  York,  1858),  and,
with  Rev.  Conway  P.  Wing,  "  The  Epistles  to  the
Corinthians,"  from  the  German  of  Lange  (1868).

POOR,  Enoch,  soldier,  b.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  21
June,  1736 ;  d.  near  Ilackensack,  N.  J.,  8  Sept.,
1780.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  place,  and
removing  to Exeter,  N.  H.,  engaged  in  business

there  until  the  bat-
tle of  Lexington,
when  the  New
Hampshire  assem-
bly resolved  to
raise  2,000  men.
Three  regiments
were  formed,  and
the  command  of
one  of  them  was
given  to  Poor.  Af-
ter the  evacuation
of  Boston  he  was
sent  to  New  York,
and  was  afterward
ordered  to  join  the
disastrous  Cana-
dian expedition
with  his  regiment.
Ontheretreatfrom
Canada  the  Americans  concentrated  near  Crown
Point,  and  Co\.  Pof)r  was  actively  occupied  in
strengthening  the  defences  of  that  post  until  a
council  of  general  officers  advised  its  evacuation,
which  was  accordingly  ordered  by  Gen.  Philip
Schuyler. Against  this  step  twenty-one  of  the


^ O'LCf-C^ c/c7-C


^^T^^


field-officers,  headed  by  Poor,  John  Stark,  and
William  Maxwell,  sent  in  a  written  remonstrance.
Gen.  Washington,  on  being  appealed  to,  while  re-
fusing to  overrule  Gen.  Schuyler's  action,  concurred
distinctly  in  the  views  of  the  remonstrants  as  to
the  impolicy  of  the  measure.  On  21  Feb..  1777,
Poor  was  commissioned  brigadier-general,  and  he
held  a  command  in  the  campaign  against  Bur-
goyne.  In  the  hard-fought  but  indecisive  engage-
ment at  Stillwater.  Gen.  Poor's  brigade  sustained
more  than  two  thirds  of  the  whole  American  loss
in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.  At  the  battle  of
Saratoga,  Poor  led  the  attack.  The  vigor  and  gal-
lantry of  the  charge,  supported  by  an  adroit  and
furious  onslaught  from  Col.  Daniel  Morgan,  could
not  be  resisted,  and  the  British  line  was  broken.
After  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne,  Poor  joined
Washington  in  Pennsylvania,  and  subsequently
shared  in  the  hardships  and  sufferings  of  the  army
at  Valley  Forge.  During  the  dreary  winter  that
was  spent  by  the  Revolutionarj^  army  in  that  en-
campment, no  officer  exerted  himself  with  gi-eater
earnestness  to  obtain  relief.  He  wrote  urgently
to  the  legislature  of  New  Hampshire:  " I  am  every
day,"  he  said,  referring  to  his  men,  "beholding
their  sufferings,  and  am  every  morning  awakened
by  the  lamentable  tale  of  their  distresses.  ...  If
they  desert,  how  can  I  punish  them,  when  they
plead  in  justification  that  the  contract  on  your
part  is  broken  ?  "  Gen.  Poor  was  among  the  first  to
set  out  with  his  brigade  in  pursuit  of  the  British
across  New  Jersey  in  the  summer  of  1778,  and
fought  gallantly  under  Lafayette  at  the  battle  of
Monmouth.  In  1779  he  commanded  the  second
or  New  Hampshire  brigade,  in  the  expedition  of
Gen.  John  Sullivan  against  the  Indians  of  the  Six
Nations.  When,  in  August,  1780,  a  corps  of  light
infantry  was  formed  composed  of  two  brigades,  the
command  of  one  of  them  was  given,  at  the  request
of  Lafayette,  to  Gen.  Poor ;  but  he  survived  his  ap-

E ointment  only  a  few  weeks,  being  stricken  down
y  fever.  In  announcing  his  death,  Gen.  Washing-
ton declared  him  to  be  '•  an  officer  of  distinguished
merit,  who,  as  a  citizen  and  a  soldier,  had  every
claim  to  the  esteem  of  his  country."  In  1824,  when
Lafayette  visited  New  Hampshire,  at  a  banquet  in
his  honor,  he  was  called  upon  by  a  gray-haired
veteran  for  a  sentiment.  Lifting  his  glass  to  his
lips,  and  after  a  few  explanatory  words,  he  gave  :
"Light-infantry  Poor  and  Yorktown  Scammel."
He  had  seen  the  latter  mortally  wounded  at  the
battle  of  Yorktown.  Both  men  were  New  Eng-
enders. Gen.  Poor  was  buried  in  Hackensack,
where  a  fine  monument  marks  his  grave.

POOR,  John  Alfred,  journalist,  b.  in  Andover,
Oxford  CO..  Me.,  8  Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,
5  Sept.,  1871.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  practised  at  Bangor,  but  afterward  re-
moved to  Portland.  In  the  latter  city  he  was  for
several  years  editor  of  the  "  State  of  Maine,"  a
daily  paper,  and  he  subsequently  served  in  the
legislature.  He  was  the  first  active  promoter  of
the  present  railroad  system  of  his  native  state,
originated  the  European  and  North  American  line,
and  was  president  of  tKe  proposed  Portland,  Rut-
land and  Oswego  road.  He  was  an  active  member
of  the  Maine  historical  society,  under  whose  au-
spices he  published  "  A  Vindication  of  the  Claims
of  Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges  as  the  Founder  of  English
Colonization  in  America  "  (New  York,  1862).  He
also  delivered  the  address  at  the  commemoration,
on  15  Aug.,  1853,  of  the  founding  of  the  Popham
colony  at  the  mouth  of  the  Kennebec  (1863).

POORE,  Benjamin  Perley,  ioumalist,  b.  near
Newburyport,  Mass.,  2  Nov.,  1820 ;  d.'in  Washing-


POPE


popf:


m


ton,  D,  ('.,  !W)  Mnv,  1887.  He  wa«  di««cende<l  from
John  P<H>r»>,  an  hlnfjlish  yeoman,  wlu)  came  to  this
coiintrv  and,  in  UVW,  niir(.-ha>e<I  "hxlian  Hill
Farm,''  the  homest*'a<l,  wnich  still  rtMnains  in  the
family.  When  Perley  vrns  eleven  years  of  age  he
wa.*>  taken  by  his  father  to  England,  and  there  saw
Sir  Waher  Jv-ott,  Ijafayette.  and  other  notable  neo-
ple.  I^avinp  school  after  his  return,  he  servea  an
apprenticeship  in  a  printiiijr-oflflce  at  Worc-ester,
Mass.,  and  had  edited  the  Athens,  (ia..  "Southern
Whig,"  which  his  father  purchased  for  him,  for  two
years  before  he  was  twenty.  In  1841  he"  visitetl
Europe  again  as  attach(^>  of  the  American  legation
at  IJnissels,  remaining  abroad  until  1848.  During
this  ix'rio<l  ho  actcnl  in  1844-'8  as  the  historical
agent  of  Mii.'vsachusetts  in  France,  in  which  capacity
ho  filled  ten  folio  volumes  with  copies  of  im{X)rt«nt
documents,  bearing  date  1493-1780.  illustrating
them  by  engraved  maps  and  water-color  sketches.
Ho  was  also  the  foreign  correspondent  of  the  Bos-
ton "  Atlas"  during  his  entire  stay  abroad.  After
editing  the  Bosttm  "Bee"  and  "Sunday  Sentinel,"
Mr.  Poore  finally  entered  in  1854  upon  his  life-
work,  that  of  Washington  correspondent.  His  let-
ters to  the  Boston  "Journal "  over  the  signature  of
♦*  Perley,"  and  to  other  papers,  gained  him  a
national  reputation  by  their  trustworthy  character.
For  several  years  he  also  served  as  clerk  of  the
committee  of  the  U.  S.  senate  on  printing  records.
He  was  interested  in  military  matters,  had  studied
tactics,  and  during  his  editorial  career  in  Boston
held  several  staff  appointments.  About  the  same
time  he  organized  a  oattalidn  of  riflemen  at  New-
bury that  formed  the  nucleus  of  a  company  in  the
8th  Massachusetts  volunteers,  of  which  organiza-
tion Mr.  Poore  served  as  major  for  a  short  time
during  the  civil  war.  He  was  also  in  1874  com-
mander of  the  Ancient  and  honorable  artillery
company  of  Boston,  and  had  made  a  collection  of
materials  for  its  projected  history.  Maj.  Poore's
vacations  were  spent  at  Indian  Hill,  where  the
farm-house  contamed  sixt^'  rooms  filletl  with  his-
torical material,  of  which  its  owner  was  an  indus-
trious collector.  During  thirty  years  of  Washing-
ton life  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  many  emi-
nent men,  and  his  fund  of  reminiscences  was  large
and  entertaining.  He  told  good  stories,  spoke  well
after  dinner,  and  was  much  admired  in  society.
Among  his  publications  were  "  Campaign  Life  of
Gen.  Zachary  Taylor,"  of  which  800,000  copies
were  circulated,  and  "Rise  and  Fall  of  Louis
Philippe  "  (lioston,  1848) ;  "  Early  Life  of  Napoleon
Bonapirte"  (1851);  "Agricultural  Historv  of  Es-
sex County,  Mass.";  "The  Conspiracy  T^rial  for
the  Murder  of  Abraham  Lincoln  "  (1^65) ;  "Fed-
eral and  State  Charters"  (2  vols.,  1877};  "The
Political  Register  and  Congressional  Directory"
(1878) ;  "  Life  of  Bumside  "  (1882) ;  and  "  Perlev's
Reminiscences  of  Sixty  Years  in  the  National  Me-
tropolis" (Philadelphia,  1886).  As  secretary  of
the  U.  S.  agricultural  society,  he  became  the  editor
of  its  "  Journal "  in  1857.  He  began  to  edit  the
Congressional  directory  in  1867,  supervised  the
indices  to  the  "  ( 'ongressional  Record,"  and  brought
out  the  annual  abridgment  of  the  public  docu-
ments of  the  United  States  for  many  years.  By
order  of  congress  he  compiled  "  A  r)escriptiv'e
Catalogiie  of  the  Government  Publications  of  the
United  SUtes,  1774-1881"  (WashiniBcton,  1885),
and  also  made  a  compilation  of  the  various  treaties
negotiated  by  the  United  States  government  with
different  countries.

POPE,  Albert  Augustas,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  20  .May,  184a.  He  was  educated  at
public  schools,  but  even  as  a  boy  was  compelled  to


earn  his  own  living.  In  1882  he  was  commissioned
2d  lieutenant  in  the  :)5th  Masraohusetts  regiment,
with  which  he  continued  until  the  close  of  tlie  war.
when  he  was  must^-nnl  out  with  the  brevet  rank  of
lieutenant-colonel.  S<K)n  afterward  he  became  head
of  a  shoe-finding  business.  In  1877  he  began  to
take  an  interest  in  Iticycles,  and  during  that  year
onlered  eight  from  Manchester,  England.  Subse-
quently he  became  a<'tiv('lv  cngaginl  in  their  manu-
facture, and  it  is  chiefly  due  to  his  enterprise  that
most  of  the  improvements  of  the  bicycle  in  this
country  have  been  brought  about.  Cdl.  Pf){K'  was
instrumental  in  founding  "  Outing," a  journal  that
for  several  years  was  published  by  him. —  His  twin
sisters, Tmily  Frances  and  Caroline  AurniiU,
physicians,  b,  in  Boston,  Mass.,  18  Feb..  1846.  were

Srtuluated  at  the  BrfHikline  high-school,  and  at  the
ew  England  medical  college  in  1870.  .Subse-
quently they  devotetl  some  time  to  hospital  study
in  London  and  Paris,  and  on  their  return  l)ecain*e
attached  to  the  New  England  hospital  for  women
and  children.  In  1873  the^  established  themselves
in  general  practice,  in  which  they  have  l)een  suc-
cessful. Both  are  members  of  tne  New  England
hospital  medical  society,  and  of  the  Ma.ssachusetts
medical  society,  and,  with  Emily  L.  Call,  they  pre-
pared "The  Practice  of  Medicine  in  the  Cnitcd
States  "  (Boston,  1881).

POPE,  Charles  Alexander,  surgeon,  b.  in
Huntsville,  Ala..  15  March,  1H18;  d.  in  I»aris,  Mon-
roe CO.,  Mo.,  6  July,  1870.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Alabama,  and  studied  medicine  at
Cincinnati  medical  college  and  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1839.
He  spent  the  next  two  years  in  study  in  France
and  (iermany,  and  on  his  return  began  to  practise
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  soon  took  hign  rank.
He  became  professor  of  anatomy,  and  afterward  of
surgery,  in  .St.  Louis  university,  aided  in  organiz-
ing St.  Louis  medical  college,  and  wa.s  president  of
the  American  medical  association  in  1853.  He  also
took  an  active  part  in  promoting  the  cause  of  edu-
cation generally.  Soon  after  the  close  of  the  civil
war  he  gave  up  practice  and  retired  to  Paris,  Mo.,
where  he  resided  until  his  death.

POPE,  Franklin  Leonard,  electrical  engineer,
b.  in  Great  Barrington,  Mass.,  2  Dec,  1840.  He
was  educated  in  his  native  town,  l)ecame  a  tele-
graph ojierator  in  1857,  in  1862  was  made  as-
sistant engineer  of  the  American  telegraph  com-
Sany,  and  in  1864  filled  a  similar  office  in  the
lusso- American  telegraph  company.  In  associa-
tion with  George  Blenkmsop,  of  Victoria,  British
Columbia,  he  made,  while  in  that  service  in  1866,
the  first  exploration  of  the  extensive  region  be-
tween British  Columbia  and  Alaska.  alx)ut  the
sources  of  Skeena,  Stickeen.  and  Yukon  rivers.
Subsequently  he  settled  in  New  York  city,  where
he  has  since  been  engaged  chiefly  as  an  electrical
engineer  and  expert.  With  Thomas  A.  Edison  he
invented  in  1870  the  one-wire  printing  telegraph,
known  as  the  "  ticker,"  which  is  employed  in  large
cities  for  telegraphing  exchange  quotations.  He  also
invented  in  1872  the  rail-circuit  for  automatically
controlling  electric  block  signals,  now  used  on  the
princi]>al  railroa<ls  of  the  United  States,  and  he
nas  patented  other  improvements  relating  to  rail-
way and  telegraphic  service.  In  1885  he  was
elected  president  of  the  American  institute  of
electrical  engineers.  Mr.  Po|ie  has  since  1884  been
the  editor  of  "  The  Electrical  Engineer,"  and,  be-
sides articles  in  the  tec-hnical,  historical,  and  popu-
lar perioilicals,  is  the  author  of  "  Mo<lem  Practice
of  the  Electric  Telegraph "  (New  York,  1871)  and
"  Life  and  Work  of  Joseph  Henry  "  (1879).


68


POPE


POPE


POPE,  James  Colledre,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  in  liwleque.  Prince  Kuward  island,  11  June,
1826;  d.  in  Summerside.  Prince  Edward  island,  18
Mav,  1885.  He  was  educatwl  in  his  native  i>lace
and  in  England,  engaged  in  business  in  early  man-
htxMl.  and  Ix'cauie  successful  as  a  inercliant,  ship-
builder, and  shi[>-owuer.  In  1857  Mr.  1*<)|k'  Ix'came
a  niemU'r  of  the  Prince  Edwani  island  assembly,
and,  except  <lurinj;  a  few  months  in  1873,  when  he
sat  in  tlie  Dominion  jmrliament,  held  his  seat  un-
til August,  1876.  when  he  was  defeate<l.  He  became
a  nieml>er  of  the  executive  council  of  Prince  Ed-
ward island  in  1857,  and  was  premier  of  that
Erovince  in  18«5-'7.  1870-'l.  and  from  April  till
pntemlKT.  1878.  The  construction  of  the' Prince
Edward  island  railway,  and  the  negotiations  that
resulted  in  securing  better  terms  to  the  colony  on
its  entering  the  Dominion,  were  achievements  of
his  administration.  lie  was  elected  to  the  C'ana-
(lian  parliament  in  Noveml)er,  1876,  re-elected  in
1878,  and  Ijecame  minister  of  marine  and  fisheries
in  Octol)er  of  the  latter  year.  He  held  this  port-
folio till  Mav.  1882.  when  he  resigned  in  conse-
quence of  failing  health.

POPE,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Prince  William
county,  ^'Jl.,  in  1770 ;  d.  in  Springfield,  Washing-
ton co'.,  Ky..  12  July,  1845.  He  was  brought  to
Kentucky  in  V)oyhood,  and,  having  lost  his  arm
through  an  accident,  was  compelled  to  abandon
farm  work,  and  after  studying  law  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  He  first  settled  in  Shelby  county,  but
afterward  removed  to  Lexington,  Ky.  He  was  for
several  years  a  memlwr  of  the  state  house  of  repre-
sentatives, and  in  1801  was  a  presidential  elector  on
the  Jefferson  ticket.  He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  from  26  Oct.,  1807,
till  3  March,  1813.  acting  as  president  pro  tempore
in  1811.  From  1829  till  1835  he  was  territorial
governor  of  Arkansas.  On  his  return  to  Ken-
tucky he  practised  his  profession  at  Springfield
until  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  twice  re-elect-
ed, serving  from  4  Sept.,  1837,  till  3  March,  1843.
He  was  an  independent  candidate  for  a  seat  in  the
succeeding  congress,  but  was  defeated.

POPE,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Sandwich,
Mass.,  17  Dec.  1798;  d.  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  14
Jan.,  1876.  He  was  appointed  from  Maine  to  the
navy  as  midshipman,  30  May,  1816,  and  was  pro-
moted lieutenant,  28  April,  1826,  commander,  15
Feb.,  184^3,  and  captain,  14  Sept.,  1855.  As  lieuten-
ant he  saw  service  in  the  frigate  "  Constitution,"
of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  and  subsequently
in  the  West  India  and  Brazil  squadrons.  He  com-
manded the  brig  "  Dolphin  "  on  the  coast  of  Africa
in  184(>-'7,  and  the  "  \  andalia"  in  the  East  Indies
in  1853-'6.  He  had  charge  of  the  Boston  navy-
yard  in  1850,  and  of  the  Portsmouth  navy-yard  in
1858-"60.  In  1861  he  commanded  the  steam-sloop
"  Richmond,"  of  the  Gulf  squadron. He  was  a

1)rize-commissioner  in  Boston  in  1864-'5,  and  light-
louse  insnec-tor  in  1866-'9.  On  21  Dec,  1861,  he
was  placeu  on  the  retired  list,  and  he  was  promoted
commodore,  16  July,  1862.  Com.  Pope  passed
twenty-one  years  at  sea,  and  was  for  seventeen
years  and  eleven  months  engaged  in  shore  duty.

POPE,  John  Henry,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
the  Eastern  Townsliins,  Quebec,  in  1824;  d.  in  Ot-
tawa, Canada,  1  April,  1889.  He  was  educated  in
Compton,  and  then  engaged  in  farming.  He  repre-
sented Compton  in  the  Canada  assembly  from  1857
till  the  union,  and  was  elected  in  1867,  1872,  1874,
and  1878  for  that  constituency,  by  acclamation,
to  the  Dominion  parliament.  He  "was  re-elected
in  1882  and  in  February,  1887.  Mr.  Pope  became
a  member  of  the  privy  council  of  Canada,  and  was


minister  of  agriculture  from  October,  1871,  till
November,  1873,  when  he  retired  with  the  govern-
ment on  the  Pacific  railway  question.  He  was  re-
appointed minister  of  agriculture  in  1878,  and
minister  of  railways  and  canals  in  September,
1885.  During  the  summer  of  1880  he  visited  Eng-
land in  company  with  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald  and
Sir  Charles  Tupper,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the
negotiations  that  resulted  in  the  Pacific  railway
contract,  which  was  afterward  ratified  bv  the  Cana-
dian parliament.  Mr.  Pope  was  president  of  the
International  railway  of  Maine  and  of  the  Comp-
ton colonization  society.

POPE,  John  Hnnter,  physician,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, Wilkes  CO.,  Ga.,  12  Feb.,  1845.  He  received
his  medical  education  at  the  universities  of  Lou-
isiana and  Virginia,  and  was  graduated  at  the  lat-
ter institution  in  1868.  He  began  to  practise  at
Milford,  Ellis  co.,  Tex.,  in  1869,  but  in  1870  re-
moved to  Marshall,  in  the  same  state,  where  he
has  since  resided.  Previous  to  studying  medicine
he  was  a  private  soldier  in  the  Confederate  army
from  1861  till  1865.  From  1874  till  1875  he  was
secretary  of  the  Harrison  county  medical  associa-
tion, and  in  1879-'80  he  was  president  of  the  Texas
state  medical  association.  In  1877  he  was  appoint-
ed a  member  of  the  State  board  of  medical  exam-
iners for  the  2d  judicial  district.  He  has  published
a  "  History  of  Epidemic  of  Yellow  Fever  at  Mar-
shall, Texas"  (1874) ;  "Report  on  Climatology  and
Epidemics  of  Texas  "  (1874) ;  and  "  Report  on  the
Science  and  Progress  of  Medicine  "  (1876).

POPE,  Nathaniel,  jurist,  b.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,
5  Jan.,  1784;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  33  Jan.,  1850.  He
was  graduated  at  Transylvania  college,  Ky.,  in
1806,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  be-
gan to  practise  at  St.  Genevieve,  Mo.  He  removed
to  Vandalia,  and  afterward  to  Springfield,  111.  He
was  made  secretary  of  the  territory,  23  Feb.,  1809,
and  subsequently  he  was  chosen  delegate  to  the
14th  congress,  taking  his  seat,  2  Dec,  1816.  He  was
re-elected,  and  served  until  4  Dec,  1818.  He  was
register  of  the  land-office  at  Edwardsville,  111.,  in
1818,  and  the  same  year  was  appointed  U.  S.  judge
for  the  district  of  Illinois,  which  office  he  held  un-
til his  death.  It  was  due  to  the  action  of  Judge
Pope  in  congress  that  the  northern  boundary  of
Illinois  was  moved  from  the  southern  extremity  of
Lake  Michigan  to  42°  30',  thus  adding  the  terri-
tory now  included  in  the  thirteen  northern  coun-
ties, and  giving  the  new  state  its  greatest  lake
port  and  the  site  of  its  most  populous  city.  Pope
county  was  named  after  him. — His  son,  John,
soldier,  b.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  16  March,  18^,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1842,  and  made  brevet  2d  lieutenant  of  en-
gineers. He  served  in  Florida  in  1842-'4,  and
assisted  in  the  survey  of  the  northeast  boundary-
line  between  the  United  States  and  the  British
provinces.  He  was  made  2d  lieutenant,  9  May,
1846,  and  took  part  in  the  Mexican  war,  being
brevetted  1st  lieutenant  for  gallantry  at  Monte-
rey, and  captain  for  his  services  in  the  battle  of
Buena  Vista.  In  1849  he  conducted  the  Minnesota
exploring  expedition,'  which  demonstrated  the
practicability  of  the  navigation  of  the  Red  river
of  the  north  by  steamers,  and  in  1851-'3  he  was
engaged  in  topographical  engineering  service  in
New  Mexico.  The  six  years  following  he  had
charge  of  the  survey  of  the  route  for  the  Pacific
railroad,  near  the  32d  parallel,  and  in  making  ex-
periments to  procure  water  on  the  Llano  Estacado,
or  "  Staked  Plain,"  stretching  between  Texas  and
New  Mexico,  by  means  of  artesian  wells.  On  1
July,  1856,  he  was  commissioned  captain  for  four-


POPE


POPKIN


At.C<7^^yA^


u>on  years'  continuous  service.  In  the  political
fampiiign  of  1800  ('apt.  Pope  ByinpathijMMl  with
the  kopuhliciiiis,  and  in  an  audresH  on  the  subject
of  "  Fortifications,"  rend  In-fore  a  literary  society
at  Cincinnati,  he  t-riticised  tlie  jxilicy  of  President
Buchanan  in  unsparing  terms.  For  this  he  was
court-martialed,  but,
uix)n  the  recommen-
dation of  Post  master-
General  Joseph  Holt,
further  proceedinijs
were  dropped.  lie
was  still  a  captain  of
engineers  when  Sum-
ter was  fired  uiK)n,
and  he  was  one  of  the
officers  detailed  by
the  war  de{)artment
to  escort  Abraham
Lincoln  to  Washing-
ton, lie  was  made
brigadier  -  general  of
volunteers,  17  May,
1861,  and  placed  in
command  first  of  the
district  of  northern,  and  afterward  of  southwestern
and  central,  Missouri.  Gen.  Pope's  operations  in
that  state  in  protecting  railway  communication  and
driving  out  guerillas  were  highly  successful.  His
most  important  engagement  was  that  of  the  Black-
water,  18  Dec.  1861,  where  he  captured  1,300  pris-
oners, 1,000  stand  of  arms,  1,000  horses,  65  wagons,
two  tons  of  gunpowder,  and  a  large  quantity  of
tents,  baggage,  and  supplies.  This  victory  forced
Gen.  Sterling  Price  to  retreat  below  the  Osage
river,  which  he  never  again  crossed.  He  was  next
intruste<i  by  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck  with  the  com-
mand of  the  land  forces  that  co-operated  with  Ad-
miral Andrew  H.  Foote's  flotilla  in  the  expedi-
tion against  New  Madrid  and  Island  No.  10.  He
succeeded  in  occupying  the  former  place,  14  March,
1802,  while  the  latter  surrendered  on  the  8th  of
the  fcillowing  month,  when  6,500  prisoners,  125
cannon,  and  7,0(X)  small  arms,  fell  into  his  hands.
He  was  rewarded  for  the  capture  of  New  Madrid
by  a  commission  as  major-general  of  volunteers.
As  commander  of  the  Armv  of  the  Mississippi,  he
advanced  from  Pittsburg  landing  upon  Corinth,
the  operations  against  that  place  occupying  the
perioti  from  22  April  till  30  May.  After  its  evacu-
ation he  pursued  the  enemy  to  Baldwin,  Lee  co.,
Miss.  At  the  end  of  June  he  was  suionioned  to
Washington,  and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the
Army  of  Virginia,  comprise<l  of  Fremont's  (after-
ward Sigel's),  Banks's,  and  McDowell's  corps.  On
14  July  Tie  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  in
the  regular  army.  On  9  Aug.  a  division  of  his
army,  under  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  had  a  severe
engagement  with  the  Confederates,  commanded  by
Gen.  Thomas  J.  Jackson,  at  Cedar  mountain.  For
the  next  fifteen  days  Gen.  Pope,  who  had  lK?en  re-
enforced  by  a  portion  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,
fought  continuouslv  a  greatly  superior  force  of  the
enemy  under  Gen.  ftobert  E.  Lee,  on  the  line  of  the
Rappahannock,  at  Bristow  station,  at  Groveton,  at
Manassas  junction,  at  Gainesville,  and  at  German-
town,  near  Chantillv.  Gen.  Pope  then  withdrew
his  force  l)ehind  Difficult  creek,  between  Flint  hill
and  the  Warrenton  turnpike,  whence  he  fell  bjvck
within  the  fortifications  of  Washington,  and  on  3
Sept.  was.  at  his  own  request,  relieved  of  the  com-
mand of  the  Army  of  Virginia,  and  was  assigned
to  that  of  the  Department  of  the  Northwest,  where
in  a  short  time  h^  completelv  che<-ked  the  outrages
of  the  Minnesota  Indians, lie  retained  this  com-


mand until  80  Jan.,  186S,  when  he  was  given
charge  of  the  military  division  of  the  Missouri,
which,  in  June  following,  was  maile  the  Deiwrtment
of  the  Miswjuri,  including  all  the  nortliwestern
states  and  territories.  From  this  he  was  relieved
0  Jan.,  1800.  He  has  since  ha<l  command  suc-
cessively of  the  3d  military  district,  comprising
(ieorgia,  Alabama,  and  Florida,  under  the  first
Reconstruction  act,  1807-'8 ;  the  Department  of
the  Ijakes,  1868-'70;  the  Department  of  the  Mis-
souri, headquarters  at  Fort  Ijcavenworth,  Kan.sas,
1870-'84;  and  the  Military  Department  of  the  Pa-
cific from  1884  until  he  wjus  retired.  10  March,  1886,
In  Washington,  in  DecemU'r,  1802,  he  testified  be-
fore a  court-martial,  calle<l  for  the  trial  of  Gen.
Fitz-John  Porter  (o.  t'.),  who  had  l)een  accused  by
him  of  misconduct  before  the  enemy  at  the  seconi
battle  of  Manassas  or  Bull  Run.  Gen.  Pope  was  brc-
vetted  major-general,  13  March,  1805,  "  for  gallant
and  meritorious  services"  in  the  capture  of  Island
No.  10,  and  advanced  to  the  full  rank,  20  Oct.,
1882.  The  fullest  account  of  his  northern  Virginia
campaign  is  to  be  found  in  the  rei)ort  of  the  con-
gressional committee  on  the  conuuct  of  the  war
(Supplement,  part  xi.,  1805).  Gen.  Pope  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Explorations  from  the  Red  River  to  the
Rio  Grande,  in  "  Pacific  Railroad  Reports,"  vol.
iii.,  and  the  "Campaign  of  Virginia,  of  July  and
August,  1862  "  (Washington,  1805).

POPE,  Richard,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  Toronto,
19  Oct.,  1827.  He  was  called  to  the  bar  of  Ijower
Canatla  in  1855,  and  was  assistant  editor  of  the
Lower  Canada  "  Law  Reports  "  in  1855-'60.  After
serving  as  commissioner  for  the  Chaudiere  gold-
mining  association  from  1866  till  1871  he  was  clerk
in  the  department  of  public  works,  and  private
secretary  to  the  minister  from  1872  till  1873,  when
he  was  appointed  clerk  of  the  crown  in  chancery.
He  is  a  major  in  the  Canadian  militia,  and  organ-
ized the  Quebec  volunteer  rifle  a.ssociation.  Mr.
Pope  won  the  first  prize  medal  of  the  Literary  and
historical  society  of  Quebec  for  the  best  "  Essay  on
f 'anada  "  (Quebec,  1853),  and  is  also  the  author  of
"Canadian  Minerals  and  Mining  Interest "  (1857);
"  Gold  Fields  of  Canada  "  (1858) ;  and  "  Notes  on
Emigration  and  Mining  and  Agricultural  Labor
inCanmla"(1859).

POPHAM,  (ieorgre,  colonist,  b.  in  Somerset-
shire, England,  about  1550 ;  d.  in  Maine,  5  Feb.,
1608.  He  bec4ime  as.sociated  with  Sir  Ferdinando
Gorges  (y.  r.)  as  one  of  the  patentees  of  an  exten-
sive territory  in  what  is  now  the  state  of  Maine,
and  sailed  from  Plymouth,  31  Mav,  1607,  with  two
ships  and  one  hundred  men,  Popham  was  in  com-
mand of  one  ship,  and  Raleigh  Gilbert,  a  nephew
of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  of  the  other.  On  15  Aug.,
1607,  they  landed  at  the  mouth  of  the  Saga<laht)c
or  Kennebec  river.  After  listening  to  a  sermon,
and  the  patent  laws,  the  company  jiroceeded  to
build  a  storehouse,  with  a  fort,  which  they  called
Fort  George.  This  was  the  first  English  settlement
in  New  England.  The  ships  sailed  on  the  home
voyage  on  5  Dec.,  leaving  a  colony  of  forty-five
persons,  Popham  being  president  and  GilU'rt  ad-
miral. Aft«r  Popham'saeath  the  cohmists,  having
become  discourage<l,  returned  to  England. — His
brother.  Sir  John,  b.  in  Somersetshire  in  1531  :  d.
10  June,  1607,  became  lord  chief  justice  al)Out  1592,
and  was  active  in  colonization  schemes. — Sir  Fran-
cis, su|)posed  to  be  a  son  of  Sir  John,  and  named
as  a  patentee  of  New  England,  was  a  memljer  of
parliament  in  1620.

POPKIN,  John  Snellingr,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  19  June,  1771 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  2  March,  1852. His  ancestors,  of  Welsh


70


PORCALLO  DE PIGUEROA


PORTALES


descent,  came  to  this  country  from  Ireland,  and
his  father.  John,  was  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  the
Revolutionary  army.  He  was  graduated  in  1792,
with  the  first  honors,  at  Harvard,  where  he  was
tutor  in  (Jreek  in  171»5-'8.  after  teacliiiiK  in  Wolmrn
and  C'ainbridj,'e.  He  had  also  studied  theolojry,
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1708.  and  on  10  July,
1799,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Federal  street
church  in  lioston.  where  ho  remained  till  1802.  He
was  jmsfor  at  Newbury  in  1804-'15.  then  professor
of  (Jreek  at  Harvard  on  the  college  foundation  till
182<5,  and  Kliot  professor  of  (treck  literature,  to
succwd  Kdward  Everett,  till  18JJM.  From  the  latter
date  till  his  death  he  lived  in  retirement  in  Cam-
bridge. Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  I).  I),  in
181.').  and  he  was  a  member  of  the  American  acade-
my of  arts  and  sciences.  Dr.  Popkin  left  the  Uni-
tarian faith  for  the  orthmlox  Congregational,  and
finally  IxHrjune  an  Episcopalian.  He  whs  a  profound
Greek  scholar.  He  edited  the  fourth  American
edition  of  Andrew  Dalzel's  "Collectanea  Graeca
Majoni "  (2  vols..  Cambridge.  1824),  and  was  the
autnor  of  various  wcasional  sermons,  a  Greek  gram-
mar (1828).  and  "Three  Lectures  on  Literal  Edu-
cation "  (181^0).  These  last,  with  selections  from
other  lectures,  extracts  from  his  sermons,  and
a  memoir  bv  Cornelius  C.  Felton,  appeared  after
his  death  (1852).

PORCALLO  »E  FIGIEROA,  Vasco  (por-cal -
yo).  Spanish  s<5ldier,  b.  in  Caceres.  Spain,  in  1494;
d.  in  Puerto  Principe.  Cuba,  in  1550.  He  went  to
Cuba  when  very  young  and  served  under  Diego
Vela>*fiuez,  the  conqueror  and  first  governor  of  the
island.  He  was  the  founder  of  several  cities,  among
others  Remedios  and  Puerto  Princi{>e.  Velasquez
selected  him  to  command  the  expedition  that  he
intended  to  send  against  Cortes,  but  Porcallo  de-
clined. In  1539  he  accompanied  Fernando  de  Soto
in  his  expedition  to  Florida,  but  he  soon  returned
to  Cuba,  and  afterward  resided  in  Puerto  Principe.

PORCHER,  FrancLs  Peyre,  phvsician.  b.  in
St.  John's.  Berkeley,  S.  C,  14  Dec.  1825.  He  was
graduated  at  South  Carolina  college  in  1844  and  at
the  Medical  college  of  the  state  of  South  Carolina
in  1847.  where  he  now  holds  the  chair  of  materia
medica  and  thera[>euties.  On  graduating  he  settled
in  Charleston,  where  he  has  since  continued  in  the
active  practice  of  his  profession,  also  holding  the
appointments  of  surgeon  and  physician  to  the  ma-
rine and  city  hospitals.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
surgeon  in  charge  of  Confederate  hospitals  at  Nor-
folk and  Petersburg,  Va.  Dr.  Porcher  was  president
of  the  South  Carolina  medical  association  in  1872,
and,  Ijesides  holding  memberships  in  other  societies,
is  an  associate  fellow  of  the  Philadelphia  college  of
physicians.  He  was  one  of  the  editors  of  the
"  Charleston  Medical  Journal  and  Review,"  having
charge  of  the  publication  of  five  volumes  of  the
first  series  (185()-'5).  and  more  recently  of  four  vol-
unu's  of  the  second  series  (1873-'6).  '  Dr.  Porcher
was  an  enthusiastic  botanist  and  has  devoted  con-
siderable attention  to  that  subject.  Beside*  numer-
ous fugitive  contributions  to  the  medical  journals,
and  articles  in  medical  works,  he  has  published  "  A
Medico- Botanical  Catalogue  of  the  Plants  and  Ferns
of  St.  John's,  i^'rkeley.  South  Carolina  "  (Charleston,
1847) ;  "  A  Sketch  of  the  Medical  Botanv  of  South
Carolina"  (Philatlelphia,  1849);  "The  'Medicinal,
Poisonous,  and  Dietetic  Properties  of  the  Crvpto-
gamic  Plants  of  the  United  States "  (New  1f ork,
1854);  "Illustrations  of  Disease  with  the  Micro-
scope, and  Clinical  Investigations  aided  by  the
Microscope  and  by  Chemical  Reagents"  (Charleston.
18C1) ;  and  "  Resources  of  the  Southern  Fields  and
Forests,  Medical,  Economical,  and  Agricultural,"


published  by  order  of  the  surgeon-general  of  the
Confed«Tate  states  (Richmond,  1863  ;  new  and  re-
vised ed..  Charieston.  18f59).
PORET  »E  BLOSSEYILLE,  Jules  Alphonse

Ren^  (jt)o-ray).  Baron,  French  navigator,  b.  in
Rouen,  29  July,  1802;  d.  in  the  Arctic  ocean  about
February,  18JM.  lie  entered  the  navy  as  a  volun-
teer in  1818,  served  in  the  West  Indies  and  South
America,  and  in  1833  was  appointed  commander
of  the  brig  "La  Liloise"  and  sent  to  the  Arctic
ocean.  Sailing  from  Brest  in  May.  1833,  he  visited
Iceland  and  Greeidand,  where  he  made  astronomi-
cal observations,  and  prepared  a  valuable  chart  of
the  western  coast  of  the  latter  country.  He  had
rea(!hed  latitude  83°  N.  when  he  was  imprisoned  by
the  ice-fields,  and  sent  news  to  France  by  a  whaler.
This  was  the  last  that  was  heard  of  him,  and  several
French  and  English  expeditions  failed  to  find  traces
of  him.  The  expedition  of  "  La  Recherche  et  I'A ven-
ture" ascertained  through  Esouimaux  that  Poret
advanced  farther  than  latitude  84°  N.,  and  it  is
supposed  that  his  death  was  similar  to  that  of  Sir
John  Franklin.  His  works  include  "  Histoire  des
decouvertes  faites  k  divenses  epoques  par  les  navi-
gateurs"  (Paris,  1826).  and  "Histoire  des  explora-
tions de  I'Amerique  du  Sud  "  (1832). — His  brother.
Viscount  B^nique  Ernest,  b.  in  Rouen,  19  Jan..
1799;  d.  in  1882;  was  the  author  or  translator  of
several  American  novels,  including  "  John  Tanner,
on  30  annees  dans  les  deserts  de  PAraerique  du
Nord  "  (Paris,  1839).

PORREZ,  Martin  de,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lima
in  1579 ;  d.  there  in  1639.  He  was  an  illegitimate
son,  his  father  being  a  nobleman  and  his  mother  a
negress.  His  youth  was  neglected,  but  he  gave
evidence  of  so  many  virtues  that  his  father  deter-
mined to  recognize  him.  He  was  then  educated,  and,
as  his  tastes  lay  in  the  direction  of  surgery,  was
enabled  to  study  that  profession.  He  was  noted
for  his  care  of  the  poor,  whom  he  attended  without
fee ;  but  the  respect  that  this  gained  him  in  Lima
alarmed  his  humility,  and  he  determined  to  retire
from  the  world,  fie  joined  the  Dominicans  in
1602,  taking  the  lowest  rank  in  the  order — that  of
oblate  brother.  He  was  charged  with  the  care  of
the  sick  after  his  reception,  and  when  a  plague
broke  out  in  Lima  he  was  constant  in  his  attend-
ance on  its  victims.  The  ravages  of  this  epidemic
in  one  of  the  suburbs  obliged  his  superiors  to
send  hira  thither,  and  he  set  out  at  once.  Some
of  the  cures  he  performed  were  considered  miracu-
lous, and  he  was  summoned  back  to  Lima.  The
rest  of  his  life  was  spent  in  caring  for  the  sick.
It  was  believed  in  Peru  that  he  had  restored
many  to  life  by  supernatural  agencies.  After  his
death,  the  chapter,  university,  and  religious  com-
munities of  Lima  demanded  that  he  should  be
honored  on  the  altars  of  the  church,  and,  after  an
examination  that  lasted  during  the  reign  of  Cle-
ment X..  he  was  teatified  under  Gregory  XVI.

PORRO,  Francis,  clergyman,  d.  about  1802.  He
was  a  member  of  the  order  of  Franciscans,  and  be-
longed to  the  convent  of  the  Holy  Apostles  in  Rome.
Bishop  Portier,  when  he  was  at  Rome  in  1829,  saw
a  portrait  of  Porro  as  bishop  of  New  Orleans.  It
was  supposed  that  he  was  consecrated  in  1802,  and
died  on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Louisiana.  It
is  now  Ijclieved  that  he  was  never  consecrated,  as  it
was  known  at  Rome  that  the  Spanish  government
was  not  likely  to  retain  possession  of  Louisiana,  in
which  case  it  was  doubtful  whether  the  diocese
could  support  a  bishop.  See  Archbisiiop  Spalding's
"  Life  of  Bishop  Flaget."

PORTALES,  Diego  Jo8§  TictorKpor-tah'-les),
Chilian  soldier,  b.  in  Santiago  in  June,  1793 ;  d.  in


PORTKR


PORTER


71


V'al(>unU80,  6  June.  1887.  He  acquired  his  educa-
tion in  the  College  of  San  Carlos,  and  in  1817  ob-
taintnl  the  place  of  atutayer  of  the  mint,  but  went  to
Peru  in  l&hl  and  entere<l  commerce.  Jle  returne<l
to  Chili  in  1H34,  and,  Iteinjj  discontented  onact^ount
of  heavy  losses  in  a  contract  with  the  Chilian  gov-
ernment, fnun  whom  he  hatl  obtaineil  the  mono{H)ly
of  tobacco,  joined  the  oppcKiition,  attacking  the
government  in  the  )>a|>er  "El  Hambriento"  in
1827.  In  April.  IHJJO,  he  was  appointed  by  the
general  junta  minister  of  the  ulterior, .  foreign
affairs,  war,  and  the  navy ;  but.  on  lU'count  of  p«iliti-
cal  disturbances,  he  resigned  his  charges  in  IKH,
an<l  retired  to  Valimraiso,  where  he  engaged  again
in  business.  On  17  Aug..  1833,  he  was  elected  vice-
president  of  the  republic,  and  at  the  end  of  the
same  year  he  wasapiM)inte<l  governor  of  Valparaiso,
whert^he  organized  tne  civic  militia.  In  Septend)er,
1835,  President  Prieto  appointed  him  again  min-
ister of  war.  When  in  18;i0  the  Peru-Bolivian  con-
federation was  established,  Portales  stronglv  op-
posetl  it.  Owing  to  his  efforts,  in  Octol>er  of  that
year  a  Chilian  fleet  left  Valparaiso  for  Callao  under
Admiral  Blanco  Encalada  {q.  v.),  to  protest  against
the  confederation,  and,  not  receiving  a  satisfactory
answer,  the  Chilian  government  declared  war  on
11  Nov.,  1836.  Meanwhile,  Portales  was  organizing
an  expeditionary  force  in  Quillota,  giving  the  com-
mand of  one  of  the  best  regiments  to  Col.  Jose
Antonio  Vidaurre,  who  was  his  special  favorite.
S<K)n  afterward  a  mutiny,  led  by  Vidaurre  and
other  officers,  was  organized,  while  Portales  was  at
Valparaiso,  and  when  the  latter  returned  to  Quillota
and  was  reviewing  his  troops,  he  was  made  a  pris-
oner by  Vidaurre.  The  mutineers  marched  on
Valparaiso,  but  they  encountered  a  determined
resistance  from  the  civic  militia.  Portales  was  left
under  custody  of  a  lieutenant,  who,  .seeing  the  de-
feat of  his  party,  ordered  him  to  be  shot.  In  Sep-
tember, 1861,  a  statue  of  Portales  was  erected  in
front  of  the  mint  in  Santiago.

PORTER,  Albert  (J,  governor  of  Indiana,  b.
in  Lawrenceburg,  Ind.,  20  April,  1824.  He  was
gra<luated  at  Asbury  university,  Ind.,  in  184^3,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  l)ar  in  1845,  and
began  to  practise  in  Indianapolis,  where  he  was
councilman  and  corj)oration  attorney.  In  1853  he
was  appointed  reporter  of  the  supreme  court  of
Indiana.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republi-
can, holding  his  seat  from  5  Dee..  1859,  till  3  >Iarch.
1863,  and  serving  on  the  judiciary  committee  and
on  that  on  manufactures. He  was  a  nominee  for

g residential  elector  on  the  Hayes  ticket  in  1876.
'n  5  March,  1878,  he  was  appointed  first  comp-
tniller  of  the  U.  S.  treasury,  but  he  resigned  to
l)ecome  governor  of  Indiana,  which  office  lie  held
from  1881  till  1884  He  has  published  "  Decisions
<)t  the  Supreme  Court  of  Indiana"  (5  vols,  Indian-
a|K>lis,  1853-'6).  and  ha.s  now  (1888)  in  pre|)aration
a  historv  of  Indiana.

PORTER,  Alexander  jurist,  b.  near  Armagh,
County  Tyrone,  Ireland,  in  1796;  d.  in  Attakapas,
Ija.,  13  Jan.,  1844.  His  father,  an  Irissh  Presbyte-
rian clergyman  and  chemist,  while  lecturing  in
Ireland  during  the  insurrection  of  1798,  fell  under
suspicion  of  lieing  an  insurgent  spy,  and  was  seized
aiul  executed.  His  son  winie  to  this  country  in
18()1  with  his  uncle,  and  settle<l  in  Na.shville,  Tenn.,
where,  after  serving  as  clerk,  he  studietl  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1807,  By  the  advice
of  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson,  he  removed  to  St.  Mar-
tinsville. La.,  and  was  elected  to  the  Stat^?  consti-
tutional convention  of  1811.  In  1821-'33  he  was
judge  of  the  state  supreme  court,  and  rendered
■service  by  establishing  with  others  a  jiew  system


of  jurispnidence.  He  was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator
as  a  Whig,  in  place  of  Jos«'ph  .S.  Johnston,  detwajmd,
serving  from  6  Jan.,  18JJ4,  till  5  Jan.,  1837,  and
during  his  term  voted  to  censure  President  Jack-
son for  the  removal  of  the  dejMJsits  from  the  C  S.
bank,  and  favored  John  C.  Calhoun's  motion  to
reject  [letitions  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the
District  of  Columbia.  In  March,  18:^6,  he  made
an  elaborate  reply  to  a  s{M>ech  of  Thomas  H.  Ben-
ton ui)on  the  intro<luction  of  his  "  expunging
resolutions."  He  also  opposed  Benton's  bill  for
com[)^lling  payments  for  public  lands  to  Im>  made
in  sj)ecie,  and  advocated  the  division  of  surplus
revenue  among  the  states,  and  the  recognition  of
the  independence  of  Texas.  He  was  again  elected
to  the  senate  in  1843,  and  served  till  his  death.
For  many  years  before  his  death  he  resided  on  his
estate,  "  OaK  Lawn,"  of  5,000  acres,  on  Bavou  Teche,
and  the  large  mansion,  where  Henry  Olav  was  a
frequent  visitor,  is  still  (1888)  standing  in  tlie  cen-
tre of  an  extensive  park.

PORTER,  Andrew,  soldier,  b.  in  Worcester.
Montgomery  co..  Pa.,  24  Sept.,  1743;  d.  in  Harris-
burg,  Pa,  16  Nov.,  1813.  His  father,  Rolx>rt,  emi-
grated to  this  country  from  Londonderry,  Ireland,
in  1720,  settled
in  Londonderrv,
N.  H.,  and  af-
terward bought
land in Mont-

f:omery  countv,
*a.  In  early
years  the  son
manifested  a  tal-
ent for  mathe-
matics, and  un-
der the  advice  of
Dr.  David  Rit-
tenhouseopened.
in  1767.  an  Eng-
lish and  mathe-
matical school  in
Philadelphia,  in
which  he  taught
until  19  June,
1776,  when  he
was  appointed  by  congress  a  captain  of  marines
and  oraered  to  the  frigate  "  Effingham."  He  was
soon  transferred  to  tlie  artillery,  in  which  he
served  with  efficiency.  He  was  captain  until  13
March,  1782,  and  then  became  major,  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  colonel  of  the  4th  Pennsylvania  artil-
lery, which  post  he  held  at  the  disbanding  of  the
army.  He  participated  in  the  Imttlesof  Newton,
Princeton,  Brandywine,  and  Germantown,  where
nearly  all  his  company  were  killed  or  taken  prisf>n-
ers,  and  where  he  received  on  the  field  i)ers<nial
commendation  from  Gen.  Washington  f«)r  liis  con-
duct in  the  action,  and  at  his  request  he  was  sent
to  Philadelphia  to  prepare  material  for  the  siege
of  Yorktown.  In  April.  1779,  he  was  detached
with  his  company  to  join  Gen.  John  Sullivan's
expedition  against  the  Indians,  and  suggested  to
Gen.  James  Clinton  the  idea  of  damming  the  out-
let of  Otsego  lake,  by  which  means  the  water  was
raised  sufficiently  to  convey  the  tnKins  by  boatii  to
Tioga  {wint.  In  1783  he  retired  to  the  cultivation
of  his  farm,  and  declined  the  chair  of  mathematics
in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  saying  that  "as
long  as  he  commanded  men  he  would  not  return
to  flogging  lx)ys."  In  1784-'7  he  was  engaged  as
commissioner  to  run  the  boundary-lines  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  he  was  also  interested  in  the  com-
pletion of  the  western  termination  of  the  Mason
and  Dixon  line,  although  he  was  not  a  commis-


* — ^^<^*^*<^'^-ty>>^^^^


72


PORTER


PORTER


sioner.  He  was  made  brigadier-^neral  of  Penn-
sylvania militia  in  1801,  was  suljsequently  major-
general,  and  in  180})  apiK)inted  surveyor-general,
and  held  this  jKist  until  his  death.  Owing  to  the
inflrnuties  of  Hgt>  he  deelinwl  the  ofTlces  of  brijja-
dier- general  in  the  U.  S.  anny  and  secretary  of
war  in  President  Monroe's  cabinet,  which  were
offereil  him  in  1812-'13.— His  son,  David  Kitten-
hoiise,  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  b.  near  Norris-
town.  Montgomery  co.,  Pa..  31  Oct.,  1788;  d.  in
Harrisburg,  Pa.,  0  Aug.,  18G7,  was  etlucated  at
Norristown  academy,  and,  when  his  father  was  ap-
IM)inted  surveyor-general,  became  the  latter's  sec-
retary. He  studied  law,  but  abandoned  it,  owing
to  impaired  health,  and  removed  to  Huntingdon
county,  where  he  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of
iron,  was  interested  in  agriculture,  and  intnxluced
a  fine  stock  of  cattle  and  horses  into  the  country.
He  served  in  the  legislature  in  1819,  was  made
prothonotary  in  1821,  state  senator  in  1836,  and
governor  of  Pennsylvania  in  1S38,  under  the  new
organization  that  went  into  effect  in  that  year,
and  held  this  oflice  until  1845.  During  his  term
the  first  great  discussion  u|K)n  the  intro<luction  of
railroads  tf»ok  place  in  the  state.  He  was  active
in  suppressing  riots  in  Philadelphia  in  1844,  and
received  a  resolution  of  thanks  from  the  city.
Afterward  he  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  iron,
and  erected  in  Harrisburg  the  first  anthracite  fur-
nace in  that  jmrt  of  the  state.  —  Another  son,
George  Bryan,  governor  of  Michigan,  b,  in  Nor-
ristown. Pa.,  9  Feb.,  1791 ;  <1.  in  Detroit.  Mich.,  18
July,  1S»4,  was  graduated  at  the  Litchfield  law-
school,  ("onn,  jiractised  law  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,
served  in  the  legislature,  and  was  appointed  in
1K^2  governor  of  Michigan  teiTitory.  which  office
he  held  until  his  death.  —  Another  son,  James
Madison,  jurist,  b.  in  St^lma,  Pa.,  6  Jan..  1793;  d.
in  Easton,  Pa..  11  Nov.,  1862,  served  as  a  volunteer
in  the  war  of  1812,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1813,  aiul  settled  in  Easton,  where  he
practised  with  success.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Constitutional  convention  of  Pennsylvania  in  1838,
and  took  an  active  [)art  in  its  proceedings.  He
wjis  apnointed  secretary  of  war  in  1843,  but  was
rejected  by  the  senate,  and  returned  to  the  practice
of  law  in  Easton.  Mr.  Porter  was  a  founder  of
Lafavette  college,  Easton,  in  1826,  president  of  its
board  of  trustees  for  twentv-five  years,  and  lectured
there  oii  jurispruilence  and  political  economy.  He
served  as  presulent  judge  of  the  judicial  districts
in  his  county. — David  Rittenhouse's  son,  WiUiani
Augustus,  jurist,  I),  in  Huntingdon  county.  Pa.,
24  May,  1821;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28' June,
1886,  wjis  graduated  at  Lafayette  college  in  1839,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1842,  and
became  district  attorney  of  Philadelphia.  He  was
sheriff  of  that  city  in  1843,  and  solicitor  in  1856.  In
1858  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  supreme  court
of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1874  he  became  a  judge  of
the  court  of  Alabama  claims  in  Washington,  D.  C.
Jefferson  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL,  D.  in
1871.  He  was  a  contributor  to  the  "American
Ijaw  Magazine  "  and  "  Law  Journal,"  and  published
an  "  Essay  on  the  Law  pertaining  to  the  Sheriff's
Office  "  (1849) ;  and  the  "  Life  of  Chief-Justice  John
B.  (}d)son"  (Philadelphia,  1855).— Another  son  of
David  Rittenhouse,  Horace,  soldier  b.  in  Hunting-
don, Pa.,  15  April,  1837,  was  educated  in  his  native
state,  and  afterward  entered  the  Lawrence  scien-
tific school  of  Harvard,  and  while  there  was  ap-
pointed to  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  and  gradu-
ated in  1860.  He  was  several  months  instructor  of
artillery  at  West  Point,  and  was  ordered  to  duty
in  the  south  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.


He  was  chief  of  artillery,  and  had  charge  of  the
batteries  at  the  capture  of  Fort  Pulaski,  and  par-
ticipated in  the  assault  on  Secession vi lie,  where  he
received  a  slight  wound  in  the  first  attempt  to
take  Charleston.  He  was  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Mc-
Clellan  in  July,  1862,  and  served  with  the  Army  of
the  Potomac  until  after  the  engagement  at  Aiitie-
tam.  In  the  beginning  of  the  next  year  he  was
chief  of  ordnance  on  Gen.  Rosecrans  s  staff,  and
went  through  the  Chickamauga  camimign  with
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland.  When  Grant  had
taken  command  in  the  east.  Porter  became  aide-
de-camp  on  his  staff,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  later  as  colonel.  He  accompanied  him
through  the  Wilderness  campaign  and  the  siege  of
Richmond  and  Petersburg,  and  was  present  at  the
surrender  at  Appomattox,  Afterward  he  made  a
series  of  tours  of  inspection,  by  Grant's  direction,
in  the  south  and  on  the  Pacific  coast.  He  was
brevetted  captain,  major,  and  lieutenant-colonel
for  gallant  and  meritorious  services  at  the  siege
of  tort  Pulaski,  the  Wilderness,  and  Newmarket
Heights  respectively,  and  colonel  and  brigadier-
general,  U.  S.  army,  for  gallant  and  meritorious
services  during  the  war.  He  was  assistant  secre-
tary of  war  while  Grant  was  secretary  ad  interim,
served  as  secretary  to  Grant  during  his  first  presi-
dential term,  and  continued  to  Itx;  his  intimate
friend  till  the  latter's  death.  He  resigned  from
the  army  in  1873,  and  has  since  been  interested  in
railroad  affairs,  acting  as  manager  of  the  Pullman
paliice-car  company  and  as  president  and  director
of  several  corporations.  He  was  largely  interested
in  building  tne  West  Shore  railroad,  of  which  he
was  the  first  president.  Gen.  Porter  is  the  inventor
of  a  water-gauge  for  steam-boilers  and  of  the
ticket-cancelling  boxes  that  are  used  on  the  ele-
vated railways  in  New  York  city.  He  has  de-
livered numerous  lectures  and  addresses,  made  a
wide  reputation  as  an  after-dinner  speaker,  has
contributed  frequently  to  magazines,  and  is  the
author  of  a  book  on  "West  Point  Life"  (New
York,  1866). — George  Bryan's  son,  Andrew,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  10  July,  1820;  d.  in
Paris,  France,  3  Jan.,  1872,  entered  the  U.  .S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1836,  but  left  in  the  following
year.  He  was  appointed  1st  lieutenant  of  mounted
rifles  on  27  May,  1846,  and  served  in  the  Mexican
war.  becoming  captain  on  15  May,  1847,  and  re-
ceiving the  brevet  of  major  for  gallant  and  meri-
torious conduct  at  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and
that  of  lieutenant  -  colonel  for  Chapultepec,  13
Sept..  1847.  Afterward  he  served  in  Texas  and  in
the  southwest,  and  in  1860  was  in  command  of
Fort  Craig,  Va.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war
he  wfis  ordered  to  Washington,  and  promoted  to
command  the  16th  infantry.  He  had  charge  of  a
brigade  at  Bull  Run,  and,  when  Col.  David  Hun-
ter was  wounded,  succeeded  him  in  the  command
of  the  2d  division.  On  17  May,  1861,  he  was  ap-
pointed brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  Subse-
quently he  was  provost-niarshal-general  for  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  but  after  Gen.  George  B.
McCiellan's  retreat  from  the  Chickahominy  to
James  river  he  was  relieved  from  duty  with  this
army.  In  the  autumn  of  1862  he  was' ordered  to
Harrisburg,  Pa.,  to  assist  in  organizing  and  for-
warding troops,  and  in  November  of  that  year  he
was  assigned  to  command  in  Pennsylvania,  and
charged  with  the  duties  of  provost-marshal-gen-
eral of  Washington,  where  he  was  active  in  restor-
ing order  in  the  city  and  surrounding  district.  He
was  mustered  out  on  4  April,  1864,  and,  owing  to
impaired  health,  resigned  his  cornmfssion  on  20-
April,  after  which  he  travelled  in  Europe.


PORTKR


PORTKR


78


PORTER.  Benjamin  Curtix,  artist,  b.  in  Mel-
rtiHc,  MasN.,  27  Auk.  1^^*  He  ha.s  ha<l  no  rt'^ular
nrt  instruction.  For  some  yean*  he  k^^c  inueh
Htlention  to  fipirc-fMinlinK,  Hrconiiiiishing  some
notal>le  work  in  that  line,  hut  sui>senuently  lie
(levoted  himself  entirely  to  fH)rtniiture.  In  1W17  he
first  exhibite«lHf  the  Acwlemy  of  design,  New  York,
and  he  was  elected  an  ass*K'iate  in  1H78  and  acade-
mician in  1880.  He  has  matie  several  trips  to
Europe,  visiting  and  studying  in  England,  Hol-
land, France,  and  Italy.  Besides  his  studio  in
Boston,  he  has  ha<I  another  for  several  years  in
New  York  during  the  winter.  His  works  include
"HenrvV.  and  the  Princess  Kate"(18(W);  "The
Mandolin-Player"  and  "  t'upid  with  Butterflies"
(1874);  "The  Hour-Glass"  (187W;  "Portrait  of
Ladv,  with  Dog,"  in  the  t'orconin  gallery,  Wash-
ington (1876):  "  Portrjiitof  Boy  with  Dog"  (1884):
and  numerous  other  portraits.

PORTER.  Benjamin  Fielding,  lawyer,  b.  in
Chnrli'ston.  8.  C,  in  1808.  He  was  self-educated,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Charleston  at  an
early  age,  but afterward studietl medicine,  and

1)ractised  in  Alal)ama,  where  he  removed  in  1830.
le  returned  to  the  law,  was  chosen  to  the  legisla-
ture in  18^32,  and  became  reporter  of  the  state  in
1835.  In  1840  he  was  elected  to  the  bench,  but
doubted  the  constitutionality  of  his  election  and
declined  the  office.  He  was  frequently  an  orator
on  public  occasions,  contributed  to  jseriodicals,
translated  the  "  Elements  of  the  Institutes "  of
Heineccius,  and  published  "  Reports  of  Supreme
Court  of  Alabama"  (9  vols.,  Tuscaloosa,  18:i5-'40);
"Office  of  Executors  and  Administrators"  (1842);
and  a  collection  of  poems  (Charleston).

PORTER,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hebron,
Conn.,  27  May,  1701 ;  d.  in  Catskill,  N.  Y.,  7  Jan.,
1851.  He  served  ten  months  in  the  Revolutionary
army,  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1784,  and
taught  in  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  where  he  studied
theology,  and  was  licensed  to  preach.  From
1787  till  1803  he  was  pastor  of  a  Congrega-
tional church  in  Spencertown,  N.  Y.,  and  from
1803  till  1831  he  had  charge  of  the  1st  Presby-
terian church  in  Catskill,  N.  Y.  Williams  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1811.  Dr.  Porter  pul>-
lished  nine  sermons  (1801-'28),  and  "  A  Dissertation
on  Christian  Baptism"  (1809).

PORTER,  David,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  1  Feb.,  1780;  d.  in  Pera,  near  Constan-
tinople, Turkey.  3
March.  1843.  Five
generations  of  this
family  have  served
in  the  navy.  His
grandfather,  Alex-
ander, commanded
a  lioston  merchant-
ship,  giving  his  aid
to  the  colonies,  and
his  father,  Capt.  Da-
vid, with  his  brother
Samuel,  command-
e<i  vessels  commis-
sioned by  Gen.  Wa.sh-
ington  in  the  Conti-
nental navy  for  the
capture  of  ships  car-
rymg  stores  to  the
liritish  army,  which
was  a  perilous  ser-
vice, the  patriots
often  fighting  their
way  to  escape  fn)m  the  foe.  In  1778  Capt.  David
Porter  commande<l  the  sloop  "  Delight,"  of  6  guns.


fitted  out  in  Maryland,  and  was  active  against  the
enemy, and  in  1780  commande<l  the  "  Aurora," of  10
guns.  efiuipj)ed  in  Mjissiuhu setts,  but  wan  captureti
I  by  the  British  and  cuiifiiicd  in  the  "Jersey"  prison-
,  ship,  where  he  suffered  many  hardships.  Escaping,
he  fought  thn)ugh<>ut  the  Uevolutionary  war,  after
I  which  lie  residiHl  in  lioston  until  he  was  ap|K>inted
by  (len.  Washington  a  sailing-master  in  the  navy,
having  charge  of  the  signal-station  on  Fe<IerHl
Hill,  Baltimore,  Md.  One  of  his  two  sons,  John,
entered  the  naval  service  in  1800,  and  died  in  IWJl,
having  attained  the  rank  of  commander.  His  other
Sim,  David,  made  voyages  to  the  West  Indies,  and
was  twice  impressed  by  British  shij)s-of-war,  but
escaped  and  worked  his  passage  home.  On  16
April,  1798,  he  wa.s  appointed  midshipman  in  the
U.  S.  frigate  "Constellation,"  and  participated  in
her  action  with  the  P>ench  frigate  "  Insurgente,"
on  9  Feb.,  1799,  receiving  a  prize  for  his  service.
He  became  lieutenant  on  8  Oct.,  1799,  and  served
on  the  West  India  station.  In  January,  1800,  his
schooner,  the  "  Experiment,"  while  Ijccalmed  off
the  coast  of  Santo  Domingo,  with  several  merchant-
men under  her  protection,  was  attacked  by  ten  pic-
aroon barges,  but  after  a  conflict  of  seven  hours,
in  which  Lieut.  Porter  was  wounded,  they  with-
drew. Subsequently  this  vessel  had  several  suc-
cessful affairs  with  privateers  and  captured  the
French  schooner  "  Diane,"  of  14  guns  and  60
men.  In  August,  1801,  the  schooner  "  Enter-
prise." of  12  guns,  to  which  Porter  was  attached,
fell  in,  off  Malta,  with  a  Tripolitan  cruiser  of  14
guns,  which  surrendered  after  an  engagement  of
three  hours.  While  attached  to  the  frigate  "  New
York "  he  commanded  a  Ixjat  expedition  which
destroyed  several  feluccas  in  the  harbor  of  Tripoli,
and  was  again  wounded.  In  October,  1803,  he  was
captured  in  the  frigate  "  Philadelphia"  and  im-
prisoned in  Tripoli  until  peace  was  proclaimed.
On  20  April.  1806,  he  became  master-commandant,
and  he  was  matle  captain  on  2  July,  1812.  At  the
beginning  of  the  war  of  1812  he  sailed  from  New
York  in  command  of  the  frigate  "  Essex,"  of  32
gains,  carryinjj  a  flag  with  the  words  "  Free-
Trade  and  Sailors'  Rights,"  and  in  a  short  cruise
captured  several  British  merchantmen  and  a
transjxirt  that  was  bearing  troops  to  Halifax.  On
13  Aug.,  1812,  he  was  attacked  by  the  British
armed  ship  "  Alert,"  which,  after  an  action  of  eight
minutes,  surrendered  in  a  sinking  condition.  This
was  the  first  British  war- vessel  that  wa.s  captureti
in  the  conflict.  On  11  Dec.  he  also  t<X)k.  near  the
ef{uator,  the  British  government  iiacket  "  Nwton,"
with  foO.CKK)  in  specie  on  board.  He  cruised  in
the  South  Atlantic  and  upon  the  coast  of  Brazil
until  January,  1813.  when  he  determine<l  to  destroy
the  English  whale-fishery  in  the  Pacific,  and  saileti
for  Val[)araiso,  where  he' learned  that  Chili  had  be-
come an  independent  state,  and  that  the  viceroy
of  Peru  had  sent  out  cruisers  against  those  of  the
Americans.  After  refitting  he  went  to  sea,  and  on
25  March  captured  the  Peruvian  privateer  "  Nere>'-
da,"  of  19  guns,  which  hatl  taken  two  American
whale-ships  and  had  their  crews  on  board  as  pris-
oners. The  latter  were  transferred  to  the  "  Essex,"
and  the  armament  and  ammunition  of  the  "  Nerey-
da  "  were  thrown  overboanl.  when  she  was  relea.«ed.
One  of  her  prizes  was  ret-apturetl  shortly  afterward
and  restored  to  her  commander.  After  this  Capt.
Porter  cruised  about  ten  months  in  the  Pacific,
capturing  a  large  number  of  British  whaling-shii)s.
The  British  loss  was  about  $2.500,00(J,  with  400
prisoners,  and  for  the  time  the  British  whale-fish-
eries in  the  Pacific  were  destroyed.  The  captured
"  Georgiana "  was  converted  into  a  vessel  of  war


74


PORTER


PORTER


called  the  "Essex  Jr.."  and  cruised  with  the  "  Es-
sex," under  the  command  of  Lieut.  John  Downes.
Having  hoard  that  the  British  government  had
sent  out  vessels  under  Capt.  James  Hillyar,  with
orders  to  take  the  "  Es.sex,"  Capt.  Porter  sailed  to
the  Marquesas  islands  U)  reflt,  and  on  his  way  c;ap-
tured  ottuT  English  vessels.  He  anchored  in  the
Bay  of  Nukuhivah,  where  the  "Essex"  was  the
first  to  carry  the  American  flag,  and  named  it
Massjwhusetts  bay.  He  assisted  in  subduing  the
hostile  natives,  and  on  19  Nov.,  1813,  took  posses-
sion of  the  island  in  the  name  of  the  United  States.
On  3  Feb.,  1814,  the  "Essex"  and  the  "  Es>^ex  Jr."
arrived  at  Valparaiso.  On  8  Feb.  the  British  frig-
ate "  Phtt'lH>,"  commanded  by  Capt.  James  Hillyar,
a  |H»rsonal  friend  of  Capt.  Porter,  and  her  consort
the  "Cherub,"  also  arrived  and  anchored  near  the
"  Essex,"  and,  after  obtaining  sjipplies,  cruised  otT
Valparaiso  for  six  weeks.  Porter  determined  to  es-
ca|x>,  and  made  sail  for  the  open  sea ;  but  a  heavy
squall  disabled  the  "  Essex,"  which  was  forced  to
return  to  harbor.  The  enemy,  disregarding  the
neutrality  of  the  harbor,  followed,  took  position
under  her  stern,  and  opened  fire  on  28  March,  1814.
The  "  Essex  "  was  of  800  tons,  mounting  32  guns,
with  a  crew  of  255,  while  the  "  Phoebe "'  was  of  900
tons,  mounting  53  guns,  and  had  a  crew  of  320,  and
her  consort,  the  "Cherub,"  which  attacked  the
"  Essex "  on  her  starl)oard  l>ow,  carried  28  guns,
18  thirty-two-pound  carronades,  and  2  long  nines
on  the  quarter-deck  and  forecastle,  and  a  crew  of
180.  Hoth  ships  had  picked  crews  and  were  sent
to  the  Pacific  to  destroy  the  "  Essex."  Their  flags
bore  the  motto  "God  and  country,  British  sailors'
best  rights;  traitors  offend  Iwth."  In  reply  Capt.
Porter  wrote  at  his  mizzen,  "  God,  our  country,  and
lil)erty ;  tyrants  offend  them."  The  "Essex  Jr."
took  no  part  in  the  action,  her  armament  being
too  liglit  to  be  of  service.  The  engagement,  which
wjis  one  of  the  most  desperate  and  remarkable  in
naval  history,  lasted  two  hours  and  thirty  minutes,
and,  excei)t  the  few  minutes  they  were  repairing
damages,  the  firing  was  incessant.  The  "  Essex  "
ran  out  three  long  gnus  at  the  stern  ports,  which
in  half  an  hour  forced  her  antagonist  to  retire  for
rejiaii-s.  The  "  Plicebe  "  was  armed  with  guns  of
long  range,  while  those  of  the  "  Essex  "  were  mostly
carronatles.  Capt.  Hillyar  therefore  drew  off  to  a
distance  where  he  w>us  beyond  the  fire  of  the  "  Es-
sex," and  then  kept  his  guns  stea<lily  at  work  till  the
"  Essex  "  became  a  helpless  wreck  and  surrendered,
having  suffered  a  heavy  loss  of  men.  Capt.  Porter
and  Lieut.  Stephen  Decatur  MacKnight  were  the
oidy  commissioned  oflicers  that  remained  unhurt.
The  latter,  who  was  exchanged  with  others  for  a
jiart  of  the  "Sir  Andrew  Hammond's"  crew,  sailed
in  a  Swedish  brig,  bound  for  England,  and  was  lost
at  sell.  Porter  wrote  to  the  secretary  of  the  naw :
"  We  have  Ijeen  unfortunate,  but  not  disgraced."
From  the  "Tagus,"  which  arrived  a  few  days  after
Porter's  capture,  he  learned  that  other  ships  were
cruising  in  search  of  the  "  Essex,"  to  possess  which
coft  the  British  government  nearly  $2,000,000.
The  "Essex  Jr."  brought  the  survivors  to  the
United  States.  At  Sandv  Hook  thev  fell  in  with
the  British  ship-of-war  "The  Saturn,''  under  Capt.
Nash,  who  at  first  treated  the  crew  with  civility,
but  afterward  examined  their  passport  and  de-
tainetl  the  "Essex  Jr.,"  declaring  Capt.  Porter
a  prisoner  and  no  longer  under  parole  to  Capt.
Hillyar.  Early  on  the  following  day  Capt.  Por-
ter escaped,  leaving  a  message  that  "most  Brit-
ish officers  were  not  only  destitute  of  honor,  but
regardless  of  the  honor  of  each  other;  that  he  was
armed,  and  prepared  to  defend  himself  against  his


boats,  if  sent  in  pursuit  of  him ;  and  that  he  must
be  met,  if  met  at  all,  by  an  enemy."  With  much
difllcultv  he  reached  Babylon,  L.  1.,  and  on  arriv-
ing in  N'ew  York  was  received  with  distinction,  and
wiLs  given  the  thanks  of  congress  and  of  several
state  legislatures.  The  "  i^ssex  Jr."  was  condemned
and  sold  on  her  arrival  in  New  York.  From  April,
1815,  till  December,  1823,  Capt.  Porter  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  board  of  navy  commissioners,  which  post
he  resigned  to  command  the  expedition  called  the
Mosquito  fleet  that  was  fitted  out  against  pirates  in
the  West  Indies.  A  depot  was  established  at  Thomp-
son island,  near  Key  West,  and  a  system  of  cruising
was  arranged.  In  Octt)ber,  1824,  upon  evidence
that  valuable  goods  had  been  stored  by  pirates  at
Foxardo,  Porto  Rico,  Com.  Porter  despatched  the
"Beagle"  to  investigate  the  matter;  but  the  com-
manding officer,  on  landing,  was  arrested  and
thrown  into  j)rison  on  the  charge  of  being  a  pirate.
Com.  Porter  then  sailed  for  the  island,  landed  a  force
of  200  men,  and  demanded  an  apology,  which  was
promptly  given.  The  government,  deeming  that
he  had  exceeded  his  powei*s,  brought  him  before  a
court-martial,  and  he  was  sentenced  to  suspension
for  six  months.  He  resigned  his  commission  on  18
Aug.,  1820,  and  entered  the  service  of  Mexico  as  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  naval  forces  of  that  country.
He  remained  in  this  service  until  1829,  when  he  re-
turned to  the  United  States,  having  been  treated
treacherously  by  the  Mexican  officials.  He  was
afterward  appointed  consul-general  to  the  Barbary
states,  from  which  post  he  was  transferred  to  Con-
stantinople as  charge  d'affaires,  and  was  made  min-
ister resident  there  in  1831,  which  office  he  held  un-
til his  death.  He  was  buried  in  the  grounds  of  the
naval  asylum  in  Philadelphia.  It  is  a  singular  fact
that  the  two  most  distinguished  officers  of  the  U.S.
navy  fought  their  first  battles  under  his  command
— his  son,  David  D.,  and  David  G.  Farragut  {q.  v.),
the  latter  of  whom  he  adopted  in  1809.  Com.  Por-
ter was  the  author  of  "  Journal  of  a  Cruise  made  to
the  Pacifick  Ocean  in  the  U.  S.  Frigate  '  Essex '  in
1812-'13-'14."  illusti'ated  with  his  own  drawings
(2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1815 ;  2d  ed..  New  York,  1822),
and  "  Constantinople  and  its  Environs,"  by  an
American  long  resident  (2  vols.,  1835).  See  "  Trial
of  Commodore  David  Porter  before  a  Court-Mar-
tial  "  (Washington,  1825).  His  life  was  written  by
his  son  (Albany,  1875). — His  son,  William  Uavid,
b.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  10  March,  1809 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  1  May,  1864,  was  educated  in  Phila-
delphia, and  ap}X)inted  to  the  U.  S.  navy  from
Massjichusetts  as  midshipman  on  1  Jan.,  1823.  He
became  lieutenant  on  31  Dec.,  1833,  served  on  the
"  F'ranklin,"  "  Brandywine,"  "  Natchez,"  "  Experi-
ment," "  United  States,"  and  "  Mississippi,"  and  in
1843  was  assigned  to  the  home  squadron.  He  com-
manded the  store-ship  "  Erie "  in  1849,  and,  in
1851,  the  "  Waterwitch."  On  13  Sept.,  1855,  he  was
placed  on  the  reserved  list,  but  he  was  restored  to
active  duty  as  commander  on  14  Sept.,  1859.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  serving  on
the  U.  S.  sloop  "  St.  Mary's,"  in  the  Pacific.  He  was
ordered  to  the  Mississippi  to  assist  in  fitting  out
the  gun-boat  flotilla  with  which  he  accompanied
Com.  Andrew  H.  Foote  up  Tennessee  river,  and
commanded  the  "Essex,"  which  he  had  named  for
his  father's  ship,  in  the  attack  on  Fort  Henry,  6
Feb.,  1862,  during  which  engagement  he  was  scalded
and  temporarily  blinded  by  steam  from  a  boiler
that  had  been  pierced  by  shot.  He  also  commanded
the  "Essex"  in  the  battle  of  Fort  Donelson,  14
Feb.,  1802,  and  fought  in  the  same  vessel  past  the
batteries  on  the  Mississippi  to  jofh  the  fleet  at
Vicksburg. lie  attacked  the Confederate ram


\


( J~'  Cr.a'l:^:^^  (J^c^^^TcX^


A


D.  Appleton  &Co


PORTER


PORTER


75


"Arkansas"  above  Baton  Rouge,  15  Julv,  1862,
and  disjiblwl  her,  and  her  mn^zino  shortly  after-
ward t'X{>l(KU>d.  He  yf&»  made  cninmo<lure  on  16
Julv,  1M(]2.  niul  then  Ixuiiltartled  Natcht'/.  and  at-
tacked tlie  Vifksburu  btittt-ries  and  Port  Hudson.
Sub8i>qui'titly  lie  servwl  hut  little,  owin^  to  impaired
health.  He  hml  two  .sons  in  the  Confederate  ser-
vice.—Another  son,  David  Dixon,  naval  ofllcer,
b.  in  Chester,  Delaware  eo,.  Pa.,  8  June,  1813;  d.
in  Washintrton,  I).  C,  13  Feb.,  18U1,  in  1824,
accompanied  his  father  in  the  "John  Adanis"  to
8um)ress  piracy  in  the  West  Indies,  was  apiH>inted
midshipman  in  the  Mexican  navv,  and  served  un-
der his  cousin,  Capt.  David  if.  Porter,  in  the
"Guerrero,"  which  sailed  fn)m  Vera  Cruz  in  1837,
and  had  a  rouch  experience  with  a  Snanish  frigate,
"  La  ljealta<l,  Capt.  Porter  Iwing  killed  in  the  ac-
tion. David  D.  enteretl  the  U.  S.  navy  as  midship-
man on  3  Feb.,  1839,  cruised  in  the  Mediterranean,
and  then  served  on  the  coast  survev  until  he  was
promoleil  to  lieutenant,  27  Feb.,  1841.  He  was  in
the  Metliterranean  and  I3razilian  waters  until  1845,
when  he  was  ap|)ointed  to  the  naval  observatory  in
Washington,  and  in  1840  he  was  sent  by  the  gov-
ernment on  a  secret  mission  to  Hayti,  and  reported
on  the  condition  of  affairs  there.  He  serveu  dur-
ing the  entire  Mexican  war,  had  charge  of  the  na-
val rendezvous  in  New  Orleans,  and  was  engaged
in  everj'  action  on  the  coast,  first  as  lieutenant  and
afterward  as  commanding  officer  of  the  •'  Spitfire."
Subsequently  he  returned  to  the  coast  survey,  and,
on  the  discovery  of  gold  in  California,  obtained  a
furlough  and  commanded  the  California  mail-
steamers  "  I*anama"  and  "Georgia"  between  New
York  and  the  Isthmus  of  Panama.  At  the  l)egin-
ning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  ordered  to  command
the  steam  fri^te  "Powhatan,"  which  was  de-
snatched  to  join  the  Gulf  blockatling  squadron  at
Pensacola,  and  to  aid  in  re-enforcing  Fort  Pickens.
On  32  April,  18G1,  he  was  appointed  commander,
and  subsecjuently  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the
mortar  fleet,  consisting  of  31  schooners,  each  car-
rying a  13-inch  mortar,  and,  with  5  steamers  as
convoys,  joined  Farragut's  fleet  in  March,  1863,
and  lx)mbarded  Fort  Jackson  and  Fort  St.  Philip,
below  New  Orleans,  from  18  till  24  April,  1862,  dur-
ing which  engagement  20,000  Iwmbs  were  exploded
in  the  Confetlerate  works.  Farragut,  having  de-
stroyed the  enemy's  fleet  of  fifteen  vessels,  left  the
reduction  of  these  forts  to  Porter,  and  they  sur-
rendered on  28  April,  1862.  He  assisted  Farragut
in  all  the  latter's  operations  between  New  Orleans
and  Vicksburg,  where  he  effectively  boml>arded  the
forts  and  enabled  the  fleet  to  pass  in  safety.  In-
forming the  secretary  of  the  navy  of  the  surrender
of  Vicksburg,  Admiral  Porter  writes :  "  The  navy
has  necessarily  performetl  a  less  conspicuous  part
in  the  capture  of  Vicksburg  than  the  army;  still  it
has  l)een  employed  in  a  manner  highly  creditable
to  all  concerned.  The  gun-lwats  have  been  con-
stantly below  Vicksburg  in  shelling  the  works,  and
with  success  co-o[)erating  heartilv  with  the  left
wing  of  the  army.  The  mortar-boats  have  been
at  worlc  for  forty-two  days  without  intermission,
throwing  shells  into  all  parts  of  the  city,  even
reaching  the  works  in  the  n'ar  of  Vicksburg  and  in
front  of  our  trfH)ps,  a  distance  of  three  miles.  .  •  .
I  stationed  the  smaller  class  of  gun-boats  to  keep
the  lianks  of  the  Mississippi  clear  of  guerillas,  who
were  assembling  in  force  and  with  a  large  number
of  cannon  to  block  up  the  river  and  cut  off  the
tran8|)orts  bringing  down  supplies,  re-enforcements,
and  ammunition  for  the  army.  Though  the  rebels
on  several  wcasiom-  built  batteries,  and  with  a  large
foroe  attempted  to  sink  or  capture  the  transports,


they  never  succeeded,  but  were  defeated  by  the  gun-
boats with  severe  loss  on  all  occasions."  While
the  Confe<lerales  were  making  efforts  to  repair  the
"  Indianola,"  which  they  had  captured.  Com.  Porter
fltted  an  old  scow  to  look  like  one  of  his  "turtle"
gun-ljoats,  with  two  catKXfs  for  (juarter-boats,  a
smoke-stack  of  (X)rk-lMirrels,  and  mud  furnatres  in
which  fire  was  kindUnl.  This  wa^  called  the  "  Tur-
retetl  Monster"  and  set  adrift  with  no  one  on
Ixmrd.  A  tremendous  cannonade  from  the  Con-
fixlerate  batteries  failed  to  stop  her,  and  the  au-
thorities  at  Vicksinirg  hastily  uestroyed  the  "In-
dianola," while  the  supjKJsed  monitor  drifted  for  an
hour  amid  a  niin  of  shot  Ix-fore  the  enemy  discov-
ered the  trick.  In  July,  Commander  Porter  was
ordered  with  his  mortar  flotilla  to  Fort  Monroe,
where  he  resigned  charge  of  it,  and  was  ordered  to
command  the  Mississippi  squadron,  as  acting  rear-
atlmiral,  in  September,  1862.  He  improvised  a
navy-yard  at  Mound  City,  increased  the  numljerof
his  stjuadron,  which  consisted  of  125  vessels,  and,  in
co-operation  with  Gen.  Sherman's  army,  captured
Arkansas  Post  in  January,  186^1  For  his  services  at
Vicksburg  Porter  received  the  thanks  of  congrass
and  the  commissian  of  rear-admiral,  dated  4  July,

1863.  Soon  afterward  he  ran  past  the  batteries
of  Vicksburg  and  captured  the  Confederate  forts
at  Grand  Gulf,  which  put  him  into  communication
with  Gen.  Grant,  who,  on  18  May,  bv  means  of  the
fleet,  placed  himself  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg,  and
from  that  time  the  energies  of  the  army  aiul  navy
were  united  to  capture  that  stronghold,  which  was
accoinnlished  on  4  July,  1863.  On  1  Au^.,  1863,  he
arrived  in  New  Orleans  in  his  flag-ship  "  Black
Hawk,"  accompanied  by  the  gun-lx)at  "Tuscum-
bia,"  and  during  the  remainder  of  1863  his  squad-
ron was  employed  to  keep  the  Mississippi  river
open.  In  the  spring  of  1864  he  co-operated  with
Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  in  the  unsuccessful  Red
river  expedition,  and  through  the  skill  of  Lieut.-
Col.  Jose[)h  liailey  (q.  v.)  the  fleet  was  saved.  In
October,  1864,  he  was  transferred  to  the  Nortli  At-
lantic squadron,  which  embracetl  within  its  limits
the  Cape  Fear  river  and  the  port  of  Wilmington,
N.  C. He  appeared  at  Fort  Fisher  on  24  Dec.,

1864,  with  35  regular  cruisers,  5  iron-clads,  and  a
reserve  of  19  vessels,  and  began  to  bombard  the
forts  at  the  mouth  of  Cape  Fear  river.  "In  one
hour  and  fifteen  minutes  after  the  first  shot  was
fired,"  says  Admiral  Porter.  "  not  a  shot  came  from
the  fort.  Two  magazines  had  been  blown  up  by
our  shells,  and  the  fort  set  on  fire  in  several  places,
and  such  a  torrent  of  missiles  was  falling  into  and
bursting  over  it  that  it  was  impossible  for  any
human  lieing  to  stand  it.  Finding  that  the  lot-
teries were  silenced  completelv.  I  directed  the  ships
to  keep  up  a  moderate  fire.  In  hope  of  attracting
the  attention  of  the  tmnsjxtrts  and  bringing  them
in."  After  a  rec<mnoissance.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.
Butler,  who  commanded  the  military  force,  decided
that  Fort  Fisher  was  sul)stantially  uninjureil  and
could  not  be  taken  by  assault,  and  returned  with
his  command  to  Hampton  lioads,  Va.  Admiral
Porter  reouested  that  the  enterprise  should  not  be
abandoneii,  anil  a  second  military  force  of  al>out
8.500  men,  commanded  bv  Gen.  Alfred  H.Terry
(o.  J*.),  arrived  off  Fort  Fisher  on  13  Jan.,  1865.
This  fleet  was  increase*!  during  the  bombardment
by  additional  land  an<l  naval  forces,  and,  after  seven
hours  of  desperate  fighting,  the  works  were  cap-
tured on  15  Jan.,  186.5,  by  a  combinetl  body  of  sol-
diers, sailors,  and  marines.  According  "to  Gen.
Grant,  "this  was  the  most  formidable  armada  ever
collecte<l  for  concentration  upon  one  given  point."
Rear-Admiral  Porter  received  a  vote  of  thanks


76


PORTER


PORTER


from  congress,  which  was  the  fourth  that  he  re-
ceived during  the  war,  including  the  general  one
for  the  capture  of  New  Orleans,  He  was  promoted
vice-adrninil  on  2^)  July,  1806.  and  served  as  super-
intendent of  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  till  1869,
when  he  was  detailed  for  duty  in  the  navv  depart-
ment in  Washington,  On  15  Aug.,  1H76,  he  wjis
appointed  admiral,  which  rank  he  held  for  two
decades.  lie  was  the  author  of  a  "  Life  of  Com-
mtxlore  David  Porter"  (Albany.  1875):  a  romance
entitled  "Allan  Dare  and  Roljort  le  Diablc"  (New
York,  1885),  which  has  been  dramatized,  and  was
prtMluce<l  in  New  York  in  1887 ;  "  Incidents  and
Anecdotes  of  the  Civil  War"(lM85);  "Harry  Mar-
line "  (1886) ;  and  "  History  of  the  Navy  in  the  War
of  the  Rebellion  "  (New  York,  1887).— Another  son.
Tlieodoric  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Wjishington,  D.  C,
10  Aug.,  1817;  d.  in  Texas  in  March,  184«>,  was  ap-
pointed a  catlet  at  West  Point,  resigning  after  two
years.  He  was  api>ointed  by  President  Jackson  2d
lieutenant  in  the  4th  infantry,  served  under  Gen.
Zachary  Taylor  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  with
Mexico,  and  was  the  first  American  officer  killed  in
the  conflict,  having  been  sent  with  twelve  men  on
a  scouting  ex|K>(lition  near  Fort  Brown  on  the  Rio
Grande,  where  he  was  surrounded  by  a  large  force
of  Mexican  cavalry.  Tlie  commanding  officer  called
upon  Lieut.  Porter  to  surrender,  which  he  refused,
and  was  cut  to  {)ieces.  only  one  of  his  escort  escap-
ing.—Another  son,  Henry  Ogden,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Washington,  I).  C.  in  1823 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
in  1872.  was  appointed  midshipman  in  1840,  resign-
ing in  1847.  He  served  in  one  of  Walker's  expedi-
tions to  Central  America,  where  he  fought  bravely,
and  W!is  wounded  several  times.  Afterward  he  was
appointed  lieutenant  in  the  U.  S.  revenue  marine,
and  during  the  civil  war  was  made  acting  master  in
the  navy.  24  April,  1862,  serving  as  executive  officer
on  the  "  Hattenis  *'  when  that  vessel  was  sunk  by  the
Confederate  steamer  "  Alabama."  He  died  from  the
effect  of  his  wounds.— Com.  David's  nephew,  David
H.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New  Castle.  Del.,  in  1804  ;  d.
near  Havana,  Cuba,  in  March,  1828,  entered  the  U.  S.
navy  as  midshipman  on  4  Aug.,  1814,  became  lieu-
tenant on  13  .Jan..  1825,  and  resigned  on  26  July,
1826.  He  joined  his  uncle  while  commander-in-
chief  of  the  Mexican  navy,  and  in  1827  sailed  in
command  of  the  brig  "  Guerrero,"  built  by  Henry
Eckford.  of  New  York,  taking  this  vessel  to  Vera
<'ruz.  He  fell  in  with  a  fleet  of  50  merchant  ves-
sels, fifteen  miles  below  Havana,  sailing  under  con-
voy of  two  Spanish  war-vessels,  carrying  together
29  guns.  Driving  them  into  the  port  of  Little
.Mariel,  after  a  conflict  of  two  hours  he  silenced  the
fire  of  the  two  brigs,  cutting  them  severely,  and
sunk  a  number  of  the  convoy.  A  twenty-four-
pound  shot  from  a  battery  on  shore  cut  the  cable
of  the  "Guerrero."  and  the  vessel  drifted  on  shore,
and  went  afterward  to  sea  to  repair  damages.  In
the  mean  tinu-  she  was  attacked  by  the  "  Lealtad,"
of  64  guns,  and  after  a  very  severe  engagement,
lasting  two  hours  and  a  quarter,  in  which  Capt.
Porter  was  killed,  eighty  of  his  officers  and  men
being  either  killed  or  wounded,  the  masts  and  sails
of  the  "  Guerrero  "  all  shot  away  and  the  hull  rid-
dled, the  "Guerrero"  was  surrendered  and  taken
into  Havana. — David  Dixon's  cousin,  Fitz-John,
soldier,  b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  13  June,  1822,  is  the
son  of  Commander  John  Porter,  of  the  U.  S.  navy.
He  studied  at  Phillips  Exeter  academy,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1845,  and  as-
signed to  the  4th  artillery,  in  which  he  became  2d
lieutenant,  18  June,  1846.  He  served  in  the  Mexi-
can war,  was  commissioned  1st  lieutenant  on  29  May,
and  received  the  brevet  of  captain  on  8  Sept.,  1847,


cavalry
1  May,  1854,  till


for  services  at  Molino  del  Rey,  and  that  of  major
for  Chapultepec.  During  the  assault  on  the  city  of
Mexico  ne  was  wounded  at  lielen  gate.  Afterward
he  was  on  garrison  duty  until  9  July,  1849,  when
he  was  appointed  assistant  instructor  of  artillery  at
West  Point.  He  became  adjutant  there  in  1853-'4,
and  was  instructor  of
artillery  and
from

11  Sept.,  185.5.  In  1856
he  was  appointed  as-
sistant aajutant- gen-
eral with  the  rank  of
captain,  and  he  served
under  Gen.  Albert  Sid-
ney Johnston  in  the
Utah  expedition  of
1857-'60.  In  1860  he
became  assistant  in-
spector -  general,  with
headquarters  in  New
York  city,  and  super-
intended the  protec-
tion of  the  railroad  be-
tween Baltimore  and
Harrisburg  during  the
Baltimore  riots.  When
communication  was  in-
terrupted with  Washington  at  the  breaking  out  of
the  civil  war,  he  assumed  the  responsibility  of  reply-
ing in  the  affirmative  to  telegrams  from  Missouri
asking  permission  to  muster  troops  for  the  protec-
tion of  that  state.  His  act  was  approved  by  the  war
department.  During  this  period  he  also  organized
volunteers  in  Pennsylvania.  On  14  May,  1861,  he
became  colonel  of  the  15th  infantry,  a  new  regiment,
and  on  17  May,  1861,  he  was  made  brigadier-general
of  volunteers,  and  assigned  to  duty  in  Washington,
In  1862  he  participated  in  the  Virginia  peninsular
campaign,  served  during  the  siege  of  Yorktown
from  5  April  till  4  May,  1862,  and  upon  its  evacua-
tion was  governor  of  that  place  for  a  short  time.
He  was  given  command  of  the  5th  corps,  which
formed  the  right  wing  of  the  army  and  fought  the
battles  of  Mechanicsville,  26  June,  1862,  and  Gaines's
Mills,  27  June,  1862.  At  Malvern  Hill,  1  July,
1862,  he  commanded  the  left  flank,  which  mainly
resisted  the  assaults  of  that  day.  He  received  the
brevet  of  brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army
for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at  the  bat-
tle of  Chickahominy,  Va.,  27  June,  1862.  He  was
made  major-general  of  volunteers,  4  July,  1862.  and
temporarily  attached  to  Gen.  John  Pope's  Army  of
Virginia.  His  corps,  although  ordered  to  advance,
was  unable  to  move  forward  at  the  second  bat-
tle of  Bull  Run,  29  Aug.,  1862,  but  in  the  afternoon
of  the  30th  it  was  actively  engaged,  and  to  its
obstinate  resistance  it  is  mainly  due  that  the  de-
feat was  not  a  total  rout.  Charges  were  brought
against  him  for  his  inaction  on  the  first  day.  and
he  was  deprived  of  his  command,  but  was  restored
to  duty  at  the  request  of  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,
and  took  part  in  the  Maryland  campaign.  On  27
Nov.,  1862,  Gen.  Porter  was  arraigned  before  a
court-martial  in  Washington,  charged  with  dis-
obeying orders  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,
and  on  21  Jan.,  1863,  he  was  cashiered,  "and  for-
ever disqualified  from  holding  any  office  of  trust
or  profit  under  the  government  of  the  United
States,  for  violation  of  the  9th  and  52d  articles  of
war."  The  justice  of  this  verdict  has  been  the  sub-
ject of  much  controversy.  Gen.  Porter  made  sev-
eral appeals  for  a  reversal  of  the  decision  of  the
court-martial,  and  numerous  petitioift  to  open  the
case  were  addressed  to  the  president  during  the


PORTER


PORTER


77


8uccee<ling  eighteen  years,  as  well  as  memorials
from  various  legislatures,  and  on  28  Dec,  1^W2,  a
bill  for  his  relief  was  presented  in  the  stMiate,  under
the  action  of  an  advisory  lx)ard  appointed  bv  Presi-
dent Haves,  eonsisting  of  (Jen,  .John  M.  Sc^iofleld,
Gen.  Alfred  II.  Terry,  and  (ten.  George  VV.  (letty.
On  4  May,  1882,  the  president  remitted  so  much  of
the  sentenc*  of  the  court-martial  as  forever  dis-
qualified (ten.  Porter  from  holding  any  oflice  of
trust  or  profit  under  the  government ;  but  the  bill
for  his  relief  failetl  in  its  )>assage. A  technical  ob-

{'ection  caused  President  Arthur  to  veto  a  'similar
till  that  was  passed  by  the  48th  congress,  but
another  was  passed  sul)sequently  wlTich  was  signed
by  President  Cleveland,  and  he  was  restored  to  the
U.  S.  army  as  colonel  on  7  Aug.,  1880.  Gen.  Grant,
after  his  term  of  service  as  president  hati  ended,
though  he  had  refused  many  |X!titions  to  open  the
case,  studied  it  more  thoroughly,  and  published  his
conclusions  in  December,  1882,  in  an  article  en-
titled "An  Undeserved  Stigma,"  in  which  he  said
that  he  was  convinced  of  Gjen.  Porter's  innocence.
After  leaving  the  army,  Gen.  Porter  engaged  in
business  in  New  York  citv,  was  subsequently
superintendent  of  the  New  .Tersey  asylum  for  the
insane,  and  in  Februaiy,  1875,  was  mmle  commis-
sioner of  public  works.  lie  was  police  commis-
sioner in  1884-'8,  and  then  became  commissioner  of
the  fire  department.  In  18G9  the  khedive  of  Egypt
offered  him  the  post  of  commander  of  his  army,
with  the  rank  of  major-general,  which  he  declined.

PORTER,  Ellphalet,  clergyman,  b.  in  North
Bridgewater,  Ma«s.,  11  June,  1758;  d.  in  Roxburv,
Mass.,  7  Dec,  1833.  His  father.  John  (1715-1802),
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1736,  was  pastor  of
the  1st  Congregational  church  of  North  Bridge-
water  from  1 740  till  his  de«th,  and  published  sev-
eral controversial  pamphlets  in  defence  of  Calvin-
ism. The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1777,
studied  theology  with  his  father,  and  was  ordained
over  the  Congregational  society  of  Roxbury  on  2
Oct.,  1782,  where  he  continued  until  his  death.  In
1830  Rev.  George  Putnam  was  associated  with  him
in  his  pastorate.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Academy
of  arts  and  sciences,  an  overseer  of  Harvard  and  a
member  of  its  corporation,  an  original  trustee  of
the  Massachusetts  Bible  society,  and  a  founder  of
the  State  temperance  society.  Harvard  gave  him
the  degree  «f  I).  D.  in  1807.'  He  published  several
sermons,  and  a  "  Eulogv  on  Washington  "  (18(X)).

PORTER,  George  W.,  soldier,  b.  about  1806;
d.  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,  7  Nov.,  1856.  He  was  a
lieutenant  m  the  38th  U.  S.  infantry  from  May.
1814.  till  June,  1815,  and  made  many  valuable  in-
ventions, including  the  Porter  rifle.

PORTER,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middle-
borough,  Mass.,  21  March,  1808;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  16  April,  1888.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  "lie
entered  a  cotton-factory  in  his  native  town  with
the  intention  of  learning  the  business  of  a  manu-
facturer, but  three  years  later  he  determined  to
study  for  the  ministry.  He  attended  the  Kent's
Hill  seminary  at  Readfleld,  Me.,  and  at  the  age  of
twenty-two  was  admitted  a  member  of  the  New
England  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church.  During  the  early  period  of  his  ministry
Dr.  Porter  held  many  pastorates  in  and  near  Bos-
ton. For  several  years  he  was  a  presiding  elder
of  the  conference,  and  from  1844  till  1872  ne  was
a  delegate  to  the  general  conference.  From  1852
till  18.55  he  was  a  memlier  of  the  board  of  over-
seers of  Harvard,  being  the  first  Methotlist  clergy-
man to  hold  that  office.  From  18.55  till  1871  he
was  trustee  of  Wesleyan  university,  which  con-
ferred upon  him  the  degree  of  A.  M. In  1856  he


was  elected  one  of  the  l)ook  agents  in  New  York
city,  having  in  charge  the  Meth<xlist  book  concern,
which  oflice  he  held  for  twelve  years.  From  18(J8
till  1882  he  was  secretary  of  the  National  temi)er-
ance  society,  and  he  was  also  one  of  the  earlier
memljers  of  the  New  England  anti-slavery  s<x;iety.
He  was  closely  connected  with  the  alK>lition  move-
ment, and  was  at  one  time  in  danger  from  the  mob
while  delivering  a  speech  in  lioston  U|X)n  the  sub-
ject. He  was  a  preacher  of  the  old  schfxil,  collo-
?uial  in  manner,  but  of  commanding  presence,
n  1856  he  received  the  degreee  of  I).  I),  from
McKendrick  college.  Illinois.  Besides  contributing
fre<iuently  to  various  periodicals.  Dr.  Porter  pul>
lished  "(Jamp  Meetings  Considered"  (New  York,
1849) ;  "  Chart  of  Life  "  (1^55) ;  "  True  Evangelist "
(1860);  "The  Winning  Worker;  or  the  Possibili-
ties, Duty,  and  Methods  of  Doing  Good  to  Men  "
(1874);  "Compendium  of  Methodism"  (1875);
"  History  of  Metho<lism  "  (1876);  "  Revival  of  Re-
ligion" (1877);  "  Hints  to  Self-educatetl  Ministers,
etc."  (1879);  "Christianity  Demonstrated  by  Ex-
perience, etc."  (1882);  "  Self- Reliance  Encouraged,
etc"  (1887);  and  "  Commonplace  Book."

PORTER,  James  Bavis,  governor  of  Tennes-
see, b.  in  Paris,  Henry  co.,  Tenn.,  7  Dec,  1828.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Nashville  in
1846,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851,
and  practised  his  profession.  He  was  elected  to  the
legislature  in  18.59,  and  served  through  the  civil
war  in  the  Confederate  army  as  adjutant  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Cheatham,  after  which  he
resumed  the  practice  of  law,  was  a  delegate  to  the
Constitutional  con  venti<m  of  Tennessee  in  1870,  and
in  that  year  was  elected  circuit  judge  for  the  12th
judicial  circuit  of  the  state,  which  f)ost  he  resigned
in  1874.  From  1874  till  1879  he  was  governor  of
Tennessee.  In  1880  he  was  chairman  of  the  Tennes-
see delegation  to  the  Democratic  national  conven-
tion, and  from  that  year  till  1884  he  was  president  of
the  Nashville,  Chattanooga,  and  St.  Louis  railroad
company.  In  1885-'7  he  was  assistant  secretary  of
state.  Gov.  Porter  is  vice-president  of  the  Tennes-
see historical  society  for  west  Tennessee,  a  trustee
of  the  Peabody  fund,  and  is  president  of  the  board
of  trustees  of  the  University  of  Nashville,  from
which  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1879.

PORTER,  John  Addison,  chemist,  b.  in  Cats-
kill,  N.  Y.,  15  March,  1822 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  25  Aug..  18(>G.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1842.  and  after  further  study  in  Philadelphia
l)ec}ime  in  1844  tutor  and  then  professor  of  rhetoric
at  Delaware  college  in  Newark,  Del.  In  1847  he
went  abroad  and  studied  agricultural  chemistry  for
three  years  under  Liebig.  at  the  University  of
Giessen.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States  he
was  assistant  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of
Harvard  for  a  few  months,  but  in  1850  he  was  a|)-
pointed  professor  of  chemistrj'  applied  to  the  arts
at  Brown,  and  in  1852  he  wa-^  called  to  succeed
Prof.  John  P.  Norton  in  the  chair  of  agricultural
chemistry  in  Yale  (now  Sheffield)  scientific  school.
In  18.56  he  was  given  charge  of  the  department  of
organic  chemistry,  and  so  continued  until  1864,
when  failing  health  led  to  his  resignation.  Prof.
Porter  was  particularly  interested  in  the  welfare  of
the  scientific  school,  and  did  much  to  ensure  it«
success.  He  married  a  daughter  of  Joseph  E.
Sheffield  (q.  v.\  and  his  influence  and  efforts  were
potent  toward  securing  the  generous  donation  from
the  latter  that  resulted  in  placing  the  school  on  a
firm  financial  basis.  The  present  great  interest  in
obtiiining  a  knowledge  of  scientific  agriculture  is
largely  the  outcome  of  his  work.  Prof.  Porter  was
a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  contributed  va-


78


PORTER


PORTER


rious  papers  to  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science."
Ho  also  estal)lislie(l  the  "Connecticut  War  Record,"
a  monthly  |)i>ri«xlical,  devoted  to  the  publication  of
news  from  the  Connecticut  regiments  at  the  front
during;  the  civil  war.  Prof.  Porter  published
"  Princioles  of  Chemistry"  (New  York,  lH5fi);
"First  ii<K)k  of  Chemistry  and  Allied  Sciences"
(IH.")?);  and  "Selections  from  the  Kalevala,  the
Great  Finnish  Epic"  (18<J8).  In  1H71  the  Scroll
and  key  society  of  Yale,  of  which  he  was  a  founder
in  1H42,  established  in  his  memory  the  John  A,
Porter  university  prize  of  $250,  which  is  awarded
annually  for  the  best  essjiy  on  a  given  sui)ject,  and
is  the  only  prize  o|>en  to  all  the  membi-rs  of  Yale
university. — His  s<^m.  John  Addison,  journalist,
b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  17  April,  185(5,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1878,  and  has  l)een  connected  with
various  journals.  He  has  contributed  to  ]>eriodi-
cals,  and  publisheti  monographs  on  "The  Corpora-
tion of  Yale  College "  (Washington,  1885),  and
"  Administration  of  Citv  of  Washington  "  (1885) ;
and  a  volume  of  "Sketches  of  Yale  Life"  (1886).

PORTER,  Joshna,  physician,  b.  in  Lebanon,
Conn.,  in  1730;  d.  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  12  Sept.,
1825.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1754,  studied
medicine,  and  practised  in  Salisbury.  He  served
in  the  state  assembly  before  the  Revolution,  and
was  one  of  the  committee  of  the  pay  table,  and
colonel  of  state  militia.  He  was  agent  to  super-
intend the  manufac^ture  of  the  first  home-made
cannon-balls  that  were  used  during  the  war.  At
the  battle  of  Saratoga,  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  offi-
cers, he  led  a  regiment  as  a  volunteer,  and  he  at-
tended the  wounded  after  the  fight.  For  more
than  fifty  years  he  held  local  offices  of  trust  in
Connecticut. — His  son.  Peter  Bnel,  soldier,  b.  in
Salisbury,  C(mn.,  4  Aug.,  1773;  d.  in  Niagara  Falls,
N.  Y.,  20  March,  1844,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1791,  and,  after  studying  at  Litchfield  law-.school,
began  jtractiee  at  ('anandaigua,  N.  Y.,  in  1795,
and  afterward  removed  to  Black  Rock,  Niagara
county.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1808  as  a
Democrat,  and  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on
foreign  relations  prepared  and  introduced  the  cele-
brated rej)ort  in  1811  that  recommended  war  with
Great  Britain.  Upon  the  opening  of  hostilities  he
resigned  his  seat  in  congress,  and  became  an  active
participant  in  the  contest.  He  declined  a  general's
commission,  and  subsequently  accepted  the  com-
mand of  a  l)ody  of  volunteer  troops  from  Penn-
sylvania and  New  York,  in  connection  with  In-
dian warriors  from  the  Six  Nations.  His  operations
were  chieflv  in  west-
em  New  York  and
on  the  Canada  side  of
the  Niagara.  When
Black  Rock,  after-
ward part  of  Buffalo,
fell  into  the  hands  of
the  British  in  1813,
Gen.  Porter's  house
becamethe  headquar-
ters of  the  enemy,
and  he  rallied  a  force
and  expelled  them,
^j  - ^A^gp-. *  mortally wounding

/^T'r^^'^iP^^  Col.  Bishop,  the  com-

n  — wF^ \  mander. He  was  en-

gaged in  Gen.  Alex-
ander Smyth's  at-
tempt to  invade  Can-
a«la,  and  his  remarks
on  its  conduct  led  to
a  duel  between  him  and  Smyth.  He  exhibited
"great  personal  gallantry"  at  the  battle  of  Chip-


>  f


pewa,  and  led  the  volunteers  in  the  successful  en-
gagement at  Lundy's  I^ane,  25  July,  1814,  where
Gen,  Scott  was  itj  command.  At  the  siege  of  Fort
Erie  he  led  a  brilliant  sortie.  For  his  military
services  he  received  a  gold  medal  from  congress,
and  a  sword  from  the  legislature  of  New  York.  In
1815  President  Madison  appointed  him  commander-
in-chief  of  the  army ;  but  he  declined,  and  he
served  again  in  congress  from  December,  1815,  till
his  resignation  in  the  following  year.  He  was  one
of  the  earliest  projectors  of  the  firie  canal,  and  was
appointed,  with  Gouverneur  Morris  and  De  Witt
Chnton,  on  the  commission  to  explore  the  route.
In  1816  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  for  de-
termining the  northwestern  l)oundary,  and  in  1828
he  was  made  secretary  of  war  by  President  Adams.
— Peter  Buel's  grandson,  Peter  Augustus,  soldier,
b.  in  Black  Rock,  N.  Y.,  in  1827;  killed  in  the  bat-
tle of  Cold  Harbor,  Va.,  3  June,  1864,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1845,  and  subsequently  studied
in  the  universities  of  Heidelberg  and  Berlin.  He
was  a  member  of  the  New  York  legislature  in  1862.
and  in  that  year  he  raised  a  regiment,  afterward
consolidated  with  the  8th  New  York  artillery,  was
placed  in  command,  and  served  on  garrison  duty.
When  he  was  oflfered  the  nomination  for  secretary
of  state  of  New  York  on  the  Republican  ticket  in
1863,  he  declined  t«  leave  the  army.  He  was  or-
dered to  the  field  in  May.  1864,  participated  in  the
battles  of  Spottsylvania  and  Totopotomoy,  and
fell  while  storming  a  breastwork  at  Cold  Harbor. —
Peter  Buel's  nephew,  Augustus  Steele,  senator,  b.
in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  18  Jan.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Niag-
ara Falls,  N.  Y.,  18  Sept.,  1872,  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1818,  studied  law  in  Canandaigua,
and  settled  in  Black  Rock,  N.  Y.,  and  afterwanJ  in
Detroit,  Mich.  He  became  mayor  of  that  city  in
1836,  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Whig  in
1838,  served  one  term,  and  in  1848  removed  to
Niagara  Falls,  N.  Y.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Union  convention  in  1866.

PORTER,  Lvdia  Ann  Emerson,  author,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  14  Oct.,  1816,  She  is  a  second
cousin  of  Ralph  W.  Emerson,  and  was  educated  at
the  Ipswich  female  academy  from  1829  till  1832,
then  taught  in  Royalton,  Vt.,  and  in  1834  estab-
lished a  school  in  Springfield,  Vt.  In  1836  she  be-
came principal  of  Putnam  female  seminary,  in
Zanesville,  Ohio,  and  she  subsequently  took  charge
of  the  female  department  of  Delaware  academy,
Newark,  Ohio.  In  1841  she  married  Charles  E.
Porter,  of  Springfield,  Vt.,  and  she  has  since  re-
sided in  that  tovm.  Mrs.  Porter  is  the  author-of
"  Uncle  Jerry's  Letters  to  Young  Mothers "  (Bos-
ton. 1854)  and  "  The  Lost  Will"  (1860),  and  several
Sunday-school  books.

PORTER,  Moses,  soldier,  b.  in  Danvers,  Mass.,
in  1755;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  14  April,  1822.
He  entered  the  Revolutionary  army  as  a  lieuten-
ant in  Capt.  Samuel  R.  Trevett's  artillery,  19  May,
1775,  served  at  Bunker  Hill  and  through  the  war,
and  was  one  of  the  few  old  officers  that  were  se-
lected for  the  peace  establishment  in  1794.  He  be-
came lieutenant  of  artillery,  29  Sept.,  1789,  and
captain  in  November,  I'VOl,  and  served  under  Gen.
Anthony  Wayne  in  the  expedition  against  the
northwestern  Indians  in  1794.  He  was  appointed
major  of  the  1st  artillery  on  26  May,  1800,  colonel
of  light  artillery  12  March,  1812,  accompanied  Gen.
James  Wilkinson's  army  to  Canada,  commanded
the  artillery,  and  served  with  cretlit  at  the  capture
of  Fort  George,  27  May,  1813.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  on  lO'Sept.,  1813,  and  ordered  to
the  defence  of  Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1814.  He  became
colonel  of  the  1st  artillery  in  May,  1^1.


PORTER


PORTER


79


POKTKR,  Noah,  clcrf^yinan,  b.  in  Parmington,
Conn.,  in  Ik-conibtT,  17«1  ;  (l.thort'.  24  St'pt..  imH.
His  ancestors,  Robert  and  Tiioinas  Porter,  settled
in  KHrminjfton  in  m40.  He  was  ffnulimted  at
Yale  with  the  highest  honor  in  lH(Ki,  and  wa8
ordained  jiastor  of  the  C'onjjrejrational  church  in
his  native  town,  which  charge  he  held  until  his
death.  For  many  years  he  was  a  nienilK^r  of  the
corjtoration  of  Yalo.  Dartmouth  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  S.  T.  I),  in  1828.  He  published  cx-casion-
al  sermons  in  the  "  National  Preacher,"  a  "Half-
Century  Discourse,"  in  the  fiftieth  year  bf  his
ministry,  and  contributed  to  the  "  Christian  Spec-
tator." His  "Memoir"  was  written  by  his  sxm,
Noah,  —  His  son,  SamiU'l,  etlucatx)r  of  the  deaf
and  dumb,  b.  in  Farmiiigton,  Conn.,  12  Jan.,
1810,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  182U.  He  was  in-
stnictt)rof  the  deaf  and  dumb  in  the  Hartford  in-
stitutiim  from  18;{2  till  MHiii,  and  again  from  1846
till  18tK),  also  holding  the  same  oftice  in  the  New
York  institution  in  1843-'6.  Vnnn  18««  till  1884  he
was  professor  of  mental  science  and  English  phi-
lology in  the  National  deaf-mute  college  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  and  is  now  (1888)  professor  emeri-
tus, lie  has  made  a
8|)ecial  study  of  pho-
netics, was  editor  of
the  "American  An-
nals of  the  Deaf  and
Dumb"  from  1854  till
1860,  and  has  pub-
lished "  The  Vowel
Elements  in  Speech,  a
Phonological  and  Phi-
lological Essay  "  (New
York,  1867),  and  nu-
merous articles,  includ-
ing "Is  Thought  pos-
sible without  Lan-
guage," in  the  "Prince-
ton Review  "(1881).—
Another  son,  Noah,
educator,  b.  in  Far-
mington,  Conn.,  14
Dec,  1811.  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1831,  became  master  of  Hopkins
grammar-school  in  New  Haven,  and  was  tutor  at
Yale  in  1833-'5.  during  which  time  he  studied  the-
ology. He  was  pastor  of  Congregational  churches
in  New  Milford,  Conn.,  from  1836  till  1843,  and  in
Springfield,  Ma.ss.,  from  1843  till  1846.  Mr.  Porter
was  then  apjiointed  professor  of  moral  philosophy
and  metaphysics  at  \  ale,  which  chair  he  still  (1888)
holds.  In  1871  he  succeede<l  Theodore  I).  Woolsey
as  president  of  Yale,  which  post  he  held  till  his
resignation  in  1886.  During  President  Porter's  ad-
ministration the  progress  of  the  college  was  marked.
Some  of  its  finest  buildings  were  erected  in  this
period,  including  the  art-school,  the  Pealx>dy  mu-
seum, the  new  theological  halls,  the  Sloane  physi-
cal lalK)ratory,  the  Battell  chajx'l,  and  one  of  "the
largest  dormitories.  The  curriculum  was  also  con-
siderably enlarged,  especially  by  the  introduction
of  new  elective  studies,  although  Dr.  Porter  has
been  an  earnest  champion  of  a  recjuired  course,
as  opposed  to  the  elective  system  as  it  has  been
recently  elal)orated  at  Harvard.  He  has  also  ably
maintained  the  claims  of  the  classics  to  a  chief
place  in  a  liberal  course  of  education.  As  an
ni-stnictor,  and  in  his  personal  relations  with  the
students,  he  was  one  of  the  most  jKipular  presidents
of  Yale.  He  is  prolvibly  the  last  to  hold  the  presi-
dency and  a  professor's  chair  at  the  same  time,  as
his  successor,  Timothy  Dwight,  expressly  stipu-
lated on  accepting  the  office  that  the  duties  of  a


tAa^iX\yficr)^&f~.


teacher  should  not  attach  to  it.  Ho  receive<l  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  the  city  of
New  York  in  18.'>8,  and  that  of  LIj.'D.  from  l<xlin-
burgh  in  1886.  and  also  from  Western  I{<t»erve  col-
lege, Ohio,  in  1870,  and  fn)m  Trinity  in  1871.  He  is
the  author  of  an  "  Historical  Discourse  at  Farming-
ton,  Nov.  4,  1840,"  commemorating  the  200th  an-
niversary of  its  settlement  (Hartford,  1841);  "The
Educational  Systems  of  the  Puritans  ami  Jesuits
('om|)ared."  a  prize  essay  (New  York.  18r)l);  ""The
Human  Intellect."  which  is  used  as  a  text-ljook  of
metaphysics  at  Yale  and  elsewhere  (1868;  many
new  e<l'itions);  "Books  and  Remling "  (1870);
"  American  Colleges  and  the  American  Public"
(New  Haven,  1871);  "Sciences  of  Nature  versus
the  Science  of  Man,"  a  review  of  the  philosophy  of
Herbert  Sjjencer  (1871) ;  "Evangeline;  the  Place,
the  Story,  and  the  Poem  "(1882);  "Science  and
Sentiment"  (1882);  "The  Elements  of  Moral
Science,  Theoretical  and  Practical "  (188.")) ;  "Life
of  Bishop  Berkeley"  (1885);  and  "Kant's  Ethics,
a  Critical  Exposition  "  (Chicago,  1886).  Dr.  Por-
ter is  one  of  the  most  scholarly  metaphysicians  in
this  country.  He  was  the  principal  editor  of  the
revised  editions  of  Noah  Webster's  "  Unabridged
Dictionary  "  (Springfield,  Mass.,  1864  and  1880). —
The  first  Noah's  daughter,  Sarah,  wlucator,  b.  in
Farmington,  Conn.,  17  Aug.,  1813.  oj)ened  a  small
day-school  for  girls  in  Farmington,  which  is  now
(1888)  a  large  seminary,  and  attracts  students  from
all  parts  of  the  United  States.  In  1885  a  fine
building  was  erected  and  presented  to  Miss  Porter
by  some  of  her  former  pupils  for  an  art  studio.
*  PORTER,  Kiifus,  inventor,  b.  in  West  Box-
ford,  Mass..  1  May,  1792 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
13  Aug.,  1884.  He  early  showed  mechanical  genius.
In  1807  his  parents  apprenticed  him  to  a  shoe-
maker, but  he  soon  gave  up  this  trade,  and  occu-
pied himself  by  playing  the  fife  for  military  com-
panies, and  the  violin  lor  dancing  parties. "  Three
years  later  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  house-painter.
During  the  war  of  1812  he  was  occupied  in  paint-
ing gun-boats,  and  as  flfer  to  the  Portland  light
infantry.  In  1813  he  painted  sleighs  at  Denmark,
Me.,  beat  the  drum  for  the  soldiers,  taught  others
to  do  the  same,  and  wrote  a  book  on  the  art  of
drumming,  and  he  then  enlisted  in  the  militia  for
several  months.  Subsequently  he  was  a  teacher,
but  was  unable  to  remain  in  one  place,  and  so  led
a  wandering  life.  In  1820  he  made  a  camera-ol>-
scura  with  a  lens  and  a  mirror  so  arranged  that
with  its  aid  be  could  draw  a  satisfactory  portrait
in  fifteen  minutes.  With  this  apparatus  he  trav-
elle<l  through  the  country  until  he  invented  a  re-
volving almanac,  when  he  at  once  stopped  his
painting  in  order  to  introduce  his  latest  device.
His  next  project  was  a  twin  boat  to  be  propelled
by  horse- power,  but  it  proved  unsuccessful,  and  he
turned  to  portrait-painting  again.  In  1824  he
began  landscape-painting,  but  relinquished  it  to
build  a  horse  flat-boat.  He  invented  a  success-
ful cord-making  machine  in  1825,  and  thereafter
Kroduced  a  clock,  a  steam  carriage,  a  jtortable
orse-power,  corn-sheller,  churn,  a  washing-ma-
chine, signal  telegraph,  fire-alarm,  and  numer-
ous other  articles.  In  1840  he  became  e<litor  of
the  "  New  York  Mechanic,"  which  prospered,  and
in  the  following  year  he  moved  it  to  Boston,  where
he  called  it  the  "  American  Mechanic."  The  new
art  of  electrotyping  there  attracted  his  attention,
and  he  gave  up  editorial  work  in  order  to  occupy
himself  with  the  new  invention.  He  devised  at
this  period  a  revolving  rifle,  which  he  sold  to  Col.
Samuel  Colt  for  f  100.  In  1845  he  returned  to  New
York  and  engaged  in  electrotyping,  and  about  this


80


PORTER


PORTER


time  he  founded  the  "  Scientific  American,"  the  first
issue  of  which  bears  the  date  28  Aug.,  1845.  At
the  end  of  six  months  he  was  glad  to  dispose  of
his  interest  in  the  |)U|>er,  and  then  occui)ie<l  him-
self with  his  inventions.  These  included  a  liy-
ing-ship,  trip-hammer,  fog-whistle,  engine-lathe,
balanced  valve,  rotary  plough,  reaction  wind-wheel.
fK)rtai)le  house,  thermo-engine,  rotary  engine,  and
scores  of  others.

PORTER,  Samuel,  clergyman,  h.  in  Ireland,
11  June,  17«R):  d.  in  Congruily.  Pa.,  23  Sept.,  1825.
He  learned  the  trade  of  a  weaver,  and  came  to
this  country  in  178J1  settling  in  Pennsylvania.  lie
studied  theology,  was  licenseil  to  nreach  by  the
presbytery  of  Redstone  in  1790,  una  held  charge
of  the  united  congregations  of  Poke  Run  and
Congruity,  Pa.,  from  1790  till  1798,  and  then  of
Congruity  alone  until  his  death.  He  published
several  sermons,  and  two  dialogues  between  "  Death
and  the  Believer  "and  "  Death  and  the  Hypocrite,"
which  were  republished,  with  a  biography  of  the
author,  bv  Rev.  David  Elliott.  D.  1).  in  1853.

PORTTER,  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  Farmin^ton,
Conn.,  in  May,  1734;  d.  in  Granville,  N.  \.,  in
August,  1833.  His  ancestor,  Thomas,  emigrated
from  England  in  1640,  and  was  an  original  proprie-
tor of  Farmington.  He  served  in  the  British  army
at  Lake  George  in  1755.  and  was  captain  of  a  com-
pany of  minute-men.  About  1757  he  removed  to
Cornwall,  Conn.,  and  in  1779  he  went  to  Tin-
mouth,  V't.,  in  both  of  which  towns  he  held  loci\\
offices.  For  ten  years  he  wjvs  judge  of  the  su-
preme and  county  courts  of  Vermont,  and  he  was  a
meml)er  of  the  legislatures  of  Connecticut  and
Vermont  for  thirty-five  years. — His  son,  Eben-
ezer,  educator,  b.  in  Cornwall.  Conn.,  5  Oct.,  1772;
d.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  8  April,  1834,  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1792,  studied  theology
in  Bethlehem.  Conn.,  wjis  pai?tor  of  a  Congre-
gational church  in  Washington,  Conn.,  from  1796
until  1812,  and  from  that  year  until  1832  was
professor  of  sacred  rhetoric  at  Andover  theological
seminary,  of  which  he  was  president  from  1827
till  his  death.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.
in  1795,  and  Dartmouth  that  of  D.  D.  in  1814.  He
contrii)uted  to  the  "  Quarterly  Register,"  and  pub-
lished sixteen  sermons,  two  fast  sermons  (1831),
and  abridgments  of  Owen  on  "  Spiritual  Minded-
ness  "  and  on  the  "  130th  Psalm  "  (1833) ;  and  was
the  author  of  "  The  Young  Preacher's  Manual "
(Boston.  1819) ;  "  Lecture  on  the  Analysis  of  Vocal
Inflections"  (Andover,  1824);  "An  Analysis  of
the  Principles  of  Rhetorical  Delivery "  (1827) ;
"Syllabus  of  Lectures"  (1829);  ""Rhetorical
Reader"  (1831,  enlarged  by  James  N.  MacEUigott,
New  York,  1855) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Revivals  of
Religion "  (Andover,  1832) ;  "  Lectures  on  the
Cultivation  of  Spiritual  Habits  and  Progress  in
Study  "  (18^33) ;  "  Lectures  on  Homiletics,  Preach-
ing, and  Public  Prayer,  with  Sermons  and  Let-
ters "  (Andover  and  ^ew  York,  1834:  2d  ed.,  with
notes  and  appendix  by  the  Rev.  J.  Jones,  of  Liver-
pool, London,  1835) ;  and  •'  Lectures  on  Eloquence
and  Style,"  revised  by  Rev.  Lyman  Matthews  (An-
dover, 1836).  See  "  5lemoir  of  Ebenezer  Porter,"
D.  D.,  by  Rev.  Lyman  Matthews  (Boston,  1837).

PORtER,  Thomas  Conrad,  botanist,  b.  in
Alexandria,  Huntingdon  co..  Pa.,  22  Jan..  1822.
He  was  gmduated  at  Lafayette  college,  Easton,
Pa.,  in  1840,  and  at  Princeton  theological  semi-
nary in  1843,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1844.
In  1846  he  was  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church
in  Monticello,  Ga.,  and  in  1848  he  took  charge
of  the  newly  organized  2d  German  Reformed
church  in  Reading,  Pa.,  and  was  ordained  by  the


classis  of  Lebanon.  In  1849  he  resigned  to  be-
come professor  of  natural  sciences  in  Marshall
college,  Mercersburg,  Pa.,  held  the  same  chair
when  the  institution  was  removed  to  Lancaster
and  consolidated  with  Franklin  college  in  1858,
and  was  secretary  of  the  board  of  trustees  until
1866,  when  he  resigned  to  bt>come  professor  of
botany  and  zoology  in  Lafayette,  which  office  he
now  (1888)  holds.  In  1877  he  became  pastor  of  the
Third  street  Reformed  church  of  that  town,  which
charge  he  resigned  in  1884.  Rutgers  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1865,  and  Franklin  and  Mar-
shall that  of  LL.  D.  in  1880.  He  is  a  member  of
various  scientific  societies,  and  was  a  founder  and
ftrst  president  of  the  Linnaean  society  of  Lan-
caster county,  Pa.  His  extensive  herbarium  is  in
the  possession  of  Lafayette  college.  His  reports  in
connection  with  Dr,  Ferdinand  V.  Hayden's  col-
lections in  the  Rocky  mountains  in  l670-'4  were
published  by  the  government,  and  one  of  these,
"  A  Synopsis  of  the  Flora  of  Colorado,"  prepared
with  Prof.  John  M.  Coulter,  has  been  issued  in
a  separate  volume  (Washington,  1874).  He  also
furnished  a  summary  of  the  flora  of  the  state  to
"  Gray's  Topographical  Atlas  of  Pennsylvania "
(Philadelphia,  1872),  and  to  "  Gray's  Topographical
Atlas  of  the  United  States"  (18*73).  In  addition
to  contributions  to  the  "  Mercersburg  Review,"  he
has  published  a  prose  version  of  Goethe's  "  Her-
mann und  Dorothea "  (New  York,  1854) ;  trans-
lated "  The  Life  and  Labors  of  St.  Augustine,"
from  the  German  of  Dr.  Philip  Schaff  (New  York,
1854-'5),  and  "  The  Life  and  Times  of  Ulric  Zwing-
li,"  from  the  German  of  Hottinger  (Harrisburg,
1857) ;  and  contributed  several  hymns  from  the
German  and  Latin  to  Dr.  Philip  Schaff's  "  Christ
in  Song"  (New  York,  1868).  He  was  an  active
member  of  the  committee  that  framed  in  1867  the
order  of  worship  that  is  now  (1888)  used  in  the
German  Reformed  church  in  the  United  States.

PORTER,  William  Trotter,  journalist,  b.  in
Newbury,  Vt.,  24  Dec,  1800 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
20  July,  1858.  He  was  educated  at  Dartmouth,  but
was  not  graduated.  In  1829  he  became  connected
with  the  "  Farmer's  Herald "  at  St.  Johnsbury,
Vt.,  and  the  following  year  he  became  associate
editor  of  "  The  Enquirer  "  at  Norwich.  His  am-
bition for  a  wider  field  of  action  led  him  to  New
York  city,  where  he  first  found  employment  as
foreman  in  a  printing-office.  He  engaged  as  a
compositor  Horace  Greeley,  who  had  recently  ar-
rived in  the  city,  and  a  life-long  friendship  ensued.
Mr.  Porter's  cherished  project  was  put  into  effect
on  10  Dec,  1831,  when  he  issued  the  initial  num-
ber of  the  "  Spirit  of  the  Times,"  the  first  sport-
ing journal  in  the  United  States.  It  was  a  novel
undertaking,  and  was  not  at  first  successful.  In  a
few  months  it  was  merged  with  "  The  Traveller,"
with  Mr.  Porter  in  charge  of  the  sporting  depart-
ment. The  following  year  he  resigned  and  took
charge  of  "  The  New  Yorker  "  for  a  short  time,  and
then  of  "The  Constellation."  As  these  journals
gave  only  a  subordinate  place  to  sporting  topics,
he  purchased  "  The  Traveller,  and  Spirit  of  the
Times"  from  C.  J.  B. "Fisher,  who  had  united  the
two,  and  on  3  Jan.,  1835,  the  paper  was  issued
again  under  its  original  name.  At  this  period
the  sports  of  the  turf  and  field  were  held  in  dis-
repute, especially  in  the  New  England  states,  and
the  task  of  correcting  deep-rooted  prejudices  called
into  play  all  the  perseverance,  tact,  and  talent  of
the  editor,  who  was  thoroughly  imbued  with  love
of  the  work.  The  paper  was  progressive,  and  was
soon  supported  by  a  host  of  wealthy  patrons  and
versatile  contributors. Among  the  fatter  were  Al-


PORTERFIELD


POKTIER


81


bert  Pike,  Thomas  B.  ThomN  "  Frank  Foroster,"
(fporp!  Wilkins  Kendall,  Charles  (i.  Ijolanil,  and
Thomais  Picton.  The  |»o|MiIarity  <>f  Mr.  Porter  wan
ereat. Nearly  all  his  wirresjKmdents,  antl  the  nia-

Iority  of  his  8id»seril>er»,  wert^  personal  friends,
lis  sol>ri(iuot  of  "  York's  Tall  Son  "  wa.s  be-stowitl
not  le.ss  in  rei-o>;nition  of  his  s<»eial  qualities  than
of  his  lofty  stature — six  feet  and  four  inches.  A
writer  saysof  him  :  "  His  mind  wa.s  comprehensive,
his  |H>rcej)tion  keen,  his  (knluctions  clear  and  con-
cise, whilst  his  judgment  and  decisions  in  all  s|)ort-
injf  matters  were  more  reliable  and  more  resi>ected
than  any  other  man's  in  this  country.  He  was  the
father  of  a  school  of  American  s[H>rtinff  literature,
which  is  no  less  a  credit  to  his  name  than  it  is  an
honor  to  the  land  that  gave  him  birth.  Many  of
his  decisions  and  spt>rtinjtj  rejwrts  will  l)e  quoted
as  authority  for  jjenerations  to  come.  He  {K>Si$essed
ft  fund  of  sporting  statistics  uno({ualled  by  any
other  nuiii  in  Americji."  In  February,  1839,  he
purt!hase<l  the  "American  Turf  Register  and
Sporting  Magazine"  froTn  John  S.  Skinner,  of
Baltimore,  and  the  periodical  wa.s  thenceforth  pub-
lished in  New  York  until  it  was  finally  suspended
in  1844.  After  conducting  the  old  "Spirit" — as
it  was  familiarly  termed — for  nearly  twenty-five
years,  he  withdrew  from  the  editorial  manage-
ment, and  with  George  Wilkes  established  "  l*or-
ter's  Spirit  of  the  Times "  in  Septeml)er,  1856.
Failing  health  prevented  close  application  to  the
new  field  of  lalwr.  He  edited  three  collections  of
tales  that  had  appeared  in  his  journal,  entitled
"  The  Big  liear  or  Arkansaw,  and  Other  Tales  "
(Philadelphia,  1835) ;  "  A  Quarter  Race  in  Ken-
tucky, and  Other  Sketches"  (1846);  and  "  Major
T.  B.  Thorpe's  Scenes  in  Arkansaw,  and  Other
Sketches"  (1859):  and  also  issued  an  American
edition,  with  additions,  of  Col.  Peter  Hawker's  "  In-
structions to  Young  Sportsmen  "  (1846).  At  the
time  of  his  death  he  was  engaged  in  preparing  a
biography  of  Henry  William  Herbert  ("Frank  For-
ester ").  See  "  Life  of  William  T.  Porter,"  by  Fran-
cis Brinlev  (New  York,  1860).

PORTERFIELD,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Fred-
erick county,  Va.,  in  1750;  (^  on  Santee  river,  S.
C,  in  October,  1780.  He  l)ecame  a  member  of  the
first  company  that  was  raised  in  Frederick  county
in  1775  for  service  in  the  Revolutionary  war.  of
which  Daniel  Morgan  was  elected  captain,  marched
to  Cambridge,  near  Boston,  and  soon  afterward
joined  in  the  expedition  against  Quebec,  and  wiis
made  prisoner  in  the  attempt  on  that  fortress.  The
assailing  column,  to  which  he  belonged,  was  under
the  command  of  Col.  Arnold.  When  that  officer
was  wounded  and  carried  from  the  ground.  Porter-
field,  with  Morgan,  rushing  forwanl,  jmssed  the
first  and  second  barriers.  After  being  exchanged
he  re-entered  the  service  as  captain  in  the  rifle-
corps  of  Col.  Morgan  and  participated  in  all  the
battles  in  which  it  was  engaged  uuring  the  cam-
paigns of  1777-'8.  In  1779  he  was  appoinletl  by
Gov.  .Jefferson  lieutenant-colonel  of  a  Virginia
regiment  that  had  l)een  equipjwd  mainly  at  hisown
expense,  with  which,  in  the  spring  of  1780,  he
marched  to  the  relief  of  Charleston,  S.  C.  He  re-
mained in  South  Carolina  and  joined  the  army  of
Gen.  Gat^s  a  few  days  before  the  bjittle  of  Camden.
His  command  formed  part  of  the  julvanced  guard
of  Gates's  army,  and  unexpectedly  met  that  of  the
enemy  alK)ut  one  o'clock  a.  m.  on  1(5  Aug.,  a  moon-
light night.  While  making  a  gallant  resistance
and  holding  the  enemy  in  check,  he  received  a
mortal  wound,  his  left  leg  l»eing  shattered  just  Ih?-
low  the  knee.  He  was  earned  from  the  field,  re-
mained ten  days  without  surgical  attention,  and


was  then  taken  in  a  cart  twelve  mil«>s  to  Camden
where  the  re(juin'<l  amputation  was  |>erformed.
While  a  prisoner  in  Camden  he  was  tn-ated  with
great  kindness  and  attention  by  both  Ix)rd  Corn-
wallis  and  liord  Rawdon,  who  supplie<l  all  his
wants.  He  was  jwroled,  but  «lie<I  from  the  effects
of  his  wound. — His  brother,  Robert,  sohlier.  b.  in
Fre«lerick  county,  Va.,  22  Vvh.,  1752:  d.  in  Au-
gusta county,  Va.,  13  Feb.,  1843,  was  apfK>inted  a
lieutenant  in  Capt.  Peter  B.  Bruin's  company  of
Continental  troops  in  Winchester,  Va.,  in  1*776,
serve<l  in  Col.  Daniel  Morgan's  regiment  through
the  campaigns  of  1777-'9,  the  last  vear  was  aide  Ut
Oen.  William  Woodford,  and  was  I'n  the  battles  of
the  Brandywine,  Germantown,  and  Monmouth.
He  acconifianied  Gen.  Wrxxlford  to  the  south  in
Deceml)er,  1779,  and  participatetl  in  the  siege  of
Charleston,  S.  C,  where  he  was  surrenderetl  a  pris-
oner of  war  in  Mav.  1780.  He  was  apf>ointed  a
brigadier-general  of  Virginia  militia  during  the
war  of  1812,  and  commande<l  at  Camp  Holly,  Va.
Gen.  Porterfleld  was  a  county  magistrate  for  more
than  fifty  years,  and  wa.s  twice  high-sherifT.

PORtlER,  Michel,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Mont-
brison,  France,  7  Sept.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  14
May,  1859.  He  entered  the  Seminary  of  Lyons,
but  before  completing  his  theological  studies  he
met  with  Bishop  I)ul)ourg.  of  Louisiana,  who  had
come  to  France  in  search  of  missionaries  for  his
diocese. Young  Portier  consented  to  follow  the

ftrelate  to  the  Lnited  States,  and  reached  Annapo-
is,  4  Sept.,  1817.  After  a  visit  of  several  months
to  the  home  of  Charles  Carroll,  of  Carrollton.  he
finished  his  studies  in  St.  Mar}''s  seminary,  Balti-
more, and  was  ordainwl  j)riest  in  St.  Louis  by
Bishop  Dulwurg  in  1818.  Shortly  afterward  there
was  an  epidemic  of  yellow  fever  in  the  country,
during  wnich  he  was  unceasing  in  his  attendance
on  the  sick  and  dying.  He  was  finally  attacked  by
the  disease,  and  on  his  recovery  was  summoned  to
New  Orleans,  where  he  established  a  school  on  the
Lancasterian  system.  He  was  shortly  afterward
appointed  vicar-general  of  the  diocese.  The  rapid
increase  in  the  number  of  Roman  Catholics  ren-
dered a  division  of  the  see  of  Louisiana  necessary,
and  in  1825  Alabama,  Florida,  and  Arkansas  were
created  a  vicariate.  Dr.  Portier  was  nominated
vicar-apostolic  the  same  year.  He  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Olena  iw  part  thus  by  Bishop  Rosati  in  St.
Louis  on  5  Nov.,  1826.  There  were  only  two  churches
in  his  vicariate — one  in  Pensacola  and  the  other  in
St.  Augustine — and  the  three  priests,  who  were  the
sole  missionaries  in  thisextensive  territon*,  belonged
toother  dioceses,  to  which  they  were  recalled  shortly
after  his  consecration.  His  poverty  was  so  great
that  he  was  unable  to  purchase  the  insignia  appro-
priate to  his  rank.  He  remained  in  Mobile  until
the  summer  of  1827.  when  he  l)egan  his  episcopal
visitation,  travelling  on  horseback  to  Pensacola,
Tallahassee,  and  St.  Augustine.  Owing  to  the  heat
that  prevailed  during  his  journey,  he  was  attacked
by  a  fever  at  the  latter  town  and  narrowly  escaped
death.  When  he  had  partially  recovered  he  re-
sumetl  his  lalwrs  in  St.  Augustine  and  its  neigh-
borhood. The  absence  of  priests  for  some  years
had  resulted  in  a  total  neglect  of  religious  obliga-
tions among  the  Spanish  population,  and  he  found
it  necessary  to  instruct  even  the  adults  in  the  rudi-
ments of  Ohristian  doctrine.  He  remained  until
the  end  of  September,  constantly  pi-eachingand  in-
stnicting  in  Spanish  and  English,  except  when
stricken  by  fever,  and  wrought  an  extraonlinarv
change  in  the  habits  of  the  people.  His  Knglish
sermons  were  attended  by  the  members  of  all  de-
nominations, and  he  received  substantial  aid  also


82


PORTILLO


PORTUONDO


from  thosp  who  differed  with  him  in  belief  during
his  stay  in  St.  Augustine.  In  1829  he  prevailed  on
Hishop  Kngland  to  station  a  priest  of  his  di<x;ese  in
East  V'iorida.  He  then  sailed  for  Kuro[K',  and,
after  sfRMiding  several  months  in  France,  where  he
obt4iined  money,  Iwsides  the  services  of  two  priests,
four  sul)-dt'acons,  and  two  ecclesiastical  students,
he  returned  the  sjime  year.  While  he  was  in  Eu-
rofH'  the  bishopric  of  Mobile  hiul  Iwen  formed  out
of  his  vicariate,  and  he  was  installed  bishop  of  the
new  see  after  his  arrival. He  iH'gan  at  once  to  or-

fanize  parishes,  and  built  churches  at  Tuscaloosa,
.lontpomcry,  Florence,  Huntsville,  and  Moulton.
lie  next  founded  Sjiring  Hill  college,  near  Mobile,
and  also  built  the  ecclesiastical  seminary  that  was
atUwhed  to  it.  The  funds  he  had  obtained  from
abroad  enabled  him  to  employ  teachers.  He  intro-
duced the  Nuns  of  the  Visitation  order  into  his  dio-
cese in  18;J2,  and  in  the  following  year  built  a  con-
vent and  ivcailemy  for  them  in  Summerville.  He
began  the  eret^tion  of  the  cathedral  of  the  Im-
maculate Conception  in  18JW,  a  fine  structure,
which  he  completed  in  1850.  Nearly  all  the  great
charities  of  the  diocese  owed  their  origin  to  Bishop
Portier.  A  large  number  of  children  having  been
rendered  orphans  by  the  cholera  epidemic  of  1839,
he  introduced  a  colony  of  Sisters  of  Charity  and  a
body  of  Brothers  of  Christian  Instruction  from
France,  who  took  charge  of  the  asylums  that  he
founded.  To  these  institutions  he  attached  labor
and  free  schools.  He  organized  a  girls'  school  in
St.  Augustine,  introduced  the  Jesuits,  and  added
largely  to  the  number  of  churches  and  missions.
He  paid  a  second  visit  to  Europe  in  1849.  After
his  return  he  took  part  in  the  different  councils  of
his  church  in  this  country  and  wjis  active  in  their
deliberations.  His  last  great  work  was  the  erection
of  Providence  infirmary  in  Mobile,  to  which  he  re-
tired when  he  felt  his  end  approaching.  Bishop
Portier  may  be  said  to  have  created  the  Roman
Catholic  church  in  his  vicariate,  which,  before
his  death,  was  divided  into  three  extensive  dio-
ceses. He  left  twenty-seven  priests,  a  splendid
cathedral,  fourteen  churches,  a  college  and  ecclesias-
tical seminary,  fourteen  schools,  three  academies
for  boys  and  three  for  girls,  two  orphan  asylums,
an  infirmary,  and  many  free  schools.  He  was  for
some  time  l^efore  his  death  the  senior  bishop  of  the
American  hierarchv.

PORTILLO,  Jacinto  de  (por-tee'-yo),  later
known  as  Fray  Cixto,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Spain
about  1490;  d.  in  Nombre  do  Dios,  Mexico,  20
Sept.,  150(5.  He  went  to  Cuba  as  a  soldier  with
Diego  de  Velazquez,  and  took  part  in  the  explora-
tion of  the  coast  of  Mexico  under  Juan  de  Grijalva
in  1519.  He  also  particijiated  in  the  conquest  of
Mexico,  afterward  went  with  eight  of  his  comrades
to  explore  the  northwest  coast,  and,  having  suffered
great  hardships,  reached  the  South  sea,  taking  pos-
session of  it  in  the  name  of  the  emperor,  as  he  re-
lates in  a  letter  to  Philip  II.,  dated  Mexico,  20  July,
1561.  As  a  reward  for  his  services,  the  emperor
gave  him  the  Indian  commanderies  of  Huitzitlapan
and  Tlatanquitepec,  where  he  acquired  a  great  for-
tune. AlK)ut  1563  he  abandoned  his  adventurous
life  for  a  life  of  penitence,  distributed  his  riches
among  the  poor,  and  as  a  priest  devoted  himself
to  the  conversion  of  the  natives  in  the  province  of
Zacatecas.  Fray  Cinto  disnlayed  much  zeal  in  his
new  vocation  and  met  with  great  success.  With
Friar  Pedro  de  Espinadera  he  founded  the  town  of
Nombre  de  Dios,  and  many  Christian  congrega-
tions. He  died,  after  a  residence  in  New  Spain  of
nearly  half  a  century,  in  the  convent  of  the  town
that  he  had  founded.


PORTLOCK,  Nathaniel,  English  navigator,
lived  in  the  18th  century.  He  served  with  Capt.
Cot)k  in  his  last  voyage  to  the  Pacific  ocean,  and
was  given  command  in  1785  of  the  "  King  George,"
which  was  sent  out  from  London  by  the  King
George's  Sound  company,  a  corporation  that  had
been  formed  for  traduig  in  furs  from  the  west  coast
of  North  America  to  CTiina.  After  various  expe-
riences in  the  Pacific,  Capt.  Portlock  brought  his
vessel  back  to  England  in  1788  after  making  a
voyage  around  the  world.  Subsequently  he  wrote
"Voyage  Around  the  World:  but  More  Particu-
larlyto  the  Northwest  Coast  of  America  "  (London,
1789;  abridged  ed.,  1789).  His  convoy  on  this  ex-
pedition was  commanded  by  George  Dixon  {q.  v.),

PORTOCARRERO  LASO  DE  LA  VEGA,
Melchor  de  (por-to-car-ray'-ro).  Count  of  Mon-
clova,  viceroy  of  Mexico  and  Peru,  b.  in  Madrid,
Spam,  4  June,  1636 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  22  Sept.,
1705.  During  his  youth  he  was  page  of  Queen
Elizabeth  of  Bourbon,  and  he  served  in  the  armies
of  Flanders,  Sici-
ly, Catalonia,  and
Portugal,  from
1658  till  1662.
He  lost  an  arm
in  the  battle  of
the  Downs  of
Dunkirk,  and
used  a  silver  one
till  his  death.  In
1665  he  took  part
in  the  siege  and
battle  of  Villavi-
ciosa,  where  he
was  taken  pris-
oner, and  on  his
liberation  he  was
promoted  lieu-
tenant -  general.
He  was  appoint-
ed viceroy  of
Mexico  in  1685,
and  arrived  there
30  Nov.,  1686.  During  his  administration  there
was  a  destructive  eruption  of  the  volcano  of  Ori-
zaba (1687),  the  Indians  of  Coahuila  were  con-
quered, the  city  of  Monclova  was  founded,  and  the
aqueduct  from  Chapultepec  to  the  Salto  de  Agua
was  constructed  at  his  private  expense.  In  1688
he  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Peru,  and  he  entered
Lima,  15  Aug.,  1689.  He  introduced  many  re-
forms and  rebuilt  the  city  of  Lima,  which  he  fouild
almost  entirely  destroyed  by  the  earthquake  of
20  Oct.,  1687.  He  also  reconstructed  the  church
of  Copacabana  and  the  hospital  of  the  Bethlemi-
tas.  Another  important  work  was  the  reconstruc-
tion of  the  dock  of  Callao,  which  he  began  in  1694,
and  the  repairing  of  the  cathedral  of  Lima.  Dur-
ing his  government  several  destructive  earthquakes
occurred ;  in  1698  the  cities  of  Tacunga  and  Ambato
were  destroyed,  and  in  1701  a  great  flood  inundated
Trujillo.  He  ordered  the  construction  of  three
ships,  and  appointed  the  admiral,  Antonio  fieas,
to  explore  the  islands  of  Juan  Fernandez.  I(i  1698
a  Scottish  colony  occupied  the  Isthmus  of  Darien
(see  Paterson,  William),  and  the  king  ordered
the  viceroy  to  attack  them ;  but  the  Scotch  soon
abandoned  the  isthmus,  and,  although  they  re-
turned next  year,  before  the  viceroy  could  leave
Lima  with  an  expedition,  he  received  advice  from
Gen.  Pimienta,  the  governor  of  Carthagena,  that  he
had  expelled  them.

PORTUONDO,  Bernardo  (por-tw(jn'-do),Cuban
soldier,  b.  in  Santiago  de  Cuba  in  1840. He  went


PORY


POST


83


to  Spain  when  very  younjr,  was  et1ucate<l  in  Madrid,
entertMl  tlu>  army  as  a  military  engineer,  and  t<M)k
part  in  the  war  apiinsl  Moroeco.  In  1802  he  was
ap[)<>iiited  profesMjr  in  the  College  of  military  engi-
niHsrs.  In  1804  the  government  sent  him  to  Den-
mark tx>  re|Kirt  on  the  war  Iwtween  that  country
and  Germany  and  Austria.  In  18(W  he  returneti
to  Cuba,  where  ho  superintended  the  construction
of  S4! vend  im|)ortant  public  works.  Ho  went  back
to  SjMiin  in  1874,  in  1871)  he  was  elected  to  repre-
sent his  native  city  in  the  Spanish  cortes,  antl  he
has  since  been  an  active  member  of  the  Culian
Liberal  homo-rule  party  in  that  lx>dy.  He  also
assiste<l  to  bring  alx)Ut  the  alxdition  of  slavery  In
the  S(>anish  West  Indies.  He  has  published
••Tratado  de  Arquiteotura";'  "Estudios  de  Or-
ganizaciones  militares  extranjeras  " ;  "  Descripcion
(le  varias  plazas  de  |;uerra  ;  and "  Empleo  del
hierro  en  Ins  fortificaciones."

PORY,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  England  about
1570;  d.  in  Virginia  before  1035.  He  was  educated
at  Caml)ridge,  and  in  1012  was  a  resident  of  Paris.
During  1019-*21  he  was  secretary  of  the  Virginia
colony,  and  he  was  elected  speaker  of  the  first
representative  assembly  that  was  ever  held  in  this
country,  which  convened  in  Jamestown  on  30  July,
1619.  He  visited  Plvmouth,  Mass.,  shortly  after
its  settlement  by  the  Pilgrims  from  Leyden,  but  in
1623  returned  to  Virginia  as  one  of  the  commis-
sioners of  the  privy  council,  and  died  in  Virginia.
He  assisted  Ilakluyt  in  his  geographical  work,
and  was  considered  a  man  of  great  learning.  His
account  of  excursions  among  the  Indians  is  given
in  Smith's  "Generall  Historie,"  and  he  translated
and  published  "  A  Geographical  Historie  of  Africa
by  John  Leo.  a  More,  borne  in  Granada  and  brought
up  in  Barbaric"  (London,  1000).

POS.\D.\S,  Gerva.sio  Antonio,  Argentine
statesman,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  19  June,  1757;  d.
there,  2  July,  1832.  He  studied  law,  and  for  several
years  was  employed  in  the  Spanish  administration,
but  when  independence  was  proclaimed,  25  May,
1810.  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  patriotic  move-
ment. Soon  he  became  the  chief  of  tJie  Centraliza-
tion party  in  opposition  to  the  Federal,  and  when  in
1813  the  constituent  assembly  abolished  the  execu-
tive junta,  he  was  appointed.  26  Jan.,  1814,  supreme
director  of  the  Argentine  Republic.  He  created  the
provinces  of  ?]ntrerios,  Tucuman,  and  Salta,  and
was  active  in  forwartling  re-enforcements  to  the
army  in  the  Banda  Oriental,  and,  on  22  June,  Monte-
video was  captured  by  Gen.  Alvear.  His  conserva-
tive ideas  caused  him  to  send,  in  December  of  that
year,  a  secret  mission  to  Europe,  for  the  purpose  of
obtaining  a  protectorate  or  a  monarch  from  Eng-
land or  some  other  European  nation,  as  he  did  not
think  his  country  ripe  for  a  republic.  His  inten-
tions became  known,  and  there  were  several  insur-
rections. Posadas,  not  feeling  himself  strong
enough  to  resist,  resigned,  9  Jan.,  1815,  and  after
the  accession  of  Rosas  and  the  adoption  of  the  Fed-
eral system  he  was  often  persecuted.

POSEY,  Carnot,  soldier,  b.  in  Wilkinson  coun-
ty. Miss.,  5  Aug.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Charlottesville,  Va.,
13  Nov.,  1863.  He  served  in  the  Mexican  war  as  a
lieutenant  of  rifles  under  Jefferson  Davis,  and  was
wounded  at  Buena  V^ista.  He  liecame  colonel  of
the  16th  Mississippi  regiment  on  4  June.  1801,  and
was  appointed  brigadier-general  in  the  Confederate
army,  1  Nov.,  1862.  His  brigade  was  composed  of
four  Mississippi  regiments  of  infantry,  and  formed
part  of  Anderson's  division  of  Ambrose  P.  Hill's
corps  in  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia.  Gen.
Posey  received  wounds  at  Bristoe  Station,  Va.,  14
Oct.,  1863,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  died.


POSEY,  ThomaM,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia,  on  the
banks  uf  Potonuw  river,  9  July,  1750;  d.  in  Shaw-
neetown,  III.,  19  March,  1818.  He  received  a  eom-
mon-schiM>l  eilucation,  and  in  1769  removed  to
western  Virginia.  In  1774  he  became  quarter-
master of  Andrew  Ix'wis's  division  of  I>ml  Dun-
more's  armv,  and  to<jk  part  in  the  battle  with  the
Indians  at  Point  Ple^usant  on  10  Oct.  of  that  year.
A  year  later  he  was  one  of  the  committee  of'cor-
ri'spondence,  and  was  commissioned  captain  in  the
7th  Virginia  Continental  ri'giment.  In  this  capaci-
ty he  was  present  at  the  engagement  at  Gwynn's
island  on  8  July,  1776,  where  Lorti  Dunmore  (q.  v.}
was  defeated.  He  joined  the  Continental  army  at
Middlebrook,  N.  J.,  early  in  1777,  an<l  was  trans-
ferred, with  his  company,  to  Daniel  Morgan's  cele-
brated rifle-corps,  with  which  he  t«Mik  part  in  the
action  with  the  British  light  troops  at  riscataway,
N.  J.  Cant.  Posey  was  then  sent  to  Gen.  Horatio
Gates,  and  rendered  efficient  service  in  the  two
battles  of  Bemis  Heights  and  in  that  of  .Stillwater.
In  1778  he  was  commissioned  major,  and  led  the
expedition  against  the  Indians  in  Wyoming  vallev
in  October  of  that  year.  He  was  given  the  11th
Virginia  regiment  early  in  1779,  but  soon  was
transferred  to  the  command  of  a  battalion  in  Col.
Christian  Febiger's  regiment  un«ler  Gen.  Anthony
Wayne;  and,  at  the  assault  of  Stony  Point,  he  was
one  of  the  first  to  enter  the  enemy's  works.  Sub-
sequently he  served  in  Sotith  Carolina,  and  was
present  at  the  surrender  of  Yorktown.  He  then
organized  a  new  regiment,  of  which  he  took  com-
mand with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  and
served  under  Gen.  Wayne  in  Georgia  until  the  sur-
render of  Savannah.  When  he  was  surprised  by
the  Indians  under  Gueristersigo  on  the  night  of  23
June,  1782,  he  rallied  his  men  and  led  them  to  the
charge  with  great  bravery  and  skill,  defeating  the
enemy  with  loss.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  settled
in  Spottsylvania  county,  Va.,  and  in  1785  he  was
made  colonel  of  the  county  militia,  becoming  also
county  lieutenant  and  magistrate  in  1786.  These
offices  he  held  until  1793.  when,  on  14  Feb.,  he
was  commissioned  brigadier-general,  and  served
under  Gen.  Wayne  in  his  campaigns  against  the
Indians  in  the  northwest,  resigning  on  28  Feb.,
1794.  He  then  settletl  in  Kentucky,  where  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  and  chosen
speaker  in  1805-'6,  becoming  thereby  ejc-officio  lieu-
tenant-governor of  the  state.  In  1809,  when  war
was  threatening  between  France  and  England  and
the  United  States,  Gen.  Posey  was  commissioned
major-general  and  given  charge  of  the  organization
and  equipment  of  the  Kentucky  forces.  Soon  after-
ward he  removed  to  Louisiana,  and  during  the
second  war  with  England  he  raised  a  company  of
infantry  in  Baton  Rouge,  and  was  for  some  time
its  captain.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  senator  from
Louisiana,  and  served  from  7  Dec.,  1812,  till  5  Feb.,
1813.  On  the  completion  of  his  term  he  was-aj)-
pointed  governor  of  Indiana  territory,  and  con-
tinued as  such  until  its  admission  into  the  Union,
when  he  became  a  candidate  for  the  governorship,
but  was  defeated.  His  last  office  was  that  of  In-
dian agent,  which  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.

POST,  Christian  Frederick,  missionary,  b.  in
Polish  Prussia  in  1710;  d.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,  29
April,  1785.  He  came  to  Pennsylvania  in  1742,
and  between  1743  and  1749  was  a  missionary  to
the  Moravian  Indians  in  New  York  and  Connecti-
cut. He  returned  to  Europe  in  1751,  and  thence
was  sent  to  Labrador,  but  afterwani  he  came  again
to  Pennsylvania,  and  was  again  employed  in  the
Indian  missions.  In  1758  he  undertook  an  embas-
sy in  behalf  of  the  province  to  the  Delawares  and


84


POST


POST


Shawnees  in  Ohio.  He  established  an  independent
mission  in  Ohio  in  1761.  where  he  was  joined  in
17(52  l)V  John  Ilockewelder;  but  the  Poiitiivc  war
forced  them  to  alwndon  the  project.  In  January,
17(M,  he  sailed  for  the  Mosquito  cojust,  where  he
laborcfl  two  years,  and  he  ina<ie  a  second  visit  there
in  1707.  He  afterward  united  with  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church.

POST,  Isaac,  jihilanthropist.  b.  in  Westbury,
Queens  co..  N.  Y..  2(5  Feb.,  1798;  d.  in  KrK-hcstcr,
X.  Y.,  9  May,  1H72.  lieing  the  son  of  Quaker
parents,  he  was  educated  at  the  Westl)ury  P>iends'
school.  He  engapiHl  in  the  drug  btisiness,  and  re-
moved to  Scipio,  N.  Y.,  in  1823.  and  to  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  in  1880,  where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his
life.  He  was  a  warm  adherent  of  William  Lloyd
(larrison,  and  one  of  the  earliest  laborers  in  the
anti-slavery  cause.  His  door  was  ever  open  to
those  who  had  escaped  from  bondage,  and  his  hos-
tility to  the  fugitive-slave  law  was  bitter  and  un-
coni promising.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Hieksite
branch  of  the  Quakers,  but  left  that  body  Iwcause,
in  his  opinion,  it  showed  itself  subservient  to  the
slave  power. Mr.  Post  resided  in  Rochester  when

fiublic  attention  was  first  attracted  to  the  inani-
estations  by  the  Fox  sisters,  and  became  one  of
the  earliest  converts  to  Spiritualism.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Voices  from  the  Spirit  World,  lieing
Communicjitions  from  Many  Spirits,  by  the  Hand
of  Isaa<^!  Post,  Medium"  (ftochester,  1852). — His
brother.  Joseph,  b.  in  Westbury,  L.  I.,  30  Nov.,
18(W  ;  (1.  there.  17  Jan.,  1888,  resembled  Isaac  in  his
profession  of  abolition  principles.  He  was  at  one
time  proscribed  and  persecuted  within  his  own  sect,
but  lived  long  enough  to  witness  a  complete  revolu-
tion of  sentiment,  and  to  be  the  recipient  of  many
expressions  of  confidence  and  esteem  from  his  co-
religionists. When  Isaac  T.  Hopper,  Charles  Mar-
riot,  and  James  S.  Gibbons  were  disowned  by  the  So-
ciety of  Friends,  on  account  of  their  outspoken  oppo-
sition to  slavery,  they  received  encouragement  and
support  frotn  Joseph  Post.  Mr.  Post  passed  his  life
in  the  same  house  in  which  he  was  born  and  died.
POST,  Mintnrn,  physician,  b.  in  New  York  citv,
28  June.  1808;  d.  there,  20  April,  1869.  He  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1827,  and,  after  studying
medicine  under  Dr.  Valentine  Mott,  received  his
degree  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Virginia  in  1832.  Subsequently  he  studied
in  Paris,  and,  settling  in  New  York  city  on  his
return,  he  accpiired  a  large  practice,  and  became
recognized  as  an  authority  on  diseases  of  the  chest.
In  1843  he  was  called  to  be  medical  examiner  of
the  New  York  life  insurance  company.  He  trans-
lated and  added  notes  to  Raciborski's  "  Ausculta-
tion and  Percussion  "  (New  York.  1839).

POST,  Philip  Sidney,  soldier,  b.  in  Florida,
Orange  co.,  N.  Y..  19  March,  1833.  He  was  graduate(l
at  Union  college  in  1855,  studied  law.  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar.  He  then  travelled  through  the
northwest,  his  [)arents  having  meanwhile  removed
to  Illinois,  and  took  up  his  abode  in  Kansas,  where
he  practised  his  profession,  and  also  established
and  edited  a  newspaper.  At  the  opening  of  the
civil  war  he  was  chosen  2d  lieutenant  in  the  59th
Illinois  infantry,  and  in  1802  he  became  its  colo-
nel. He  was  severely  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Pea
Ridge,  and  miule  his  way  with  much  suffering,  and
under  many  difficulties.'to  St.  Louis.  Before  fully
recovering,  he  joined  his  regiment  in  front  of  Cor-
inth, Miss.,  and  was  assigned  to  the  command  of
a  brigade.  From  May,  1862,  till  the  close  of  the
war  he  was  c(mstantly  at  the  front.  In  the  Army
of  the  Cuml)erland,  as  first  organized,  he  com-
manded the  1st  brigade,  1st  division,  of  the  20th


army  corps  from  its  formation  to  its  dissolution.
He  tegan  the  battle  of  Stone  River,  drove  back  the
enemy  several  miles,  and  captured  Leetown.  Dur-
ing the  Atlanta  campaign  he  was  transferred  to
Wood's  division  of  the  4th  army  corps,  and  when
that  general  was  wounded  at  Lovejoy's  station,
Post  took  charge  of  the  division,  and  with  it  op-
posed the  progress  of  the  Confederates  toward  the
north.  On  16  Nov.,  1804,  in  a  charge  on  Overton
Hill,  a  grape-sttot  crushed  through  his  hip,  making
what  was  for  some  days  thought  to  be  a  mortal
wound.  On  16  Dec,  1864,  he  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers.  After  the  surrender  at
Appomattox  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of
the  western  district  pf  Texas,  where  there  was  then
a  concentration  of  troops  on  the  Mexican  border.
He  remained  there  until  1866,  when  the  with-
drawal of  the  French  from  Mexico  removed  all
danger  of  military  complications.  He  was  then
earnestly  recommended  by  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas
and  others,  under  whom  he  had  served,  for  the  ap-
pointment of  colonel  in  the  regular  army;  but  he
did  not  wish  to  remain  in  the  army.  In  1866  he  was
appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Vienna,  and  in  1874  he  be-
came consul-general.  His  official  reports  have  been
quoted  as  authority.  In  1878  he  tendered  his  resigna-
tion, which,  however,  was  not  accepted  till  the  year
following.  He  then  resided  at  Galesburg,  111.,  and
in  1886  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican.

POST,  Trnnian  Marcellns,  clergyman,  b.  in
Middlebury,  Vt.,  3  June,  1810 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
31  Dec,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  col-
lege in  1829,  and  then  was  principal  of  an  academy
at  Castleton,  Vt.,  for  a  year.  In  1830  he  returned  to
Middlebury  as  tutor,  and  remained  for  two  years,
also  studying  law.  He  spent  the  winter  of  1832-'3
at  Washington,  D.  C.  listening  to  debates  in  con-
gress and  at  the  supreme  court.  After  spending  a
short  time  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  he  settled  in  Jackson-
ville, 111.,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1833  he
became  professor  of  languages  in  Illinois  college,
and  later  he  took  the  chair  of  history.  He  studied
theology,  and  was  ordained  minister  of  the  Con-
gregational church  in  Jacksonville  in  1840.  He
was  called  in  1847  to  the  3d  Presbyterian  church  in
St.  Louis,  and  in  1851  to  the  newly  organized  1st
Congregational  church  in  that  city,  serving  until
his  death.  Dr.  Post  held  the  place  of  university
professor  of  ancient  and  modern  history  at  Wash-
ington university,  and  in  1873-'5  was  Southworth
lecturer  on  Congregationalism  at  Andover  theo-
logical seminary,  and  was  professor  of  ecclesiasti-
cal history  in  Northwestern  theological  seminary
in  Chicago.  In  1855  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Middleburj-  college.  He  contributed  to  the
"  Biblical  Repository  "  and  other  religious  periodi-
cals, and,  besides  various  pamphlets,  addresses,  and
sermons,  was  the  author  of  "  The  Skeptical  Era  in
Modern  History  "  (New  York,  1850).

POST,  Wright,  surgeon,  b.  in  North  Hemp-
stead, N.  Y.,  19  Feb.,  1700;  d.  in  Throg's  Neck,
N.  Y.,  14  June,  1828.  He  studied  medicine  under
Dr.  Richard  Bayley,  and  then  for  two  years  under
Dr.  John  Sheldon  in  London.  On  his  return  in
1786  he  began  to  practise  in  New  York,  and  in  1787
delivered  lectures  on  anatomy  at  the  New  York
hospital.  These  efforts  were  interrupted  by  the
"doctor's  mob,"  which  broke  into  the  building  and
destroyed  the  valuable  anatomical  specimens  that
had  been  collected.  In  1792  he  was  appointed
professor  of  surgery  in  the  medical  department  of
Columbia  college,  and  he  then  visited  the  great
schools  of  Europe,  collecting  a  splendid  anatomical
cabinet,  and  returning  to  New  \ork,in  1793,  after
which  he  held  the  chair  of  anatomy  until  1813.


POST


POTANOU


85


I


Dr.  Post  took  rank  a»  onoof  the  ablpHt  of  operative
surirtHHis,  and  his  skill  >rainp<l  for  him  eelebrity
iKdli  (It  home  ami  abrmwl.  He  wa.^  the  first  in  the
Unite*!  States  to  perform  an  operation  fur  a  case

of  fal!<<^  aneurism
of  the  femoral  ar-
torv.  Sub8e<}uent-
ly  The  o|K>rated  in
two  cases  for  caro-
tid aneurism,  and
in  all  three  cases
was  successful.
One  of  his  great-
est feats  was  the
successful  opera-
tion of  tying  the
subc^lavian  artery
above  the  clavicle
on  the  scH[)ular
side  of  the  scalene
muscles  /or  briwli-
ial  aneurism  situ-
y^^ ^  OPD /  ated  so  high  in  the

■^X^y/C/-  -€^t^^—-> axilla  as  to  make

it  inexpetlient  to
tie  this  artery.  The  accomplishment  of  this  ojHjr-
ation  was  es|)ecially  noteworthy  from  the  fat^t  that
Dr.  John  Abernethy,  Sir  Astley  Cooper,  and  other
English  surgeons  had  been  unsuccessful  in  its  jier-
formance.  In  1813,  on  the  union  of  the  medical
facility  of  Columbia  and  that  of  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons.  Dr.  Post  was  appointed
professor  of  anatomy  and  phvsiology  in  tne  new
facultv,  of  which  he  wiis  president  in  1821-'6.  In
1814  lie  received  the  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.
from  the  regents  of  the  University  of  the  state  of
New  York,  and  in  1816  he  wa.«  chosen  a  trustee
of  Columbia  college.  Dr.  Post  was  a  member  of
various  me<lical  societies  both  at  home  and  abroad.
For  more  than  thirty -five  years  he  was  one  of
the  surgeons  and  consulting  surgeons  of  the  New
York  hospit^il.  His  publications  include  papers
in  medical  journals  and  lectures. —  His  nephew.
Alfred  Charles,  surgeon,  b.  in  New  York  citv,  13
Jan.,  18(K{;  d.  there,  7  Feb.,  1880,  was  the  son  of
Joel  Post,  a  merchant  of  New  York,  whose  place  of
business  was  on  Hanover  square,  and  who  owned
as  his  country-seat  the  prof)erty  known  tis  Clare-
mont,  which  is  now  included  in  ftiverside  park  and
embraces  the  site  of  Gen.  Grant's  tomb.  Young
Post  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1822.  and  after
studying  medicine  under  his  uncle,  Wright  Post,
received  his  degree  at  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  1827.  After  jiassing  two  years  at  the
medical  schools  of  Europe,  he  established  himself
in  182»  in  New  York  city,  and  devoted  his  atten-
tion chiefly  to  surgery.  During  1831-'5  he  was
demonstrator  of  anatomy  at  the  College  of  phy-
sicians and  surgeons,  and  in  the  latter  year  he
moved  to  Brooklyn,  but  two  years  later  he  retume<l
to  Now  York,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.
He  was  chosen  professor  of  ophthalmic  surgery  at
Castleton  medical  college,  Vt.,  in  1843,  and  a  year
later  was  appointed  to  the  chair  of  surgery.  From
18.51  till  1875  he  was  professor  of  surgery  in  the
m(Hlical  flepartment  of  the  University  of  the  city
of  New  York,  serving  also  as  presi<lent  of  the  medi-
cal faculty  from  1873  until  his  <leath.  Dr.  Post
held  consulting  relations  to  various  institutions,
notably  to  the  New  York  hospital  from  18Ji6,  to
St.  Luke's  hospital  from  its  beginning,  and  to  the
Presbyterian  hospital.  His  ^reat  fame  was  acrhieved
in  surgery,  and  liis  operations  wt>re  marked  with

grecision  and  dexterity. He  was  the  first  in  the
I^nited  States  to  operate  for  stammering,  and  in


184()  devi»e<l  a  new  methoil  of  |icrforming  bilateral
lithotomy.  He  alsft  showe*]  mechanical  ingenuity
in  devising  instruments  and  appliances,  and  in  the
latter  part  of  his  life  lal)ored  much  in  plastic  sur-
ger)',  making  important  re|M>rt»  of  o{terationH  in
that  line.  He  was  a  memlM>r  of  medical  sf>cietie8
Ixith  at  home  and  abroad,  and  was  president  of  the
New  York  acmlemv  of  me<licine  in  18(57-'8.  In
1872  he  receivetl  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  from  the
University  of  the  city  of  New  York.  Dr.  Post  was
also  active  in  various  religious  and  charitable  or-
gan izati<ms,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  {iresi-
dent  of  the  New  York  metlical  mission,  and  one  of
the  ilirectors  of  Union  theological  seminary.  His
literary  contributions  consisted  entirely  of  techni-
cal |>ai»ers  in  professional  journals,  with  the  single
exception  of  his  "Strabismus  and  .Stammering"
(New  York.  1840).

POSTELI^  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  1760;  d.
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  January,  1801.  He  was  a
resident  of  St.  Bartholomew's  parish,  S.  C.  In  1775
he  Ijecame  a  lieutenant  in  the  1st  regiment  of  his
state,  and  on  the  capture  of  Charleston  in  1780  he
was  sent  as  a  prisoner  to  .St.  Augustine,  where  he
remained  eleven  months,  sufTering  many  hardships.
Subsequently  he  was  a  meml)er  of  the  legislature,
and  colonel  of  the  Colleton  county  regiment.  He
did  got)d  service  in  the  Revolution  under  Gea.
Francis  Marion.  His  brothers,  Maj.  Jonx  and  Col.
Jamks.  also  won  reputation  in  the  jiartisan  warfare
under  Marion.  The  former  captured  forty  British
regulars  near  Monk's  Comer  on  29  Jan.,  1781.

POTANOU,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  P'lorida  about
1525 ;  d.  there  alxiut  1570.  He  was  the  king  of  the
most  potent  of  the  three  great  Indian  confederacies
that  existed  in  lower  Florida  at  the  time  of  the
landing  of  Jean  Kibaut  {q.  v.)  in  1562,  and  his  do-
mains extended  seventy  miles  westward  and  north-
westward of  St.  John's  river.  The  Florida  Indians
were  more  advanced  in  civilization  than  the  more
northern  tribes,  and  were  chiefly  an  agricultural
people.  Potanou  was  a  legislator,  and  endeavored
to  promote  civilization  among  his  subjects.  The
villages  under  his  rule  had  wooden  buildings  that
were  constructed  according  to  his  plans,  and  aston-
ished both  the  early  French  and  .Spanish  adven-
turers. But  he  failed  in  his  attempts  to  unite  the
Indians  of  lower  Florida  in  a  single  great  confed-
eracy, of  which  it  was  his  ambition  to  be  the  chief,
and  "at  the  time  of  Ribaut's  landing  in  15G2  there
was  a  war  among  the  three  kings,  Satouriona,
Outina  {q.  r.),  and  Potanou,  in  which  the  last  seeme<l
to  have  the  atlvantage.  He  was  also  the  first  to
oi)en  intercourse  witli  Ribaut,  and  receive*!  from
him  a  present  of  a  n)lx'  of  blue  cloth,  worked  with
the  regal  fleur-de-lis.  The  difllculties  that  the
French  under  Rene  de  Laudonniere  (^.  r.)  met  in
their  attempts  to  colonize  Florida  were  due  chiefly
to  the  rivalry  among  the  three  kings,  who  aske<l
Ijaudonniere's  aid  against  their  neighbors,  and,  iK'ing
refused,  became  his  enemies.  They  afforded  assist-
ance to  the  Spaniards  under  Menendez  de  Aviles
{q.  f.).  esi)ecially  Potanou,  who  complaiiunl  of  a
raid  that  had  been  made  on  his  villages  by  Outina.
aided  by  a  [mrty  of  French  under  Arlac.  a  lieuten-
ant of ' Laudonniere.  But  the  haughtiness  and
cruelties  of  the  Spaniartls  soon  occasionetl  hostilities
with  the  Indians,  and  a  war  l)egan  against  the  in-
truders. Menendez  de  Aviles  endeavonnl  in  vain
to  conciliate  Potanou,  but  the  prudent  king  could
not  be  decoyed,  and  ordered  that  all  missionaries
and  SfMiniards  trespassing  on  his  domains  should
l)e  put  to  death.  This  enmity,  which  laste<l  till
Potanou's  death.  prove<l  a  severe  check  to  the
Spanish  colonization  of  Florida.


86


POTTER


POTTER


0^^yir-^?^Sir


POTTER.  Alonzo,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Beekman
(now  liH  (irnripi').  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y..«  .July,  1800:
d.  in  Sun  Francist-o,  Cal..  4  July,  18(55.  His  father
was  .losojih  potter,  a  fanner,  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  an  eniijjrant  from  Cranston,  R.  I.,  in  which
state  other  brandies  of  the  family  are  still  livinpj.
Alonzo  first  attended  the  district  -  school  of  his

native  place,  which
was  then  taught  by
a  Mr.  Thompson,  to
wliose  influence  in
arousing  and  di-
recting the  activi-
ties of  his  mind  he
never  forgot  that
he  was  greatly  in-
debted. At  twelve
years  of  age  he  was
sent  to  an  academy
in  Poughkeepsie,
and  he  was  gradu-
ated at  Union  col-
lege in  1818  with
the  highest  honors.
Soon  after  his  grad-
uation he  went  to
Philadelphia,  was  attracted  to  the  Episcopal  church,
and  entered  its  communion  His  thoughts  were
soon  turned  to  the  ministry,  and  he  was  directed  in
his  theological  studies  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Samuel  H.
Turner.  lie  was  presently  recalled  to  Union  college
as  a  tutor,  and  at  twenty-one  he  was  made  professor
of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy.  Meantime
he  pursued  his  studies,  and  was  admitted  deacon  by
Bishop  Hot)art,  and  in  1824  advanced  to  the  priest-
hood l>y  Bishop  Brownell.  In  the  same  year  he  mar-
ried the  only  daughter  of  President  Nott,  of  Union
college.  In  182(5  Prof.  Potter  was  called  to  the
rectorship  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Boston.  After
five  years  of  earnest  and  successful  labor  he  felt
constrained,  despite  the  protestations  of  his  peo-
ple, to  resign  his  rectorship.  In  1832  he  was  re-
called to  Union  college  to  fill  the  chair  of  moral  and
intellectual  philosophy  and  political  economy.  His
official  position  and  his  personal  relationship  natu-
rally made  him  the  friend  and  counsellor  of  the
president  in  the  administration  of  the  college.  In
1838  he  was  formally  elected  its  vice-president,  and
continued  to  be  practically  its  controlling  head
until  he  resigned  to  become  bishop  of  Pennsyl-
vania, 23  Sept.,  1845.  From  his  boyhood,  owing
perhaps  in  part  to  his  Quaker  origin^  he  cherished
a  deep  sympathy  for  the  oppressed,  and  through
life,  in  every  ofliice,  he  befriended  the  negro  race.
He  took  great  interest  in  the  organization  of  young
men's  institutes  throughout  the  state  of  New
York,  and  immediately  on  his  settlement  in  Phila-
delphia, invoking  the  help  of  energetic  laymen,
established  four  such  fraternities  in  that  city,  and
gave  iiis  personal  services  as  a  lecturer  before  them.
When  he  was  called  to  the  episcopate  he  was  al-
ready under  engagement  to  deliver  in  five  consecu-
tive years  before  the  Lowell  institute  in  Boston
courses  of  lectures  on  "  Natural  Theology  and
Christian  Evidences,"  beginning  in  1845  and  end-
ing in  1849.  They  were  given  on  an  open  plat-
form, without  even  a  brief  before  him,  and  the
largest  public  hall  in  Boston  was  filled  throughout
the  entire  series.  This  was  the  intellectual  triumph
of  his  life.  As  a  bishop  he  was  most  distinguished
for  his  executive  abilitj^.  He  had  a  genius  for  ad-
ministration. He  devised  large  plans  of  benefi-
cence, which  it  was  costly  to  consummate,  but  they
were  so  well  considered  before  he  communicated
them  to  others  that  men  of  business  and  wealth


were  found  ready  to  co-operate  and  to  contribute
for  their  realization.  In  his  time  the  Episcopal
hospital  was  founded,  built,  and  endowed  with
nearly  half  a  million  dollars  ;  the  Episcopal  acade-
my, which  for  half  a  century  had  had  no  sign  of
its  existence  but  its  charter,  was  revived,  its  com-
modious building  was  reared  and  filled  with  pupils,
and  its  reputation  for  thorough  instruction  was
made  equal  to  that  of  any  preparatory  school  in
the  city :  the  Philadelphia  uivinity-school  was  es-
tal)lished,  a  valuable  property  for  its  occupancy
was  bought  and  fitted,  and  an  endowment  of  sev-
eral hundred  thousand  dollars  was  secured  for  its
support.  These  institutions,  still  developing  for
the  benefit  of  the  present  and  future  generations,
owe  their  inception  to  Bishop  Potter,  In  the
twenty  years  of  his  episcopate  thirty  -  five  new
churches  were  built  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,
The  growth  of  the  diocese  was  such  that  in  the
vear  of  his  death  it  became  necessary  to  divide  it.
Sis  vigorous  constitution  succumbed  under  the
pressure  of  care  and  labor  that  he  took  upon  him-
self. In  1859  he  was  partially  relieved  by  an  assist-
ant, but  it  was  too  late.  He  died  in  the  harbor  of
San  Francisco,  where  he  had  just  arrived  after  a
voyage  around  Cane  Horn  in  search  of  health.  lie
had  received  the  aegree  of  D.  D.  from  Harvard  in
1846,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Union  in  the  same
year.  Bishop  Potter  was  the  auther  of  treatises
on  logarithms  and  descriptive  geometiy,  which
were  printed  for  the  use  of  his  classes  in  Union
college  (1822-'6) ;  "  Political  Economy,  its  Objects,
Uses,  and  Principles "  (New  York,  1840) ;  ''  The
Principles  of  Science  applied  to  the  Domestic  and
Mechanic  Arts,  and  to  Manufactures  and  Agricul-
ture "(Boston,  1841 ;  revised  ed..  New  York,  1850);
"  The  School  and  the  Schoolmaster,"  with  George
B.  Emerson  (1842) ;  "  Hand-Book  for  Readers  and
Students  "  (1843) ;  "  Discourses,  Charges,  Addresses,
Pastoral  Letters,  etc. "  (1858)  ;  and  "  Religious
Philosophy"  (1870).  He  edited  seven  volumes  of
"  Harpers'  Family  Library,"  with  introductory
essays;  Rev.  Samuel  Wilks's  "Christian  Essays^'
(Boston.  1829)  ;  Maria  James'3  "  Poems  "  (Is''ew
York,  1839) :  and  "  Lectures  on  the  Evidences  of
Christianity,  delivered  in  Philadelphia  by  Clergy-
men of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  1853-^"
(Philadelphia,  1855).  See  "Memoirs  of  the  Life
and  Services  of  Rt.  Rev.  A.  Potter,  D.  D..  LL.  D.,"
by  Bishop  M.  A.  De  Wolfe  Howe  (Philadelphia,
1870).— His  son,  Clarkson  Nott,  legislator,  b.  in
Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  25  April,  1825 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  23  Jan.,  1882,  was  graduated  at  Union  college
in  1842,  studied  civil  engineering  at  Rensselaer
polytechnic  institute,  and  in  1843  went  to  Milwau-
kee, Wis.  After  being  employed  as  an  engineer,
he  studied  law,  and  in  1848  returned  to  New  York,
where  he  began  to  practise.  In  1868  he  was  elected
to  congress,  from  the  12th  district  of  that  state,
as  a  Democrat,  and  he  was  twice  re-elected,  sitting
in  that  body  from  4  March,  1869,  till  3  March,
1875.  He  declined  a  nomination  to  the  44th  con-
gress, but  was  again  chosen  for  the  two  succeeding
terms,  and  served  from'lo  Oct.,  1877,  till  4  March,
1881.  During  his  congressional  career  Mr.  Potter
was  a  member  of  important  committees,  and  took
an  active  part  in  the  discussion  of  the  disputed
electoral  votes  of  Louisiana  and  Florida  in  the
presidential  election  of  1876.  In  1879  he  received
the  Democratic  nomination  for  lieutenant-governor
of  New  York,  but  was  defeated,  Mr.  Potter  served
as  president  of  the  American  bar  association,  and
received  the  decree  of  LL.  D.  —  Another  son,
Robert  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  Schenectafly,  N.  Y,,  16
July,  1829 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  19  Feb.,  1887,  spent


POTTER


POTTER


87


some  time  at  Union  college,  hut  wa«  not  gnwluiitod.
He  studied  law,  wiu«  admitttvl  to  the  bar.  and  at
the  Invsinniuj;  of  I  ho  civil  war  was  in  successful
practice  in  New  York  city.  He  was  comuiissionod
major  of  the  Slst  New  York  voluntwrs,  KmI  the
asstiuit  at  Roanoke  island,  was  woundtMl  at  New
Berne,  commandtnl  his  re;fiment  at  Ctnlar  Moun-
tain. Mana.ssas,  and  ("hantilly. and  carried  thestcme
brid^re  at  Antietam.  where  he  was  af;ain  wounded.
He  was  also  enpa>fe<l  in  the  Ixittle  of  Fre«lericks-
burj;  in  DeoemlHT.  18({2.  and  was  made  brjpidier-
ffeneral  of  volunteers.  V.]  March.  \H(')H.  He  had  i>re-
viously  Ixien  commissionwl  lieuteiumt-colonel  and
colonel.  He  led  a  division  at  Vieksburjr,  and  ttKik
part  in  the  siejje  of  Knoxville,  Tenn.  He  was  bre-
vetted  major-preneral  of  volunteers  in  June,  1864.
In  the  Wilderness  oampaifrn.  his  division  wa.«s  con-
stantly under  fire,  an<l  in  the  final  assault  on  Pe-
tersburg^, 2  April,  1865.  he  was  severely  injured.
After  the  war  ne  was  assigned  to  the  command  of
the  Connecticut  and  Rhode  Island  district  of  the
Demrtment  of  the  East,  and  on  his  weddinp-day  his
wife  was  presented  by  Sec.  Stanton  with  his  com-
mission as  full  major-peneral  of  volunteers,  dated
29  Sept.,  1865.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the  army  in
January,  186(J,  and  acted  for  three  years  as  receiver
of  the  Atlantic  and  Great  Western  railroa<l.  After
spending  some  time  in  P'ngland  for  his  health,  he
returnea  to  Newport,  R.  I.,  where  he  resided  until
his  death.  Gen.  Grant  refers  to  Gen.  Potter  in
flatterin};  terms  in  his  "  Memoirs,"  and  Gen.  Win-
fleld  S.  Hancock  said  of  him  that  he  was  one  of
the  twelve  liest  officers,  including  both  the  regular
and  volunteer  services,  in  the  army. — Another  son,
Henry  Codman,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.'in  Schenectady,
N.  Y.,  25  May,  1835,  after  being  educated  chierfy
at  the  Episcopal  academy  in  Philadelphia,  was
graduated  at  the  Theological  seminary  or  Virginia
in  1857,  received  deacon's  orders  the  same  year,
and  was  ordained,  15  Oct.,  1858.  From  July,  1857,
till  May,  1859,  he  was  rector  of  Christ  church,
Greensburgh,  Pa.,  and  for  the  next  seven  years  he
had  charge  of  St.  John's,  Troy,  N.  Y.  He  then  be-
came assistant  minister  of  Trinity  church,  Boston,
where  he  remained  two  years.  From  May,  1868,
till  January,  1884,  he  was  rector  of  Grace  church.
New  York  "city.  In  1863  he  was  chosen  president
of  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,  and  in  1875  he  was  elected
bishop  of  Iowa,  but  he  declined  both  offices.  In
1883  liishop  Horatio  Potter,  of  New  York,  having  j
asked  for  an  assistant,  the  convention  of  that  year  j
unanimously  elected  his  nephew.  Dr.  Henry  C.
Potter,  assistant  bishop.  He  was  consecrated  on
20  Oct..  in  the  presence  of  forty-three  bishops  and
300  of  the  clergy,  the  General  convention  Ix'ing  i
then  in  session  in  Philadelphia.  By  formal  instru-
ments, that  were  executed  soon  afterward,  the  aged
bishop  resigned  the  entire  charge  and  responsibility  |
of  the  work  of  the  diocese  into  the  hands  of  his
assistant.  These  duties  the  latter  continued  to  dis-
charge until  the  death  of  Bishop  Horatio  Potter,
on  2  Jan.,  1887,  ma«le  him  his  successor.  Dr.  Pot-
ter was  secretary  of  the  House  of  bishops  from  1866
till  188:1,  and  for  many  years  he  was  a  manager  of
the  Board  of  missions.  He  received  from  Union
the  degrees  of  A.  M.,  D.  D.,  and  LL.  D.  in  186:1,
1865.  and  1877,  respectively,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from
Trinity  in  1884.  Bishop  Potter  has  published
"  Sisterho<Hls  and  Deaconesses  at  Home  and
Abroad :  A  History  of  their  Rise  and  Growth  in
the  Protestant  FJpiscopjal  Church,  together  with
Rules  for  their  Organization  and  Government  "
(View  York,  1872);  "The  Gates  of  the  East:  A
Winter  in  Egypt  and  Syria"  (1876);  and  "Ser-
mons of  the  city"  (1877). — Another  son,  Edvtard


Tnrkornian,  architect,  b.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,
25  S«-pt.,  WW.  was  graduated  at  Union  In  IRM,
studie<l  architecture  under  Richard  M.  Upjr)hn.  and
has  nractis«'d  in  New  York,  giving  attention  jjrin-
cipally  to  collegiate  and  ecclesiastical  architecture.
His  work  (as  ilhistrated  in  the  Church  of  the
Heavenly  Rest,  New  York;  the  Church  of  the
(food  Shepherd  fColt  Memorial].  Hartford:  and
Memorial  Hall,  Schenectady)  is  distinguished  by
marked  freshness  and  originality  of  conception,
felicity  of  onuimentation,  and  delicacy  of  feeling.
He  has  resided  largely  abroad,  and  is  known  as  a
musical  com|>oser  of  much  merit. — Another  son,
Elinhalet  Nott,  clergyman,  b.  in  Schenectady,
N.  v.,  20  Sept.,  1836,  was  graduateil  at  Union  in
1861,  and  at  Berkeley  divinity-school  in  1862.  He
to<ik  orders  as  an  Episcopalian  clergyman,  and  was
rector  of  the  Church  of  the  Nativity  in  South  Beth-
lehem, Pa.,  from  1862  till  1869.  From  1866  till  1871
he  was  secretary  and  professor  of  ethics  at  Lehigh
university,  and  from  1869  till  1871  he  was  associate
rector  of  St.  Paul's.  Troy.  N.  Y.  At  Bethlehem
Dr.  Potter  was  instrumental  in  building  three
churches,  and  in  Troy  two  cha|iels.  In  1871  he
was  elected  president  of  Union  college,  and  he  was
chosen  to  the  same  office  when  the  college  l)ecame
a  university  in  187:^.  In  1872  he  was  elected
trustee.  Resigning  from  the  presidency  in  1884,
he  was  chosen  bishop  of  Nebraska,  but  declined,
and  accepted  instead  a  prior  call  to  l)ecome  presi-
dent of  Hobart  college.  He  received  the  tlegree
of  D.  D.  from  Union  in  1869. — Alonzo's  brother,
Horatio,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Beekman,  Dutchess
CO.,  N.  Y.,  9  Feb.,  \m :  d.  in  New  York  city,  2
Jan.,  1887.  He  was  gratluated  at  Union  college  in
1826.  ordained  deacon  in  July,  1827,  and  became
priest  the  following  year.  His  first  charge  was  at
Saco,  Me.  In  1828  he  was  elected  professor  of
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Washing-
ton (now  Trinity)  college,  and  took  an  active  part
in  plans  for  the  enlargement  of  the  college.  In
18:33  he  became  rector  of  St.  Peter's  church,  Al-
Imny,  N.  Y.,  and  held  that  post  till  1854,  when  he
was  elected  provisional  bisnop  of  the  diocese  of
New  York,  and  consecrated  in  Trinity  church  on
22  Nov.  of  that  year.  On  the  death  of  Bishop  On-
derdonk  in  1861,  he  became  bishop  of  the  dioce.se.
The  25th  anniversary  of  his  consecration  was  cele-
brated on  Saturday.'22  Nov.,  1879,  by  services  in
Trinity  church,  and
on  the  following
Tuesday  by  a  recep-
tion in  the  Academy
of  music,  at  which
deputations  from
the  other  dioceses  in
the  state  of  New
York  were  present,
and  addresses  were
made  by  William  M.
Evarts  and  John
Jay.  The  bishop's
last  public  service
was  held,  3  May,
188:1,  at  the  end  of
a  long  an«l  fatigu-
ing visitation,  after
which  he  was  pros-
trated by  an  attack
of  pneumonia  from

which  he  never  rallied.  He  died  at  his  residence,
after  being  confined  to  his  room  three  years  and
eight  months.  When  Bishop  Potter  came  to  his
diocese  it  was  in  a  state  of  great  depression  and
disquiet,  owing  to  the  controversies  that  resulted


AvicCtt^ ^fir^^tC-


88


POTTER


POTTER


from  the  trial  and  suspension  of  liis  predecessor.
(See  O.VDKRDONK,  Hknjamin  T.)  His  administration
resulted  in  the  restoration  of  order,  quietness,  and
peace,  and  in  great  development  and  prosjierity.
Among  the  notable  events  in  his  episcopate  was
the  sulxlivision  in  1868,  when  the  dioceses  of  Long
Island  and  Albany  were  set  off.  He  was  among
the  chief  members  of  the  house  of  bishops,  and
took  an  active  part  in  the  Lanibeth  conferences  in
September,  18(57,  and  July,  1878.  He  entered  zeal-
ously into  the  measures  that  had  for  their  object
the  reunion  of  the  dioceses  that  had  been  separated
temporarily  from  each  other  during  the  civil  war,
and  was  among  the  prominent  figures  in  the  gen-
eral convention  at  Philmlelphia  in  1805,  at  which
the  southern  bishops,  appearing  in  the  persons  of
two  representatives,  were  received  with  general  and
enthusiastic  rejoicings,  and  without  conditions  or
(piestions,  or  allusion  to  the  past.  Bishop  Potter
was  a  man  of  remarkable  good  sense  and  tiict,  calm,
wise,  and  patient,  an  able  administrator,  one  whose
judgment  wai»  rarely  if  ever  at  fault,  always  temper-
ate and  conciliatory ;  and  to  these  qualities  were
due  the  good  order,  peace,  and  prosperity  of  his  dio-
cese. He  was  a  uuin  of  unusual  literary  culture.
Among  his  personal  friends  and  correspondents
outsi(le  f)f  his  own  country  were  such  men  as  Bish-
ops Wilberforce,  Selwyn,  .Jac^kson,  of  London,  Ham-
ilton and  Moberly,  of  Salisbury,  and  Medley,  of
Fredericton,  Stanhope.  Archdeacon  Sinclair,  and
the  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  J.  T.  Coleridge.  The  growth  of
the  diocese  of  New  York  under  his  administra-
tion may  be  inferred  from  the  statistics  taken  from
the  convention  journals,  though  they  are  imper-
fect. In  18r)4  the  diocese  reported  290" clergy,  2,700
confirmations,  4,482  baptisms,  19, 730  communicants,
and  |!207.341.85  in  contributions.  In  1868  there
were  reported  446  clergy,  3,930  confirmations,  6,314
Imptisms,  33.000  communicants,  and  $1,005,138.21
in  contributions.  Bishop  Potter  took  a  lively  in-
terest in  city  mission  work  among  the  laboring
classes  and  the  poor,  and  devoted  to  that  subject  a
great  part  of  his  annual  addresses  to  the  conven-
tion. His  publications  are  limited  to  pastoral  let-
ters, addresses  to  the  clergy  and  laity  of  the  dio-
cese, and  occasional  sermons.  In  person  Bishop  Pot-
ter was  tall  and  of  a  dignified  and  noble  presence ;
he  belonged  to  the  old  high-church  school,  of  which
Keble,  Pusey,  and  Isaac  Williams  were  among  the
liest  illustrations,  yet  his  sympathies  went  out  free-
ly toward  all  Christian  people.  He  was  buried  in
the  cemetery  at  Poughkeepsie,  where  an  appropri-
ate monumental  stone  marks  the  place  of  his  rest.
— Horatio's  son,  WUIiam  Bleeclier,  mining  engi-
neer, b.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  23  March,  1846,  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1866,  and  then,  entering
the  school  of  mines  of  that  college,  received  the
degree  of  E.  M.  in  1869.  He  continued  for  two
years  as  assistant  in  geology  at  the  school,  and  also
served  under  Dr.  John  S.  Newberry  (q.  v.)  on  the
geological  survey  of  Ohio.  In  1871  he  was  called
to  the  chair  of  mining  and  metallurgy  at  Wash-
ington university,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  which  place  he
has  since  held,  buring  these  years  he  has  built  up
an  extensive  professional  practice  in  the  line  of
examining  mineral  deposits  and  mining  processes,
with  reports  on  the  same.  Prof.  Potter  is  a  mem-
ber of  scientific  societies,  and  in  1888  he  was  elected
president  of  the  American  institute  of  mining  en-
gineers. His  scientific  papers  have  been  confined
to  proceedings  of  societies  to  which  he  belongs.

POTTER,  Chandler  Eastman,  author,  b.  in
Concord,  N.  H.,  7  March,  1807;  d.  in  Flint,  Mich.,
3  Aug.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1831,  and  was  principal  of  Portsmouth  high-school


in  1832-'8,  except  during  1834-'5,  when  he  was  a
member  of  the  legislature.  Mr.  Potter  then  studied
law  in  Concord,  and  began  to  practise  in  East  Con-
cord, but  in  1844  removed  to  Manchester,  and  for
four  years  edited  and  published  the  Manchester
"  Democrat."  He  edited  the  "  Farmer's  Month-
ly Visitor"  in  1852-'4,  "The  Granite  Farmer  and
^'lonthlv  Visitor  "  in  1854-'5,  and  was  co-editor  of
the  "  Weekly  Mirror  "  and  the  "  Mirror  and  Farm-
er" in  1864-'5.  He  was  colonel  of  the  Amoskeag
veterans  of  Manchester  until  his  decease,  and  had
command  of  the  regiment  at  the  time  of  its  visit
to  Baltimore  and  Washington  during  the  admin-
istration of  F'ranklin  Pierce.  He  was  active  in  the
New  Hampshire  historical  society,  and  its  president
in  1855-'7.  Col.  Potter  was  well  known  as  an  agri-
cultural, historical,  and  general  newspaper  writer,
and  also  devoted  much  of  his  time  to  the  study  of
Indian  languages,  in  which  he  was  more  competent
than  any  other  scholar  in  New  Hampshire.  He
edited  and  compiled  all  that  part  of  the  adjutant-
general's  report  of  New  Hampshire  that  included
the  military  history  of  the  state  from  the  beginning
of  the  Revolution  down  to  the  civil  war  (1866-'8).
His  other  publications  include  a  "  History  of  Man-
chester, N.  II."  (Manchester,  1856),  and  articles  on
the  Penobscot  and  other  eastern  Indians  in  Henry
R.  Schoolcraft's  "  History  of  the  Indians,"  and  he

{lartially  prepared  for  the  press  a  new  edition  of
Jel knap's  "  History  of  New  Hampshire,  with  Notes
and  a  (Jontinuation  to  1860."

POTTER,  Edward  Eells,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Medina,  N.  Y.,  9  May,  1833.  He  entered  the  U.  S.
navy  as  a  midshipman  on  5  Feb.,  1850,  and  after
service  in  the  Home  and  African  squadrons  during
1850-'5,  spent  a  year  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy.
On  9  July,  1858,  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant,
in  1861  he  was  attached  to  the  "  Niagara,"  of  the
Western  Gulf  squadron,and  in  1861-'2  he  was  execu-
tive officer  of  the  "  Wissahiekon,"  of  that  squadron,
during  the  bombardment  and  passage  of  Fort  Jack-
son and  Fort  St.  Philip  and  the  capture  of  New
Orleans.  He  also  passed  the  Vicksburg  batteries
twice  and  participated  in  the  engagement  with  the
ram  "Arkansas."  On  16  July,  1862,  he  was  promot-
ed lieutenant-commander  and  attached  to  the  "  De
Soto,"  of  the  Eastern  Gulf  squadron,  then  passed
to  the  "  Wabash,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  squadron,
and  in  1864-'5  he  had  command  of  the  iron-clad
"  Mahopac."  He  was  given  the  "  Chippewa,"  of  the
North  Atlantic  squadron,  in  1865,  and  took  part  in
the  engagement  at  Fort  Fisher  and  in  the  bom-
bardment of  Fort  Anderson,  after  which  he  was
executive  officer  of  the  "  Rhode  Island  "  in  1865-'7,
and  was  executive  officer  of  the  "  Franklin,"  Ad-
miral Farragut's  flagship,  in  1867-'8,  on  the  ad-
miral's last  cruise.  Subsequently  he  was  on  shore
duty  until 1871,  having  in  the  meanwhile  been

Eromoted  commander  on  3  June,  1869.  He  then
ad  the  "  Shawmut,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  squad-
ron, during  1871-2.  and  then  until  1879  was  on
shore  duty.  In  1880  he  commanded  the  "Constel-
lation," oh  her  voyage  to  Ireland,  carrying  supplies
to  the  sufferers,  and  he,  was  commissioned  captain
on  11  July,  1880.  He  then  served  at  the  Brooklyn
navy-yard  in  1881-3,  and  commanded  the  " Lan-
caster," of  the  European  station,  until  September,
1886.  Capt.  Potter  was  made  commandant  of  the
navy-yard  at  League  island,  Pa.,  in  December,
1886,  and  now  (1888)  fills  that  place.

POTTER,  Edward  Elmer,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city,  20  June,  1823;  d.  there,  1  June,  1889.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1842,  studied  law,
went  to  California,  but  he  returned  Jio  New  York
and  turned  his  attention  to  farming. Early  during


POTTKIl


porrER


the  civil  war  he  was  ai)|K>inted  captain  and  com-
tnissary  «>f  subsistence  from  New  York,  which  coni-
inissioii  he  held  from  February  to  Ot-toU'r.  1802.
Sul»st<iuently  he  nH;ruite«l  a  regiment  of  North
Carolina  trixSps,  of  whicli  he  was  made  colonel,  and
wasenpijfed  chiefly  in  the  ojH'rations  in  North  and
South  Carolina  aiid  east  Tennessee,  receivinjj  the

Sromotion  of  hricmlier-peneral  of  volunteers  on
'i  Nov.,  18(52.  lie  resigned  on  24  July.  IWi-J.  and
was  hrevetted  major-general  of  volunteers  on  i;{
March.  IHO.").  After  the  war  Gen.  Potter  resided
in  .MikIIsuii.  N.  J.,  and  New  Vork  city.

POTTKK,  Ellsha  Reynolds,  lawyer,  b.  in
South  Kingston,  R.  I.,  5  Nov.,  1704;  d.  there,  2«
Sept.,  1835. He  Wgan  life  as  a  blacksmith's  an-

Erentice,  and  was  also  a  soldier,  but  subseciuently
e  studie<l  law,  and  practised  with  considenible
success.  From  ITDS  till  his<leath  he  was  a  memiwr
of  the  Rhode  Island  assembly,  except  during  the
years  of  his  congre.>*sional  servii-e,  and  he  was  for
five  years  its  s|>eaker.  In  1790  he  was  elected  as  a
Fe«Ieralist  to  congress  and  servinl  from  19  Dec,
1790,  until  his  resignation  in  1797.  He  was  again
sent  to  congress  and  serveil  from  22  May,  1809,  till
2  March.  1815,  acting  on  important  committees.
In  1818  he  was  a  candidate  for  governor.  It  is  said
of  him  that  "  few  political  men  in  Rhode  Island
ever  acquire<l  or  maintained  a  more  commanding
influence." — His  son.  Elisha  Reynolds,  lawyer,  b.
in  South  Kingston,  R.  I.,  20  June.  1811  :  d.  there,
10  April,  1882,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1830,
and.  after  studying  Taw,  became  a  member  of  the
Rhode  Island  legislature.  In  1835-'7  he  was  atlju-
tant-general  of  the  state. He  was  elected  to  con-

Sress  as  a  Whig,  serving  from  4  Dec,  1843,  till  3
[arch,  1845.  and  was  state  commissioner  of  public
sc-hools  from  May,  1849,  till  October,  1854.  Subse-
(|Uently  he  devoted  himself  to  the  practice  of  his
profession,  was  chosen  a  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  the  state.  Judge  Potter  was  an  active
memljcrof  the  Rhode  Island  historical  society,  and
published  in  its  collections  •'  A  Brief  Account  of  the
Emissions  of  Paper  Money  made  by  the  Colony  of
Rhode  Island"  (1837),  also  various  addresses.  In
addition  to  his  "Report  on  the  Condition  and  Im-
provement of  the  Public  Schools  of  Rhode  Island  "
(1852),  "The  Bible  and  Prayer  in  Public  Schools"
(1854),  and  other  "Reports  and  Documents  upon
Public  Schools  and  Education  in  the  State  of
Rhode  Island,"  he  was  the  author  of  "Early  His-
tory of  Narragansett,  with  an  Appendix  of  Original
Documents '"  (Pmvidence,  1835).

POTTER,  Hazard  Arnold,  surgeon,  b.  in  Pot-
ter township,  Ontario  (now  Yates)  co.,  N.  Y.,  21
Dec,  1810;  d.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  2  Dec,  1809.  He
was  graduated  at  the  metlical  department  of  Bow-
doin  in  1835,  and  began  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion in  Rhode  Island,  but  soon  returnwl  to  his
native  town.  In  1835  he  settled  in  Geneva,  where
he  performed  successfully  many  critical  surgical
operations,  and  in  1837  he  called  attention  to  the
presence  of  arterial  blood  in  the  veins  of  parts  that
had  Ix-en  paralvzed  in  conseciuence  of  injury  to  the
spinal  cord.  lie  trephined  tne  spine  for  depressed
fracture  of  the  arches  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  verte-
brae in  1844.  and  subsequently  he  |)erformed  the
same  operation  four  times,  twice  successfully.  Later
he  performed  ligature  of  the  carotid  artery  five
times,  four  times  successfully,  and  removed  the
upper  jaw  six  times  and  the  lower  Ave  times.  Dr.
Potter  was  early  convinced  of  the  safety  of  opera-
tions within  the  alxlominal  cavity,  and  in  184;J  |>er-
formed  gastrotomy  for  the  relief  of  intussusception
of  the  bowels  witJi  perfect  success.  He  removed
fibrous  tumors  of  the  uterus  from  within  the  ab-


I


dominal  cavity  five  times,  in  three  cases  micoen-
fuUy.  He  extirpated  by  ovariotomy  twenty-two
ovarian  tumors,  fourteen  of  them  successfully,  and
in  one  of  the  succ-essful  cases  Inith  ovaries  were  re-
moved at  the  same  time.  In  another  case,  also
successful,  the  operation  was  repeated  upon  the
same  patient  twice  with  an  interval  of  seventeen
months.  Dr.  Potter  serve<l  as  regimental  surgeon
of  the  50th  New  York  engineers  in  1802.

POTTER,  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  Granville  county,
N.  C,  in  1705;  d.  in  Fayetteville,  N.  Y.,  20  Dec,
1857.  He  was  educatc<l  as  a  lawyer,  and  was  aj>-
pointed  in  1801  U.  S.  ^udge  of  the  fifth  circuit.  In
1802  he  became  U.  S.  judge  of  the  district  of  North
Carolina,  and  he  was  on  the  l)ench  for  more  than
half  a  century.  Ho  was  a  trustee  of  the  University
of  North  Carolina  from  175)9  till  his  death.  Judge
Potter  published  "  Duties  of  a  Just  ice  of  the  Peace  "
(Raleign.  1810),  and  was  jissot-iated  with  John  L.
Taylor  and  Bartlett  Yancey  in  the  compilation  of
a  revision  of  the  "  Law  of  the  State  of  North  Caro-
lina "(2  vols.,  1821).

POTTER,  Israel  Ralph,  patriot,  b.  in  Crans-
ton. R.  I.,  1  Aug..  1744;  d.  there  about  1820.  He
early  left  home  and  became  a  farmer  in  New  Hamp-
shire, after  which  he  was  ass<K-iated  with  a  party  of
surveyors  as  assistant  chain-l)earer.  He  next  be-
came a  sailor  on  a  ship  that  was  burned  at  sea,  but
he  was  rescued  by  a  Dutch  vessel  and  continued
his  roving  career  for  nearly  two  years.  In  1774  he
returned  home,  and  after  working  on  a  farm  for
several  months  enlisted  in  a  regiment  that  was
raised  by  Col.  John  Patterson.  Tne  battle  of  Lex-
ington found  him  ploughing,  and,  after  deliberately
finishing  the  work,  he  joined  his  regiment  at
Charlestown.  He  fought  with  bravery  at  the  battle
of  Bunker  Hill,  and,  when  his  ammunition  wiis  ex-
haustetl,  seized  a  sword  from  a  wounded  officer  and
continued  the  contest  until  the  close,  when,  having
received  two  musket-ball  wounds,  he  found  his  way
to  the  hospital.  On  his  recovery  he  volunteered
as  a  seaman  on  the  "  Washington,"  one  of  the
blockatling  fleet  in  front  of  Boston.  Soon  after-
ward his  vessel  was  captured,  and  he  was  sent  to
England.  On  the  voyage  he  formed  a  seheme  to
take  the  frigate,  but  was  betrayed  and  put  in  irons.
When  he  arrived  in  England  he  was  conveyed  to
Spithead  and  put  on  board  of  a  hulk,  but  he  escaped,
and,  in  the  garb  of  a  lx»ggar,  found  his  way  to  Lon-
don, where  he  engaged  in  gardening  and  at  one
time  was  employed  in  Kew  gardens,  where  the
king  held  a  conversation  with  him.  After  various
experiences  he  was  sent  on  a  mission  by  friends  of
the  colonies  to  Paris,  where  he  met  Benjamin
Franklin,  by  whom  he  was  sent  l»ack  with  replies.
On  reaching  England  he  sought  employment  in
Ijondon,  where  he  was  married  and  gained  a  bare
livelihood  until  182J3,  when,  through  the  influence
of  the  American  consul,  he  was  able  to  return  to
Boston.  He  visited  his  former  home,  but  the  mem-
ory of  his  name  had  long  since  faded  away.  His
application  for  a  pension  was  refused,  owing  to  his
aosence  from  the  country  when  the  pension  law
was  (Missed;  and  so,  after  dictating  an  account  of
his  ex|)eriences,  he  passed  away.  His  memoirs,
published  in  Providence,  in  1824,  were  sold  by  ped-
lers,  and  finally  were  entirelv  lost  until  a  tattered
copy  fell  into  the  hands  of  tierman  Melville  and
was  made  the  basis  of  his  "  Israel  Potter :  His  Fifty
Yeai-s  of  Exile  "  (New  York.  1855).

POTTER,  James,  Revolutionary  soldier,  b.  in
Tyrone.  Ireland,  in  1729 ;  d.  in  Centre  county.  Pa.,  in
N"oveml)er.  1789.  He  came  to  this  country  with  his
father.  John  Potter,  in  1741,  and  the  family  settled
in  Cumberland  county,  Pa.,  of  which  the  father


90


POTTER


POTTER


became  hijfh  sheriff  in  IT-W.  At  the  ape  of  twenty-
five  the  son  wu.-*  a  lieutenant  in  the  border  militia,
and  in  IT.W  he  was  aoaptain  under  (Jen.  Armstrong
in  the  victorious  Kittanninf;cam|wign,  after  which
Armstronjj  and  Potter  were  attached  friends.  In
1703-'4  he  served  in  the  militia  Jis  major  and  lieu-
tenant-colonel. He  sympathized  ardently  with  the
colonies  in  their  contest  with  the  mother  country,
in  1775  was  ma<le  a  colonel,  and  in  the  following
yearwiis  a  memln'rof  the  Provincial  convention,  of
which  Benjamin  Franklin  was  president.  In  April.
1777.  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general  of  Pennsyl-
vania troops,  and  he  remained  in  almost  continuous
service  until  the  close  of  the  wur.  In  1777,  with
the  troops  under  his  command  in  the  counties  of
Philadelphia,  Chester,  and  Delaware,  he  obtained
important  information  for  Washington,  and  |)re-
vented  supplies  reat;hing  the  enemy.  On  11  Dec.
while  the  army  under  Washington  was  on  its  way
to  Valley  Forge,  after  part  of  it  hafl  crossed  the
Schuylkill  at  Mats<m's  ford,  it  was  found  that  the
enemy  under  t'ornwallis  were  in  force  on  the  other
side.  "  They  were  met."  writes  Washington,  "  by
Oen.  Potter,  with  part  of  the  Pennsylvania  militia,
who  iK'haved  with  great  bravcrv,  and  gave  them
every  possible  opposition  until  he  was  obliged  to
retreat  from  their  superior  numbers."  In  the  spring
of  1778  Wjishington  wrote  from  Valley  Forge:  "  If
the  state  of  Gen.  Potter's  affairs  will  admit  of  his
returning  to  the  armv,  I  shall  be  exceedingly  glad
to  see  him,  as  his  activity  and  vigilance  have  been
much  wanted  during  the  winter."  He  was  chosen
a  member  of  the  supreme  executive  council  of
Pennsylvania  in  1780,  in  1781  became  its  vice-pres-
ident, and  in  1782  was  a  candidate  for  the  presi-
dency against  John  Dickinson,  receiving  thirty-two
votes  to  Dickinson's  forty-one.  He  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  council  of  censors  in  1784,  and  in  1785
one  of  the  commissioners  of  rivers  and  streams.
He  was  a  farmer,  and  he  left  at  his  death  large  and
valuable  landed  estates.

POTTER,  John  Fox,  lawyer,  b.  in  Augusta,
Me..  11  May,  1817.  He  was  educated  at  Phillips
Exeter  academy,  and.  after  studying  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1837.  Settling  in  East  Troy,
Wis.,  in  1838,  he  began  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion, and  during  1842-'6  he  was  judge  of  Walworth
county.  In  1856  he  was  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture of  Wisconsin,  and  he  was  then  elected  as  a
Republican  to  congress,  serving  from  7  Dec,  1857,
till  4  :March,  1863.  In  1860,  after  Owen  Lovejoy's
speech  in  congress,  concerning  the  assassination  of
his  brother,  Elijah  P.  Lovejoy  (g.  v.),  Mr.  Potter,
at  the  close  of  an  an<;ry  discussion  with  Roger  A.
Pryor,  was  challenged  to  a  duel  by  the  latter.  Mr.
Potter  chose  bowie-knives  as  the  weapons,  which
were  promptly  objected  to  by  the  other  side,  and
in  consequence  the  matter  was  dropped.  Consid-
erable newspaper  discussion  followed.  It  is  said
that  at  the  roll-call  of  congress  at  the  time  of  the
proposed  meeting,  when  Potter's  name  was  reached,
the  response  came :  •'  He  is  keeping  a  Pryor  en-
gagement." When  Pryor's  name  was  called,  the
answer  was :  "  He  has  gone  to  be  made  into  Pot-
ter's clay."  In  1861  Mr.  Potter  was  a  delegate  to
the  Peace  congress,  and  on  his  defeat  for  re-election
to  congress  he  was  tendered  the  governorship  of
Dakota.  This  offer  he  declined,  and  he  received
in  1863  the  apprjintment  of  consul-general  to  Brit-
ish North  America  at  Montreal,  which  he  held
until  1866. He  has  since  resided  in  Wisconsin.

POTTER,  John  S.,  actor,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1809;  d.  in  Morris,  111.,  21  Feb.,  1869.  He
was  early  apprenticed  as  a  printer  in  the  office  of
the  Philadelphia  "  Gazette,"  but  began  to  frequent


the  theatres,  and  soon  joined  the  Boothenian  dra-
matic club.  He  made  his  first  appearance  at  the
Washington  circus  in  1827,  and  then  went  to  Pitts-
burg, where  he  played  under  the  name  of  John
Sharp.  For  several  years  he  acted  in  various  parts
throughout  the  United  States,  but  ultimately  he
became  a  manager,  in  which  vocation  he  continued
until  his  death.  Mr.  Potter  built  the  first  theatre
in  Natchez,  Miss.,  and  also  those  in  Fort  (iibson
in  1*^6;  in  Grand  Gulf  in  1836;  in  Natchitoches
in  1837;  in  Jack.son,  Miss.,  in  1837;  in  Dubuque,
Iowa,  in  1839 :  in  Chicago,  111.,  in  1841 ;  in  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.,  in  1846 ;  and  in  Cleveland,  O.,  in  1848.
He  sailed  foi*  California  in  1855,  and  remained  on
the  Pacific  coast  until  1865,  building  theatres  in
California,  Oregon,  and  Vancouver's  island.

POTTER,  Joseph  Haydn,  soldier,  b.  in  Con-
cord. N,  II.,  12  Oct.,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S,  military  academy  in  1843,  standing  next
below  Gen.  Grant  in  class  rank.  In  1843-'5  he
was  engaged  in  garrison  duty,  and  he  then  par-
ticipated in  the  military  occupation  of  Texas  and
the  war  with  Mexico,  lie  was  engaged  in  the  de-
fence of  Fort  Brown,  and  was  wounded  in  the
battle  of  Monterey.  Subsequently  he  was  employed
on  recruiting  service,  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant
in  the  7th  infantry  on  30  Oct.,  1847,  and  served
on  garrison  duty  until  1856,  becoming  captain  on
9  Jan.  of  that  year.  He  accompanied  the  Utah
expedition  in  1858-'60,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  was  on  duty  in  Texas,  where  he  was  cap-
tured by  the  Confederates  at  St.  Augustine  Springs
on  27  July,  1861,  but  was  exchanged  on  2  Aug.,
1862.  The  command  of  the  12th  New  Hampshire
volunteers  was  given  him,  and  he  took  part  in  the
Maryland  and  Rappahannock  campaigns  with  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  receiving  his  promotion  of
major  in  the  regular  army  on  4  July,  1863.  He
took  part  in  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  and  at
Chancellorsville  was  wounded  and  captured.  His
services  in  these  two  battles  gained  for  him  the
brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  respect-
ively. He  was  exchanged  in  October,  1863,  and
was  assistant  provost-marshal-general  of  Ohio  un-
til September,  1864,  when  he  was  assigned  a  brigade
in  the  18th  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  James,  with
command  of  the  Bermuda  Hundred  front  during
the  attack  on  Fort  Harrison.  He  afterward  was
assigned  to  command  of  brigade  in  the  24th  corps
and  continued  at  the  front  as  chief  of  staff  of  the
24th  corps  from  January,  1865,  until  the  surrender  of
Gen.  Lee,  receiving  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general
in  the  U.  S.  army  on  13  March,  1865,  and  pronio-
tion  to  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  1  May,
1865.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  ser-
vice on  15  Jan.,  1866,  and  appointed  lieutenant-colo-
nel of  the  30th  infantry,  28  July  same  year.  After
holding  various  posts  in  the  west  he  received  his
promotion  as  colonel  on  11  Dec,  1873,  and  then
continued  with  his  regiment,  with  the  exception  of
four  years,  from  1  July,  1877,  to  1  July,  1881,  when
he  was  governor  of  the  soldiers'  home,  Washington,
D.  C,  until  1  April,  1886,  when  he  was  made  briga-
dier-general in  the  regular  armv.  He  then  had
command  of  the  Department  of  Missouri  until  his
retirement  on  12  Oct..  1886.

POTTER,  Nathaniel,  physician,  b.  in  Carolina
county,  Md.,  in  1770;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  2  Jan.,
1843.  He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1796,
and  settled  in  Baltimore,  where  he  practised  until
his  death.  In  1807  he  was  associated  with  Dr.
John  B.  Davidge  and  others  in  founding  the  College
of  medicine  of  Maryland,  which  in,  1812  liecame
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Mary-


POTTER


POTTS


01


land,  and  he  was  it«  professor  of  the  theory  and

f tract  iff  <»f  iiuHlieine  until  his  donth,  and  its  (Iran
n  1814.  Dr.  Potti-r  whs  physii-iiin  to  tho  Halti-
niorp  jjononil  ilisiH-nsjiry  in  1S(K{,  and  stK-ri'tary  «»f
the  medical  anti  chinirjrical  fafulty  in  1H02-'1).  lie
was  a  eollalxjrator  of  the  "  Aineriran  Journal  of
the  Medical  Sciences,"  in  1811  edited  the  "  IJal-
timore  Mwlical  and  Philosonhical  Lyceum."  a
quarterly  jiericxlical.  and  in  18:{9-'48  was  co-e<litor
of  the  "Maryland  Me<lic4il  and  Surpical  Journal."
Besides  numerous  medical  {)a|)«'rs.  he  issued  **  Me<li-
cal  I'rorH'rties  and  Deleterious  (Qualities  of  Ar-
senic" (Maltimons  ISOT));  "A  Memoir  on  (V»nta-
fion,  more  es|H'cially  as  it  res|)ects  the  Yellow
'ever"  (181H);  and  "On  the  Lwusta  Septentrio-
nalis"  (1889);  and  he  edite«l,  with  notej*.  critical
and  explanatory,  John  Armstrong's  "Prat^tical
Illustrations  of' the  Typhus  Fever"  (Baltinjon*,
1821).  also,  with  Samuel  t'alhoun,  two  e<liti(ms  of
Georp'  (trejjorv's  "  Klement,s  of  Theory  and  Prac-
tice of  M.'dicine"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  lb2«5-'»).

POTTER,  Piatt,  jurist,  b.  in  Galway,  N.  Y.,  6
April,  18(X),  Ho  was  graduated  at  Schenecta4ly
aca<lemy  in  1820,  and,  after  stiidying  law  under
Alonzo  C  Paige,  wa.s  admittwl  in  1824  to  the  l)ar.
Settling  in  Minorville,  he  followed  his  profession
there  until  1883,  when  he  removed  to  Schenectady
and  entered  into  partnership  with  his  former  pre-
ceptor. Meanwhde  he  had  l)een  elected  to  the
a.sseinhly  in  IWiO,  and  attnictcil  attention  by  his
speech  in  favor  of  the  bill  to  alMtlish  imprisonment
for  debt.  From  1«39  till  1847  he  was  district  at-
torney for  Schenectady  county,  and  at  the  same
time  ma.ster  and  examiner  in  chancery,  having  lieen
appointed  to  those  offices  in  1828,  and  continuing
to  exercise  their  functions  till  the  alxilishment  of
the  court  in  chancery  about  1847.  He  was  elected
justice  of  the  supreme  court  in  1857,  and  re-elected
m  1800  without  opposition,  also  serving  as  judge
of  the  court  of  appeals.  His  judicial  services  dur-
ing the  civil  war  were  of  the  utmost  value  to  the
government,  and  his  written  opinions  and  judg-
ments l)ear  testimony  to  his  abundant  legal  knowl-
edge. In  1870  he  caused  the  arrest  of  Henry  Ray,
a  memljer  of  the  assembly,  for  refusing  to  answer
a  subpoena,  and  for  this  action  Judge  Potter  was
brought  l)efore  that  body  on  an  accusation  of  "  high
bn»ach  of  privilege";  but  he  conipletelj  vindicate<l
his  course,  and  was  discharge<l.  His  argument  was
issued  by  the  l)ar  in  pamphlet-form  (Albany,  1870),
and  he  received  numerous  voluntary  letters  of  con-
eratulation  from  eminent  jurists  throughout  the
United  States.  During  the  same  year  he  was
chosen  president  of  the  State  judicial  convention
in  Rochester.  At  present  (1888)  he  is  president
of  the  Mohawk  national  l)ank  of  Schenecta<ly.  In
1805  he  was  electe<l  a  trustee  of  Tnion  college.
which  office  he  filled  for  twenty  years,  and  in  1807
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  that
institution.  Judge  Potter  has  published  a  general
treatise  on  the  construction  of  statutes,  entitled
"  Potter's  Dwarris " (Albany,  1871):  "Equity  Juris-

Jnidence."  compiled  and  enlarged  from  the  work  of
ohn  Willard  (1875) ;  and  "  Potter  on  Cor|>orations"
(2  vols.,  1879).  In  1880  he  pn-sented  to  the  New
York  historical  society  six  volumes  of  the  "State
Trials  of  England."  published  in  1742,  that  origi-
nally l)elonge«l  Ut  Sir  William  Johnson,  bart.  The
books,  when  they  were  issued,  were  valued  at  £0(X).
POTTER,  Sainnol  John,  .senator,  b.  in  Kings-
ton. R.  I.,  2!>  June,  1789;  d.  in  Washington,  I).  ('.,
20  Sept..  1H(M.  He  was  elected  deputy  governor  of
RhcKle  Islaml  in  May,  1790.  serving  until  February,
1799,  when  the  title  of  the  office  was  changed  to
lieutenant-governor,  and  as  such  he  remained  until


I  May,  1709. He  was  again  elected  in  May,  1800,  and

!  w'rviHl  for  thriH! years. (Jov.  Potter  wax  also  a
'  nn'sidential  elector  in  171>2  and  179(J,  and  in  1806
lie  was  chosen  to  the  l'.  S.  senate,  serving  from  8
Oct..  1H()8,  until  his  death.
I POTTER,  ThoniaM  J.,  railnmd-manatrer,  b.  in
I  Burlington,  I«»wa,  10  Aug.,  1840;  d.  in  Washing-
]  ton,  I).('„  9  March.  1888, He  receive<l  a  lilteral
e<lucation,  and  in  1802  enten**!  the  service  of  the
Burlington  and  Missouri  railroad  as  a  lineman  of
I  the  engineer  corps. In 1800  he was  apjMiinteil
I  agent  of  the  same  coriK)ration  at  Burlington,  Iowa.
'  In  1878  the  Chicago,  Burlington,  and  Quincy  com-
I  [Miny  secured  his  services. He  wa«  first  agent,  then
I  as.sistant  superintendent,  afterward  general  mana-
I  ger,  antl  finally  ceneral  numager  and  vice-presi-
dent. He was  chosen vice-president  of  the  St.
j  liouisand  Keokuk,  of  the  C'hicairo,  Burlington,  and
I  Kansas  City,  of  the  Chicjigo  and  Iowa,  of  the  Han-
I  niltal  and  St.  Joseph,  and  of  the  Burlington,  and
Missouri  River  tojmIs,  respectively. Great  efforts
I  were  constantly  made  to  mduce  him  to  leave  the
I  Chicago,  Burlington,  and  Quincy  and  accept  tempt-
ing salaries  on  rival  roads,  but  it  was  not  until
May,  1887,  that  he  decided  to  accede  to  the  request
of  its  president,  Charles  Francis  Adams,  an(I  be-
come general  manager  and  vice-president  of  the
Union  Pacific  roa<l. In  this  capacity  he  labored
until  he  was  compelled  to  stop  from  illness  cause<I
by  overwork. On  hearing  of  his  early  death,  an
official  of  the  road  said: "Mr.  Potter  was  the
leader  of  practical  railroad-managers. His  judg-
ment was  n-markable  for  its  accuracy,  and  his  will
was  indomitable."

POTTS,  Georgre,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa,  15  March,  1802 ;  d.  in" New  York  city,  15  Sept.,
1804.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1819.  and  at  Princeton  theological
seminary  in  1822.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Presliv-
terian  church  in  Xatchez,  Miss.,  in  1828-'8.5.  of  the
Duane  street  church.  New  York  city,  in  18;^0-'44,
and  of  the  University  place  church  from  its  com-
pletion in  the  latter  year  until  his  death.  He  en-
gaged in  a  once  celebrated  controversy  with  Bishop
Wainwright,  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  in
1844,  on  the  subject  of  enisco|)al  ordination,  which
was  published  under  tne  title  of  "No  Church
without  a  Bishop"  (New  York,  1845).  He  als<i
published  pamphlets  and  sermons. — His  daughter,
Mary  Uncles,  d.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  in  1827;  d.  in
New  York  city  in  1858,  translated  from  the  Swedish
of  Lewis  F.  Bungener  "The  Preacher  and  the
King"  (Boston,  1853)  and  "  Priest  and  Huguenot"
(1854). See  her  "  Memorial  "  (New  York,  ISW).

POTTS,  James  Henrj-,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wood-
house,  Norfolk  CO..  Ontario,  Canada,  12  June.  1848.
He  was  educated  in  the  public  sc1i(K)1s  of  Canada
and  Michigan,  and  graduated  at  Mayhew's  com-
mercial college  in  1800.  He  afterwanl  stutlied
theology,  and  was  a  pastor  in  the  Meth()«list  Epis-
copal church  in  1809-'77.  Ho  was  ass<x'iate  editor
of  the  "  Michigan  Christian  Advocate  "  in  1877-'84,
and  has  been  editor-in-chief  since  the  latter  year.
Mr.  Potts  received  the  degree  of  .M.  A.  from  North-
western university  in  1882,  and  that  of  D.  D.
from  Albion  college  in  18^.  He  is  the  author  of
"Methodism  in  the  F'ield.  or  Pastor  and  People"
(New  York,  1809);  "Golden  Dawn,  or  Light  on
the  Great  Future"  (Phila<lelphia  1880);^  "Spirit-
ual Life,  its  Nature  and  Excellence"  (New  York.
1884);  "Our  Thorns  and  Crowns"  (Philadelphia
1884);  "Perrine's  Principles  of  Church  Goveni-
ment,"  with  additions  (New  York,  1887);  and
"  Faith  made  Vmsv,  or  what  to  Believe  and  Why  "
(Cincinnati,  1888)."


92


POTTS


POULSON


POTTS,  John,  Caniulian  clergyman,  b.  in  Ma-
guire's  Hridge,  County  Fennanagh,  Ireland,  in
18JW.  He  emigrated  to  Canada  at  an  early  age.
and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in  Kingston
and  Hamilton,  but  after  a  course  in  Victoria  col-
lege he  was  ordained  as  a  Methodist  minister  in
1801.  After  l)eing  stationed  at  London  and  York-
ville  he  was  chosen,  in  1866,  as  the  first  pastor  of
a  church  that  had  been  erected  in  Hamilton  to
comuK'niorate  the  centenary  of  American  Method-
ism. He  afterward  was  i)astor  of  churches  at
Montreal  and  Toronto.  He  is  an  eloquent  preacher,
and  one  of  the  best-known  clergymen  of  his  de-
nomination in  Canada.  He  is  a  member  of  the
board  and  senate  of  Victoria  university  and  the
Montreal  theological  college.  In  1878  the'  Wesleyan
university  of  Oliio  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.

POTTS,  Jonathan,  surgeon,  b.  in  Ponodiekon,
Berks  co..  Pa.,  1  April,  1745 ;  d.  in  Reading,  Pa.,
in  October,  1781.  He  was  a  son  of  John  Potts,
the  founder  of  Pottstown,  Pa.  After  receiving  a
classical  education,  he  went  with  Dr.  Benjamin
Rush  to  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  for  medical  study,
and  after  his  return  he  was  graduated,  in  1768,  a
bachelor  of  j)hysic  at  the  College  of  Philadelphia,
at  the  first  granting  of  medical  degrees  in  this
country,  and  in  1771  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.
His  Latin  thesis  on  the  latter  occasion,  "  De  Febri-
bus  Intermitteiitibuspotentissimum  Tertianis"  was
published  (Philadelphia,  1771).  From  1768  till  his
death  he  was  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society.  He  began  the  practice  of  medi-
cine at  Heading.  Dr.  Potts  early  identified  him-
self with  the  struggle  for  independence,  and  was
secretary  of  the  Herks  county  committee  of  safety,
and  a  member  of  the  Provincial  convention  at
Philadelphia,  2'-i  Jan.,  1775.  In  1776  he  was  ap-
pointed surgeon  for  Canada  and  Lake  George,
and  returned  with  Gen.  Gates  to  Pennsylvania.
In  general  orders,  dated  12  Dec,  1776,  Gen.  Put-
nam directed  that  all  offlcers  that  were  in  charge
of  any  sick  soldiers  should  "make  return  to  Dr.
Jonathan  Potts,  at  Mr.  John  Biddle's,  in  Market
street."  Soon  after  this  order  was  issued  Dr.
Potts  was  in  service  at  the  battle  of  Princeton.
Dr.  Potts  was  appointed  in  April,  1777,  medical
director-general  of  the  northern  department,  and
as  such  joined  the  army  at  Albany,  N.  Y.  In
November,  1777,  he  returned  to  Reading,  having
been  ftirloughed,  and  while  there  was  appointed
by  congress  director-general  of  the  hospitals  of
the  middle  department.  He  was  subsequently
surgeon  of  the  first  city  troop  of  Philadelphia. —
His  brother,  Thomas,  was  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  American  philosophical  society,
and  in  1776  was  commissioned  colonel  of  one  of
the  Pennsylvania  battalions.  —  Another  brother,
Jon.N,  studied  law  at  the  Temple,  London,  became
a  judge  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  and,  sympa-
thizing with  the  mother  country,  went  to  Halifax,
Nova  Scotia,  but  returned  after  the  war. — Another
brother,  Isaac,  is  said  to  have  been  the  person  that
discovered  Washington  at  prayer  in  the  woods  at
Valley  Forge ;  and  the  country-seat  of  David,  an-
other brother,  was  Wa.shingto"n's  lieadquarters  at
the  latter  place.  See  "  Potts  Memorial,"  by  Mrs.
Thomas  Potts  James.

POTTS,  Richard,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Upper  Marlborough,  Prince  George
CO.,  Md.,  in  July,  1753;  d.  in  Frederick  county,
Md.,  26  Nov.,  1808.  He  studied  law  at  Annapolis,
and  afterward  removed  to  Frederick  county,  where
he  practised  till  his  death.  He  was  clerk  of  the
county  committee  of  observation  in  1776,  clerk
of  the  county  court  in  1777,  and  member  of  the


house  of  delegates  in  1779-'80  and  1787-'8.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  in  1781,
became  state  attorney  for  Frederick,  Alontgomery,
and  Washington  counties,  Md.,  in  1784,  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Maryland  convention  of  1788  that  rati-
fied the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  and  in
1789  was  commissioned  by  Gen.  Washington  U.  S.
attorney  for  Maryland.  He  became  chief  justice
of  the  county  courts  o*  the  5th  judicial  aistrict
in  1791,  and  "was  U.  S.  senator  in  1793-6.  From
1801  till  1804  he  was  associate  justice  of  the  Mary-
land court  of  appeals.  Princeton  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1805.

POTTS,  Stacy  Gardner,  jurist,  bom  in  Harris-
burg.  Pa.,  9  Nov.,  1799:  d.  in  Trenton,  N.J.,  9
April,  1865.  He  became  editor  of  the  "Empo-
rium," a  weekly  newspaper,  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  in
1821,  was  atlmitted  to  the  bar  in  1827,  and  was  in
the  legislature  in  1828-'9.  He  became  clerk  of  the
New  Jersey  chancery  court  in  1821,  held  oflRce  ten
vears,  and  then  retired  on  account  of  delicate
health.  He  was  a  commissioner  to  reviss  the  laws
of  New  Jersey  in  1845,  became  judge  of  the  court
of  appeals  in  1852,  and  retired  in  1859.  Princeton
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1844.  He  was
active  in  the  affairs  of  the  Presbyterian  church,
and  in  1851,  was  chairman  of  the  finance  com-
mittee of  that  body.  After  leaving  the  bench  he
devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuits.  His  publica-
tions include  "  Village  Tales  "  (Philadelphia,  1827)
and  "  Precedents  and  Notes  of  Practice  m  the  New
Jersey  Chancery  Court "  (1841).  and  he  left  in  manu-
script a  work  entitled  "  The  Christ  of  Revelation."
— His  brother,  William  Stephens,  clergyman,  b.
in  Northumberland  county.  Pa.,  13  Oct.,  1802 ;  d.  in
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  27  March,  i852,  learned  the  printer's
I  rade,  subsequently  studied  under  Rev.  Ezra  S.  Ely
in  Philadelphia,  and  was  a  student  at  Princeton
theological  seminary  in  1825-'7.  He  was  pastor  of
the  1st  Presbyterian  church  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in
1828-'35,  president  of  Marion  college  for  the  sub-
sequent four  years,  founded  the  2d  Presbyterian
church  of  St.  Louis  in  1838,  and  was  its  pastor  till
his  death.  Marion  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1845. He  published  several  sermons.

POUCHOT,  M.  (poo-sho),  soldier,  b.  in  Greno-
ble, France,  in  1712 ;  d.  in  Corsica,  8  May,  1769.
He  entered  the  engineer  corps  of  the  French  army
in  1733,  and  subsequently  served  in  Corsica.  Flan-
ders, and  Germany,  He  accompanied  the  Marquis
de  Montcalm  to  Canada,  and  assisted  in  the  defence
of  Forts  Niagara  and  Levis.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Memoirs  of  the  War  of  1755-'60  in  North
America"  (Paris.  3  vols.,  1781),  which  has  been
translated  into  English,  and  edited  by  Franklin
B.  Hough  (2  vols.,  New  York.  1866).  In  this  work
he  speaks  of  observing  oil-springs  in  northwestern
Pennsylvania,  probably  the  first  mention  of  that
petroleum  field  on  record.

POULSON,  Zachariah,  publisher,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  5  Sept.,  1761 ;  d.  there,  31  July,  1844.
His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was  brought  from
Denmark  to  Philadelphia  in  infancy,  and  became
a  printer.  The  son  was  a  pupil  of  Christopher
Sower,  in  whose  printing  establishment  at  German-
town,  Pa.,  was  printed,  in  German,  the  first  edition
of  the  Bil)le  published  in  the  United  States.  For
many  years  he  was  printer  to  the  senate  of  Penn-
sylvania. On  1  Oct.,  1800.  he  began  the  publica-
tion of  the  "American  Daily  Advertiser,"  the
first  daily  in  the  United 'States,  which  he  had
purchased  from  David  C.  Claypoole,  and  he  con-
tinued as  its  editor  and  proprietor  till  its  discon-
tinuance, 28  Dec,  1839.  He  issued  "  Poulson's
Town and Country  Almanac"  (1789-1801),  and


POUNDMAKER


POUTRINCOURT


98


wjLs  f  ho  publisher  of  HolxTt  Proud's  "History  of
I'umisylvRijin "  (1797-'8),  the  inystifal  works  of
Williuni  Gerar  de  Bram,  and  other  valuable  books.
He  was  a  founder  and  president  of  the  Phila«lel-
phia  s<H!iety  for  alleviating  the  miseries  of  public
pris<ins,  and  a  menilwr  and  iK-nefaetor  of  various
other  IxMiovolent  ass<K'iations.  Me  was  also  for
twenty-one  years  librarian  of  the  Library  company
of  Philadelphia,  six  years  its  treasurer,  and  thirty-
two  years  a  director,  and  his  fwirtrait,  by  Thomas
Sullv.  hanfjs  in  its  hall  in  that  citv.

POrNDMAKER,  Indian  chief,  b.  near  Battle-
ford,  Northwest  territory,  British  America,  in
1820:  d.  at  Gleiehen,  near  Calvary,  4  July,  1886.
As  chief  of  the  Cree  nation,  he  first  came  into
public  notice  in  connection  with  the  tour  of  the
Marquis  of  Lome,  governor  -  fjeneral  of  Canada,
and  his  party  through  the  northwest  in  1881,  when
he  acte(l  as  their  guide  from  Battleford  to  Calgary.
Believing  that  the  Canadian  government  was  false
to  its  promise  of  relief  to  the  Indians,  he  was  in-
duced by  Louis  Riel  {q.  v.)  to  take  the  field  with
the  warriors  of  his  nation.  At  the  battle  of  Cut
Knife  Creek,  thirty -five  miles  from  Battleford,
with  850  Indian  warriors,  he  displayed  great  bra-
very in  holding  the  regular  troops  under  Lieut.-Col.
Otter  at  bay  for  more  than  four  hours.  Though
the  fight  was  indecisive  and  the  losses  about  equal,
Lieut.-Col.  Otter  thought  it  expedient  to  retire
to  Battleford.  On  another  occasion  Poundmaker
surprised  and  captured  a  supply-train  that  was
carrving  provisions  to  the  troops.  After  the  battle
of  tiatache  and  the  capture  of  Riel,  Poundmaker,
aft«r  giving  up  the  prisoners  that  he  held,  surren-
dered himself  to  Gen.  Middlcton.  He  was  subse-
quently sent  to  Regina,  tried  for  the  part  he  took
in  the  rebellion,  and  sentenced  on  18  Aug.,  1885,
to  three  years'  imprisonment  in  the  Stony  Moun-
tain penitentiary.  In  reply  to  a  question  by  the
judge,  Poundmaker  said :  "  I  am  a  man,  do  as  you
like.  I  am  in  your  power.  I  gave  myself  up ;  you
could  not  catch  me."  After  sentence  was  pro-
nounced, he  asked  to  be  hanged  at  once,  as  he  pre-
ferred death  to  imprisonment.  He  was  released
after  a  year's  confinement,  and  died  while  on  a
visit  to  C'rowfoot,  chief  of  the  Blackfoot  Indians,
his  relative  by  marriage.  He  was  of  genial  dispo-
sition, possessed  considerable  intellectual  force
and  keenness  of  perception,  and  wius  devotedly  at-
tached to  his  race  and  people.

POURTALfiS,  Louis  FraiKjois  de  (poor-tah-
lays),  naturalist,  b.  in  Xeuchatel,  Switzerland.  4
March,  1824 ;  d.  in  Beverly  Farms,  Mass.,  19  July,
1880.  He  was  educated  as  an  engineer,  but  an  early
predilection  for  natural  science  led  to  his  becoming
a  favorite  pupil  of  Louis  Agassiz,  whom  he  accompa-
nied in  1840  on  his  glacial  explorations  among  the
Alps.  In  1847  he  came  with  Agassiz  to  the  United
States  and  made  his  home  in  East  Boston,  and  then
in  Cambridge,  Mass.  Pourtales  entered  the  U.  S.
coast  survey  in  1848,  and  continued  attached  to  that
service  until  1873.  In  1851  he  served  in  the  tri-
angulation  of  the  Florida  reef,  and  at  that  time
collected  numerous  ge[)hyreans  and  holothurians,
which  led  to  his  special  study  of  the  bed  of  the
ocean.  He  was  the  pioneer  of  deep-sea  dredging
in  this  country,  and  he  lived  to  see  that  he  hjul
pave<l  the  way  for  similar  researches  both  here  and
abroad.  On  the  Hassler  expedition  from  Massa-
chusetts bay  through  the  Straits  of  Magellan  to
California  he  hatl  entire  charge  of  the  dredging
operations.  In  1854  he  was  placed  in  speci»u
charge  of  the  field  and  office  work  of  the  tidal
division  of  the  coast  survey,  where  he  remained
until his  resignation. His  most  valuable  work


was  in  connection  with  marine  zoology,  and  the
large  collections  that  he  made  were  deposited  in
the  Museum  of  comparative  zoology  in  Cambridge.
Their  examination  has  resulted  in  s|>ecial  rejK)rts
upon  echinoderms,  corals,  crinoids,  foraminifera,
sf>ongea,  annelids,  hydroids,  bryozoa,  mollusks,
and  Crustacea,  by  the  most  eminent  investigators
of  America  and  Europe,  which  were  published
principally  in  the  bulletins  of  the  museum.  Pour-
tales  Ix'came  a.ssistant  in  zo^^Iogy  at  the  museum  in
1878,  and  on  the  death  of  Louis  Agassiz  became
its  keeper.  His  name  has  been  given  to  the  genus
Pourtalesia,  a  variety  of  sea-urchins.  He  was  a
member  of  various  scientific  societies,  and  had
V)een  elected  to  memWrship  in  the  National  acad-
emy of  scienc&s.  His  writings  are  largely  con-
tained in  the  reports  of  the  coa.st  survey,  but,  in
addition  to  valuable  scientific  papers  in  the  "  Pro-
ceetlings  of  the  American  Ass<x-iation  for  the  Ad-
vancement of  Science"  and  the  "American  Jour-
nal of  Science,"  he  published,  under  the  direction
of  the  Museum  of  comparative  zo^Uogy, "  Contribu-
tions to  the  Fauna  of  the  Gulf  Stream  at  Great
Depths "  (part  i.,  1867 ;  part  ii..  1868) ;  "  List  of
the  Crinoids  obtained  on  the  Coasts  of  Florida
and  Cuba  in  1867-9"  (1869);  "  List  of  Holothu-
ridte  from  the  Deep-Sea  Dredgings  of  the  U.  S.
Coast  Survey  "  (1869) ;  "  Deep-Sea  Corals  "  (1871) ;
"The  Zoological  Results  of  the  Hassler  Expe-
dition," with  Alexander  Agassiz  (1874) ;  "  Reports
on  the  Dredging  Operations  of  the  U.  S.  Coast-
Survey  Steamer  *  Blake '" ;  "  Corals  and  Crinoids "
(1878) ;  and  "  Report  on  the  Corals  and  Antipa-
tharia"(1880).

POUSSIN,  Gnillanrae  Tell  Lavall^e  (poos-
sang),  French  soldier,  b.  in  France  alxjut  1795;  d.
after  1850.  He  accomjmnied  Gen.  Simon  Bernard
to  the  United  States  after  the  fall  of  Napoleon,  and
on  6  March,  1817,  became  assistant  tojwgraphical
engineer  in  the  U.  S.  army,  with  rank  of  ca{)tain,
and  aide  to  Gen.  Bernard.  He  was  promoted  topo-
graphical engineer,  with  rank  of  major,  15  Jan.,
1829,  but  resigned,  31  July.  1832.  He  had  tecome
a  naturalized  citizen  of  this  country,  but  returned
to  France,  where  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  estab-
lishment of  the  republic  of  1848,  and  in  1848-'9  he
was  its  minister  to  the  United  States.  Among  other
works  he  published  "Travaux  d'ameliorations  in-
terieures  projetes  ou  executes  par  le  gouvernement
general  des  fitats-Unis  d'Amerique  de  1824  k  1831 "
(Paris,  1834) ;  "  Considerations sur  le  principe  demo-
cratique  qui  regit  I'Union  Americaine,  et  de  la  pos-
sibilite  de  son  application  k  d'autres  fitats  "(1841) ;
and  "  De  la  puissance  Americaine :  origine,  institu-
tions, esprit,  politique,  ressources  des  fitats-Unis  "
(2  vols.,  1843 ;  English  translation  by  E.  L.  Du
Barrv,  M.  D.,  Philadelphia,  1851).

POUTRINCOURT,  Jean  de  Bienconrt  (poo-
trang-koor),  Sieur  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  France
in  1557;  d.  in  Mery-sur-Seine  in  1615.  He  followed
De  Monts  to  Canada  in  1()03.  and  was  subsequently
made  lieutenant  by  the  latter.  He  obtained  a  grant
of  Port  Roval  in  1604,  but  gave  his  principal  atten-
tion to  tratling  with  the  Indians,  and  neglected  the
colony  that  he  had  established  there.  He  returned
to  France  in  the  following  year,  and,  in  pursuance
of  an  agreement  with  De  Monts,  e(piit>ped  a  vessel
with  supplies  for  the  settlers,  and  sailed  from  La
Rochelle  on  13  May,  KMM).  After  fortifying  Port
Royal,  he  accompanied  Champlain  on  an  exploring
expedition  as  far  as  Port  Fortune  (Chatham),  which
was  not  productive  of  many  useful  results.  He
returned  to  F'rance.  his  grant  of  Port  Royal  was
confirmed  by  the  king  in  1(K)7,  and  he  was  de-
sired at  the  same  time  to  work  for  the  conver-


94


POVEDA


POWELL


sion  of  the  Indians,  and  to  receive  the  Jesuits  as
missionaries.  He  felt  a  stroti:;  dislike  for  that
ortler,  and.  on  the  ground  that  Port  Koyal  was  in
no  condition  to  n'ceive  the  missionaries.  bej;f;e<l
them  to  iKJstjMjne  their  departure,  and  then  sailed
for  Aeauia  in  HM)8,  He  afterward  wrote  letters
to  the  |)ofH>  and  the  F'reneheourtdeseribitifj  whole-
sale conversions  that  hrnl  been  mmle  by  himself,
and  deprecating  the  necessity  of  sending  out  Jesu-
its. In  1(510  Madame  de  Guercheviile  formed  a
jiartnei-ship  with  him,  according  to  the  terms  of
which  Jesuit  missionaries  that  she  should  send  out
were  to  be  sup|iorted  from  the  proceeds  ()f  the
fishery  and  fur-trade.  They  were  badly  received
on  their  arrival,  and  the  suspicions  that  Poutrin-
court  entertainetl  of  their  designs  consideral)ly
haniiK>re<i  them.  He  returned  to  France  in  1612,
had  a  serious  (juarrel  with  Madame  de  (Juercheville
on  this  subject,  and  ap|>enrs  to  have  Ix'en  im-
prisoned for  some  time  alK)ut  this  period.  Pou-
trincourt  sailed  for  Acatlia  after  the  Knglish  aban-
doned it  in  1(J14,  but  made  no  effort  to  rebuild  Port
Royal,  returned  home,  and  entered  the  French
service. —  His  s<m,  Hik-Ncourt,  afterward  called
Poutrincourt,  remained  in  Acadia,  and  died  there
in  lf;2:{or  lt>24.

P<)VEI).\,  Francisco  (po-vay'-dah),  Cuban  poet,
b.  in  Huviina  in  October.  179(1;  d.  in  Sagua  in  1881.
When  very  young  he  went  to  Sagua  la  (Jrande,  a
small  inland  town,  where  he  sj»ent  his  life,  becoming
successively  a  shepherd,  a  ploughman,  an  actor,  and
a  teacher.  He  has  published  several  collections
of  noems.  incluiling  "Guirnalda  Habanera.""  Ra-
millete  I'octico,"  and  "  El  tiple  campesino,"  which
are  known  by  heart  throughout  the  island  by
the  country  people;  "  Las  Rosas  de  Amor"  (1831);
"  Leyendas  ("ubanjis"  (1846);  a  complete  collec-
tion of  his  songs  and  poems  (1863 ;  2d  ed.,  1879) ;
and  "  El  peon  de  Bayamo."  a  drama,  which  was
performed  in  1879.  Poveda  was  known  under  the
name  of  the  "  Trovador  C'ubano,"  or  the  Cuban
troubailour.  on  account  of  his  popularity  and  the
nature  of  his  poems.

FOWEL,  Samuel,  mavor  of  Philadelphia, b.  in
Philadelphia  in  1739;  d".  there,  29  Sept.,  1793.
He  was  graduated  in  1759  at  the  College  of  Phila-
delphia (now  University  of  Pennsylvania),  served
several  years  in  the  city  council,  was  a  justice  of
the  common  pleas  and  quarter  scssiotis  courts,  and
in  1775  was  chosen  mayor.  iK'ingthe  last  under  the
charter  of  1701,  He  continued  in  office  until  the
military  authorities  took  municipal  matters  into
their  own  hands,  and  after  the  Revolution,  under
the  new  charter,  he  was,  in  1789,  again  chosen
mayor.  In  1780  he  subscribed  £5,(X)0  for  the  pro-
visioning of  the  army.  He  was  the  speaker  of  the
Pennsylvania  senate  in  1792,  one  of  the  early  mera-
liers  of  the  American  philosophical  society,  from
1773  till  his  death  a  trustee  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  one  of  the  founders,  and,  in  1785,  first
president  of  the  Philadelphia  society  for  promoting
agriculture,  and  a  manager  of  the  Pennsylvania  hos-
pital.—His  wife,  EHzabeth  Willing:,  "was  a  sister
of  Thomas  Willing,  the  j)artner  of  Robert  Morris.
—Her  nephew,  John  Hare,  agriculturist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  22  April,  1786;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,
14  June,  1850,  was  originally  named  John  Powel
Hare,  and  he  was  own  brother  to  Dr.  Robert  Hare
{q.  v.),  but  he  was  adopted  by  his  aunt,  Mrs.  Powel,
and  at  his  majority  assumed  her  name  by  act  of
legislature.  He  was  educated  at  the  College  of
Philadelphia,  became  a  successful  merchant,  and,

foing  abroad  for  pleasure,  became  secretary  of  the
N  S.  legation  in  London,  under  William  Pinck-
ney. While  there,  according  to  Charles  Greville  in


his  memoirs,  he  was  "the  handsomest  man  ever
seen."  He  returned  in  I)eceinl)er,  1811,  served  as
brigade-majctr  of  volunteers  under  (len.  Thomas
Cadwalader,  an<l  from  December,  1814,  till  June,
1815,  wiis  insjH'ctor-general  with  the  rank  of  colonel
in  the  regular  army.  He  subsequently,  at  the  de-
sire of  his  family,  refused  a  brigadier-general's
commission  in  the  Colombian  service,  and  passed
the  remainder  of  his  life  in  efforts  to  develop  agri-
culture and  improve  the  breed  of  domestic  ani-
mals in  the  United  States.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Pennsylvania  agricultural  society
in  1823,  and  its  secretary  till  1824,  corresftondeii
actively  with  English  agriculturists,  and  imported
many  valuable  animals.  Col.  Powel  was  a  good
speaker  and  debater,  and  a  patron  of  the  fine  arts.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania  senate  in
1827-'30.  and  a  delegate  to  the  Free-trade  conven-
tion of  1832.  He  published  many  paf)ers  in  the
"  Memoirs  of  the  Pennsylvania  Agricultural  So-
ciety "  ;  "Hints  for  American  Husbandmen"
(Philadelphia,  1827);  pamphlets  entitled  "Reply
to  Pickering's  Attack  ujkju  a  Pennsylvania  Farm-
er" (1825),  and  "  Remarks  on  the  Prof)er  Termina-
tion of  the  Columbia  Railroad"  (1830);  and  many
essjiys  in  agricultural  periodicals.

POWELL,  Aaron  Macy,  reformer,  b.  in  Clinton,
Dutchess  CO.,  N.  Y.,  26  March,  1832.  He  was  edu-
cated in  public  schools  and  in  the  state  normal
school,  but  left  before  graduation  to  take  part  in
the  anti-slavery  movement.  He  was  lecturing-
agent  for  the  American  anti-slavery  society  from
1852  till  1865,  editor  of  the  "  National  Anti-Slavery
Standard  "  from  that  time  till  1870,  and  then  of
the  "  National  Standard  "  till  1872,  and  since  that
year  has  been  secretary  of  the  National  temper-
ance society  and  editor  of  the  "  National  Temper-
ance Advocate."  In  1886  he  also  took  charge  of
the  "  Philanthropist."  Mr.  Powell  was  a  delegate
to  the  International  prison  congress  in  London  in
1872,  and  to  those  for  the  abolition  of  state  regula-
tion of  vice,  in  Geneva  in  1877,  the  Hague  in
1883,  and  London  in  1886.  He  is  the  author  of
"  State  Regulation  of  Vice  "  (New  York,  1878).

POWELL,  Henry  Watson,  British  soldier,  b.
in  England  in  1733;  d.  in  Lyme,  England,  14
July,  1814.  He  became  a  captain  in  the  64th  foot
in  1756,  served  in  the  West  Indies  in  1759,  and  was
stationed  in  this  country  in  1768.  He  became
lieutenant-colonel  in  1771,  participated  in  Gen.
John  Burgoyne's  expedition  in  1777,  with  the
rank  of  brigadier-general,  and  in  July  of  the  latter
year,  after  the  evacuation  of  Fort  Ticonderogjk,
was  placed  in  command  of  that  post,  and  success-
fully defended  it  against  New  Hampshire  and  Con-
necticut militia In  1801  he  became  a  general.

POWELL,  John  Wesley,  geologist,  b.  in  Mount
Morris,  N.  Y..  24  March,  1834.  He  is  the  son  of  a
Methodist  clergyman,  andpassed  his  early  life  in
various  places  in  Ohio,  W^isconsin.  and  Illinois.
For  a  time  he  studied  in  Illinois  college,  and  he
subsequently  entered  Wheaton  college,  but  in  1854
he  followed  a  special  course  at  Oberlin,  also  teach-
ing at  intervals  in  public  schools.  His  first  incli-
nations were  toward  the  natural  sciences,  particu-
larly natural  history  and  geology,  and  he  spent
much  of  his  time  in  making  collections,  which  he
placed  in  various  institutions  of  learning  in  Illinois.
The  Illinois  state  natural  history  society  elected
him  its  secretary  and  extended  to  him  facilities  for
prosecuting  his  researches.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  20th
Illinois  volunteers,  and  he  rose  to  be  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  2d  Illinois  artillery.  He  lost  his
right  arm  at  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  but  soon  after-


POWELL


POWELL


00


](XYW^


wnnl  ho  roturno<l  to  his  rt>jrimpnt  and  continued
in  jw-tivo  MTvifo  until  tho  vUms  of  the  war.  In
IWW  he  Un-ann'  nrofesjior  of  ff«*oio}fy  and  ourator
of  the  nuis«>utn  in  Illinois  Wesleyan  university,
Blooinington,  but  he  resigned  to  accent  a  similar

|>ost  in  Illinois  nor-
mal university.  Dur-
ing tho  summer  of
1H«7  he  visite«l  the
mountains  of  ('olo-
rado  with  his  class
for  the  purpose  of
studying  geology,
and  s»>  iR'gan  a  [irac-
tico  that  luis  Uvn
continued  by  emi-
nent teachers  els«»-
where.  On  this  ex-
petlition  he  formed
the  idea  of  explor-
ing the  Gallon  of  the
Colorado,  and  a  year
later  he  organized  a
party  for  that  pur-
pose. The  journey
lasted  more  than
three  months  and
they  pa.ssod  through  numerous  perilous  exj»eri-
en«!es,  liviiiff  for  part  of  the  time  on  half  rations.
Maj.  Powell's  success  in  this  undertaking  resulted
in  the  establishment  by  congress  in  1870  of  a  topo-
graphical and  geological  survey  of  the  Colorado
river  of  the  West  and  its  tributaries,  which  was
placed  under  his  direction.  During  the  following
years  a  systematic  survey  was  conducted,  until  the
physical  features  of  the  Colorado  valley,  embracing
an  area  of  nearly  100,000  square  miles,  had  been
thoroughly  explored.  This  expe<lition,  at  first  con-
ducted under  the  auspices  of  the  Smithsonian  insti-
tution, was  transferred  to  the  department  of  the  in-
terior, and  given  the  title  of  the  Geographical  and
geological  survey  of  the  Rocky  mountain  region.
In  1874  four  separate  surveys  were  in  the  field,  and
in  1879,  after  much  agitation,  the  National  ac-jidemy
of  sciences  recommended  the  establishment  under
the  department  of  the  interior  of  an  indepen(lent
organization  to  be  known  as  the  U.  S.  geological
survey.  Action  to  this  eflfect  was  at  once  taken  by
congress,  and  Clarence  King  {q.  v.)  was  appointed
diivctor.  From  the  beginning  of  the  controversy
Maj.  Powell  was  the  leading  advocate  of  consoli-
dation. Meanwhile  he  had  devoted  more  attention
to  American  ethnology  in  the  prosecution  of  his
work  than  the  other  surveys  had  done.  lie  had
collected  material  on  this  subject  which  he  hiul
deposited  with  the  Smithsonian  institution,  and
had  already  issued  three  volumes  as  "Contribu-
tions to  North  American  Ethnology."  In  order
to  prevent  the  discontinuance  of  this  work,  a
bureau  of  ethnology,  which  has  become  the  recog-
nized centre  of  ethnographic  operations  in  the  Unit-
ed States,  was  established  under  the  direction  of
the  Smithsonian  institution.  Maj.  Powell  wa^  given
charge  of  the  work,  and  has  since  contiiuuHl  at  its
head,  issuing  annual  reports  and  bulletins.  In
1881  Mr.  King  resigne<i  the  office  of  director  of  the
U.  S.  geological  survey,  and  Mai.  Powell  was  a\y-
pointed  his  successor.  Since  that  time  he  has
ably  mlministered  the  work  of  this  great  enter-
prise, which  includes,  besides  special  investigations
ifi  geology,  the  general  study  of  economic  geology,
paleontology,  and  geography.  In  connection  with
the  survey  there  is  als«)  a  chemical  division,  where
the  necessary  analytical  work  is  conducted.  Maj.
Powell received  the  degree  of Ph.  D.  from  the


University  of  HeidellxTg  in  1886,  and  also  during
the  same  year  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard,  and  he
is  a  member  of  many  scientific  s<x'ietie8.  In  1^0
he  was  ele<'te<l  to  the  National  acmlemy  of  sciences,
and  he  was  president  of  tho  Anthro|M>logical  soci-
ety of  Washington  from  its  organization  in  187W
till  1888.  He  Itecame  a  fellow  of  tho  American
association  for  the  a<lvancemeiit  of  science  in  1875,
vice-president  in  187U,  when  he  dcliverwl  his  retir-
ing; address  on  "Mythologic  Philosophy,"  and  in
1887  was  eUn-ted  to  the  presidency.  His  publica-
tions include  many  scientific  papers  and  afldresses,
and  numerous  government  volumes  that  b<'ar  his
name,  including  the  reports  of  the  various  surveys,
the  bureau  of  ethnology,  and  the  U.  S.  geolr)gieal
survey.  The  special  volumes  that  b«>ar  his  own
name  are  "  Exploration  of  the  Colorado  Kiver  of
the  West  and  its  Tributaries  explored  in  18(50-'72  "
(Washington,  1875);  "Report,  on  the  (Jeology  of
the  Eastern  Portion  of  the  Uinta  Moiintains'and
a  Region  of  Country  Adjacent  Thereto"  (1876);
"Report  on  the  Ijands  of  the  Arid  Region  of  the
United  States"  (1879);  and  "Introduction  to  the
Study  of  Indian  Languages,  with  Words.  Phrases,
and  Aentences  to  Iw  collected  "  (1880).

POWELIi,  LazariiH  Whit<>hend,  senator,  b.
in  Henderson  county,  Ky.,  0  Oct.,  1812;  d.  there,  3
July,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  St.  .loscoh's  col-
lege, Bardstown,  Ky.,  in  18J13,  attended  law  lec-
tures at  Transylvania  university,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  18:35.  He  then  practis«'d  his  profes-
sion, and  at  the  same  time  engagetl  in  planting.
Mr.  Powell  served  one  term  in  the  legislature  in
ISSa,  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1844,  on  the  Polk
and  Dallas  ticket,  and  was  governor  of  Kentucky
in  1851-'5.  He  was  appt)inted  by  President  Polk
one  of  the  peace  comnnssionei-s  to  Utah  in  1857,
and  issued  the  proclamation  thatofferetl  pardon  to
all  Mormons  that  would  submit  to  the  U.  S.  gov-
ernment. He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a
Democrat  in  1858.  served  till  1865,  and  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1864.  Mr.  Powell  was  a  clear  and
forcible  debater  and  an  excellent  working  mem-
ber of  the  senate.

POWELL,  Leyin,  soldier,  b.  in  Loudoun
county.  Va.,  in  1738;  d.  in  Bedford,  I'a.,  6  Aug.,
1810.  He  served  throughout  the  Revolution  as  an
officer  of  the  Virginia  line,  rising  to  the  rank  of
lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  a  memljer  of  the  Vir-
ginia convention  of  1788  that  ratified  the  U.S.
constitution,  and  in  1798  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Federalist,  declining  re-ciecti<in  for  a  second
term.  It  is  reconled  in  the  newsi)aj)ers  of  that
date  that  "  Gen.  Washington,  on  the  day  of  elec-
tion, mounted  his  old  iron-gray  charger  and  rode
ten  miles  to  the  county  court-house  to  vote
for  his  brave  fellow-soldier,  Lieut.-Col.  Powell,
who  is  happily  elected." — His  son.  Levin  Myne,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Loudoun  county,  Va.,  in  1800;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  15  Jan.,  188.5,  was  ap-
pointed midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy  in  1817,  lie-
came  lieutenant  in  1826,  was  in  )*evenil  engage-
ments against  the  Seminole  Indians  in  1836-'7,
was  wounded  on  Jupiter  river  in  January  of  the
latter  year,  and  receivtnl  the  thanks  of  congress
for  his  services  during  that  campaign.  He  became
commander  in  1843,  was  on  ordnance  duty  till
1849,  and  was  executive  officer  of  the  Washington
navy-yard  in  1851-'4.  He  became  captain  in  1855,
was  retired  in  1861.  commissione<i  coinmotlore  in
18(»'2.  and  rear-admiral  in  1869.

POWELL,  TliomaH,  e<litor.  b.  in  Ixindon,  Eng-
land, 3  Sept.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  13  Jan.,
1887.  He  was  a  successful  playwright,  and  en-
gaged in  various  literary  pursuits  in  London  for


96


POWELL


POWER


many  years,  aiding  Leigh  Hunt,  William  Words-
worth, and  Richartl  li.  florno  in  their"  Moderniza-
tion of  Chaucer,"  and  Home  in  his  new  "  Spirit  of
the  Age"  (London,  1844).  He  came  to  this  coun-
try in  1H49,  and  from  that  date  till  his  death  was
connecte«l  with  Frank  Leslie's  publications.  Ho
was  the  first  editor  of  "  Frank  Ijeslie's  Weekly."
which  he  establisheti  in  1855,  and  of  "  Frank
Leslie's  Ijadies'  iMagazine  "  in  1857.  He  was  sul)-
stHpiently  connecteil  also  with  various  short-lived
journals  in  New  York  city,  and  wrote  several  plays
that  were  successfully  produced  in  New  York  and
London.  His  publications  in  this  country  include
''The  Ijiving  Authors  in  Great  Britain"  (New
York,  1849);  "Living  Authors  in  America"
(1850);  and  "Pictures  of  the  Living  Authors  of
Great  Britain  "  (1851).

POWELL,  Walker,  Canadian  legislator,  b.  in
Norfolk  county,  Ont..  20  May,  1828.  His  paternal
grandfather,  a  loyalist,  was  born  in  the  province
of  New  York  in  1703  and  died  in  Norfolk  in  1849,
and  his  father  (1801-'52)  was  a  warden  of  Norfolk
county,  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  militia,  and  repre-
sented Norfolk  county  in  the  legislative  assemblv
of  Canada  from  1840  till  1847.  Walker  Powell
was  educated  at  Victoria  college,  and  afterward
engaged  in  commercial  enterprises.  In  1856  he
was  warden  of  Norfolk  county,  and  its  representa-
tive in  the  Canaila  assemblyfrom  1857  till  1861.
After  a  long  previous  connection  with  the  Cana-
dian militia  Mr.  Powell  was  appointed  deputy
adjutant-general  of  Upper  Canada,  19  Aug..  1862  ;
deputy  adjutant-general  for  the  Dominion  at  head-
quarters, 1  Oct..  1868 ;  acting  adjutant-general,  22
Aug.,  1873 :  and  adjutant-general,  21  April,  1875.
which  appointment  he  now  (1888)  holds.

POWELL,  WiUiam  Byrd,  physician,  b.  in
Bourlwn  county.  Ky.,  8  Jan.,  1799 ;  d.  in  Hender-
son. Ky.,  3  July,  1867.  He  wa,s  graduated  at
Transylvania  university  in  1820,  and  at  the  medi-
cal department  there  in  1823,  devoted  himself  to
the  study  of  the  physiology  of  the  brain,  and  prose-
cuted his  investigations  among  the  Indian  tribes,
professing  to  read  the  temperament  from  an  ex-
amination of  the  cranium  alone.  He  became  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  in  the  Medical  college  of  Louisi-
ana in  1835.  and  in  1849  organized  the  Memphis
medical  institute,  taking  the  criair  of  cerebral  physi-
ology. He  was  professor  of  a  similar  branch  in
the  ('incinnati  eclectic  medical  institute  in  1856-'9,
and  lectured  there  two  or  three  years.  In  18(55  he
was  chosen  professor  emeritus  of  cerebral  physiol-
ogy in  the  New  York  eclectic  medical  college,  but
he  did  not  lecture  in  that  institution.  His  collec-
tion of  skulls  numbered  500,  and  was  probably  the
next  in  value  and  variety  to  that  of  Dr.  Samuel  6.
Morton  {q.  v.).  Dr.  Powell  professed  to  have  dis-
covered a  measurement  that  indicated  infallibly
the  vital  force,  and  the  signs  ot  vital  tenacity.  He
was  a  member  of  numerous  domestic  and  foreign
scientific  societies,  and  a  frequent  contributor  to

firofessional  literature.  He  published  "  Natural
listory  of  the  Hunuin  Temperament "  (Cincinnati,
Ohio,  1856) ;  and,  with  Dr.  llobert  S.  Newton,  "  The
Eclectic  Practice  of  Medicine  "  (1 857) ;  and  an  "  Ec-
lectic Treatise  on  the  Diseases  of  Children  "  (1857).
POWELL,  WilUani  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  14  Feb.,  1823;  d.  there,  6  Oct.,  1879.
He  began' the  study  of  art  at  the  age  of  nineteen
under  Henry  Inman,  in  New  York,  and  after-
ward studied  in  Paris  and  Florence.  He  exhibited
first  at  the  Academy  of  design,  N.  Y.,  in  1838,  and
was  elected  an  associate  in  1839.  His  name  was
erasetl  from  the  list  in  1845  "  for  non-compliance
with  the  terms  of  election,"  but  he  was  re-elected


in  1854.  His  historical  paintings  include  "  DeSoto
discovering  the  Mississippi,"  at  the  capitol,  Wash-
ington (1848-'53) ;  "  Perry  s  Victory  on  Lake  Erie,"
painted  for  the  state  of  Ohio  (1863 ;  and  again  on
an  enlarged  scale  for  the  capitol,  completed  in
1873);  "  Siege  of  Vera  Cruz";  "Battle  of  Buena
Vista  " ;  "  Landing  of  the  Pilgrims  " ;  "  Scott's
Entry  into  the  City  of  Mexico  " ;  "  Washington  at
Valley  Forge  " ;  and  "  Christopher  Columbus  be-
fore the  Court  of  Salamanca."  He  also  executed
numerous  portraits,  among  them  those  of  Albert
Gallatin  (1843)  and  Erastus  C.  Benedict  (1855) ;  Pe-
ter Cooper  (1855) ;  Washington  Irving,  Maj.  Rob-
ert Anderson,  and  Gen.  George  B.  McCTellan,  in  the
city-hall,  N.  Y. ;  Lamartine,  Eugene  Sue  (1853);
Abd  el  Kader,  Gen.  Robert  Schenck,  Peter  Stuyve-
sant,  Edward  Delafield.  and  Emma  Abbott.  Many
of  his  naintings  have  been  engraved.

POWELL,  William  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Pon-
typool,  South  Wales,  10  May,  1825.  He  came  to
this  country  in  1830,  received  a  common-school
education  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  and  from  1856  till
1861  was  general  manager  of  a  manufacturing
company  at  Ironton,  Ohio.  In  August,  1861,  he
became  captain  in  the  2d  West  Virginia  volunteer
cavalry,  and  he  was  promoted  to  major  and  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  1862,  and  to  colonel,  18  May,
1863.  He  was  wounded  in  leading  a  charge  at
Wytheville,  Va.,  on  18  July,  and  left  on  the  field,
whence  he  was  taken  to  Libby  prison  and  confined
for  six  months.  After  his  exchange  he  led  a  cav-
alry division  in  the  Army  of  the  Shenandoah,  be-
ing made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in  Octo-
ber, 1864.  After  the  war  he  settled  in  West  Vir-
ginia, declined  a  nomination  for  congress  in  1865,
and  was  a  Republican  presidential  elector  in  1868.
Gen.  Powell  is  now  (1888)  president  of  a  manufac-
turing company  in  Belleville,  111.

POWER,  Frederick  Beldin^,  chemist,  b.  in
Hudson,  N.  Y.,  4  March,  1853.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Philadelphia  college  of  pharmacy  in  1874,
and  then  studied  at  Strasburg,  receiving  the  de-
gree of  Ph.  D.  in  1880,  and  serving  in  1879-'80  as
assistant  to  the  professor  of  materia  medica.  In
1881-'3  he  was  professor  of  analytical  chemistry
at  Philadelphia  college  of  pharmacy,  and  he  then
was  called  to  the  chair  of  pharmacy  and  materia
medica  in  the  University  of  Wisconsin,  with  charge
of  the  newly  established  department  of  pharmacy.
Dr.  Power  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  a  member  of
the  chemical  society  of  Berlin,  and  other  scientific
associations.  Besides  writing  chemical  papers  in
professional  journals,  he  was  associated  in  the  au-
thorship of  "  Manual  of  Chemical  Analysis  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1883);  translated  and  edited  FlQckiger's
"  Cinchona  Barks  "  (1884),  and  an  American  edi-
tion of  Fluckiger's  and  Tschich's  "  Principles  of
Pharmacognosy  "  (New  York,  1887) ;  and  has  now
(1888)  in  preparation  an  American  edition  of
FlQckiger's  '•  Pharmaceutical  Chemistry."

POWER,  Lawrence  Geoffrey,  Canadian  sena-
tor, b.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  in  August,  184t
His  father,  Patrick  Power,  represented  Halifax
county  in  the  Dominion  parliament  in  1867-72
and  in  1874-'8.  The  son  was  educated  at  St.  MarVs
college,  Halifax,  Carlow  college,  and  the  Catholic
university,  Ireland,  and  at  Harvard  law-school,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1866.  He  was  for  ten
years  a  member  of  the  board  of  school  commission-
ers of  Halifax,  and  is  a  member  of  the  senate  of
the  University  of  Halifax,  and  an  examiner  in  law
in  that  institution.  He  is  a  Reformer  in  politics,
and  was  called  to  the  Dominion  senate,  2  Feb.,  1877.
Mr.  Power  was  actively  engaged  in  preparing  "  The


POWER


POWERS


97


-/7


.^^^


Rerixed  Statutes  of  Nova  Scotia,  Fourth  Series"
(1874).  and  "  liHWs  and  Ordinances  relating  to  the
Citv  of  Hiilifax"  (1HT({).

I^OWKU,  Michael.  Cana4liHn  U.  ('.  hishop,  b.  in
Halifax,  17  Oct..  18(14;  d.  in  Toronto  in  1848.  He
was  cun-  of  Ija  I'niirit'  till  1841.  when  he  accom-
panieil  Bishop  Bourifct  to  Kuro|>c.  In  the  same
year  the  ditjceso  of  Kinjcrston  was  divided,  and  I)r.
rower  was  nominated  bishop  of  the  we«itern  jmrt  on
17  May.  He  was  pennittoa  to  di»sitjiiate the  limits
of  his  see,  and  to  take  his  episco|>al  title  from  the
city  in  which  he  judjfwl  it  most  advantageous  to
reside.  He  was  consecrated  on  8  May,  1842,  and
took  the  title  of  bishop  of  Toronto.  He  restore<l  to
the  Jesuits  the  missions  they  had  formerly  hehl  in
Upper  Canada,  and,  owing  to  his  constant  support,
thev  established  many  others.

?OWER,  Tyrone,  actor,  b.  in  Kilmm'thomas,
Ireland,  2  Nov.,  1797;  d.  at  sea  in  March,  1841.

He  ma<le  his  first  ap-
pearance on  the  stage
at  Newport,  Isle  of
Wight,  in  1815,  as
Alonzo.in  Kotzebue's
playof  "I'izarro."  In
1817  Power  nuirrie<l
a  latly  of  means,
and  after  playing  for
alxnit  a  year  in  Edin-
burgh, Dublin,  and
>|  -^fcij,"*^-*^^^^ the  provinces,  he  re-

'^^  ^>- ^^ tired  from  the  stage.

Two years later ne
joined  an  African  ex-
ploring expedition
y  ^  that  set  out  irom  the

syt^nmZ'  J-  (/yy^A/"  Cape  of  Good  Hoi>e
toward  the  equator,
and  sacrificed  all  his  means  in  this  unsuccessful  en-
terprise. Eventually  he  returned  home  to  resume
his  connection  with  the  theatre,  and  for  several  years
filled  subordinate  parts  at  different  London  play-
houses. At  this  time  he  proffered  his  services  to
several  American  managers  as  a  leading  performer
in  juvenile  tragedy.  Some  years  afterward,  while
playing  with  tlie  Covent  ganlen  company,  he  was
given  the  Irish  character  of  O'Shaughnessv  in  the
farce  of  "  The  £1(X)  Note,"  and  rendered 'it  with
such  perfection  that  it  marked  out  his  true  line  of
characters.  During  his  last  engagement  at  the
Haymarket  theatre,  Power's  salary  was  advanced
to  £150  per  week.  He  visited  tHe  United  States
on  two  occasions,  from  1833  until  1835.  and  from
1839  until  1841,  and  met  with  extraonlinary  suc-
cess. He  made  his  American  lUhnt  at  the  Park
theatre  in  New  York  city  on  28  Aug.,  IWW,  in  the
j>laysof  "  The  Irish  Ambassador"  and  '*  Teddy  the
Tiler."  His  last  api)earance  was  at  the  same  house
on  9  March,  1841.  Among  the  dramas  in  which
he  nerformed  were  "  The  Nervous  Man  and  Man
of  Nerve,"  "  Pa<ldv  Carev."  "  St.  Patrick's  Eve,"
"The  Irish  Tutor.'*  "The'White  Horse  of  the  Pep-
tx-rs."  •'  Ilory  O'More."  and  '•  O'Flannigan  and  the
Fairies."  Slome  of  these  were  written  for  him  ;
others  were  dramatized  by  himself.  He  left  New
York  for  Liverpool  on  the  steamer  "  President"  on
21  March.  1841.  Three  days  later  the  vessel  was
met  on  the  ocean,  but  it  was  never  heard  of  after-
ward. Power  was  an  easy  actor,  eruloweil  with
wit  and  humor,  set  off  by  vocal  altiiity  and  a  rich
Irish  brogue.  He  was  the  intinuite  friend  of  Fitz-
Greene  Halleck  and  other  well-known  literary  men.
His  publications  include  "  Impressions  of  Amer-
ica "  (2  vols.,  Ixjndon.  1835) ;  "  The  King's  Secret " ;
and  "The  Ix)st  Heir."

VOL.  T. — 7


POWERS,  EHza  Howard,  philanthropist,  h.
in  18()2:  d.  in  Washington,  D.  ('.,  25  Aug.,  1887.
During  the  civil  war  she  was  distinguishe<l  for
ileeds  of  charity,  and  for  her  unselfish  devotion  to
the  sick  and  wounded.  From  Noveml^er.  1862,  till
August,  18tW,  she  was  asstK-iate  manager  of  the
U.  S.  sanitary  commission  of  New  Jersey,  and  act-
ing presiilent  of  the  Florence  Nightingale  relief
a-iMK'iation  of  Paterson,  N.  J.  She  collectwl  $8.(KX),
and  2().(KX)  articles  for  the  S4^ildier8'  hospitals,  and
contributed  f  2,5(X)  of  her  own  money  to  the  same
purfM)st',  without  receiving  any  com{K>'nsation.  The
48th  congress  voted  her  a  |K<nsion.  The  commit-
tee favoring  her  claims  said  in  their  report  that
from  28  April,  1861,  till  14  Aug..  1864.  she  devoted
her  whole  time,  energy,  and  means  to  the  service
of  the  soldiers  of  the  National  army  and  for  the
success  of  the  Union  cause.

P<) W ERS,  (irant, clergvman,  b.  in  Hollis,  N.  H.,
31  May,  1784;  d.  in  Goshen.  Conn.,  10  April,
1841.  He  was  gratluated  at  Dartmouth  in  1810.
studied  theologv,  and  was  minister  at  Haverhill,
N.  H.,  in  1815-^29,  and  at  Goshen,  Conn.,  from  27
Auff.,  1829.  till  his  death.  He  publishtnl  "Essay
on  False  Hope  in  Religion  "  (Andover,  1828) :  *'  Cen-
tennial Address  "(Dunstable,  1830);  and  "  Histori-
cal Sketches  of  the  Settlement  of  the  Coos  Country,
1784-'5"  (Haverhill,  1841).

POWERS,  Hiram,  sculptor,  b.  in  Woodstock,
Windsor  co.,  Vt.,  29  July,  1805;  d.  in  Florence,
Italy,  27  June,  1873.  He  passed  his  youth  on  his
father's  farm,  and  in  1819  emigrated  to  Ohio  with
the  family.  On  his  father's  (Feath  he  settled  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  where  he  was  in  turn  a  clerk,  a
commercial  traveller,  and  a  dockmaker's  appren-
tice. Having  acquired  from  a  German  sculptor  a
knowledge  of  the  art  of  modelling  in  clay,  he  exe-
cuted several  busts  and  medallions  of  some  merit.
Later  he  took  charge  of  the  wax-work  dej)artment
in  the  Western  museum  at  Cincinnati,  which  post
he  held  for  seven  years.  In  18;W  he  went  to  Wash-
ington, where,  for  some  time,  he  was  employed  in
modelling  busts  of  well-known  men.  Owinif  jwrt-
ly  to  the  assistance  of  Gen.  John  Preston,  ne  was
enabled  to  go  abroad  in  18J17,  and  he  established
himself  in  Florence,  where  he  thereafter  rt>sided.
For  some  time  hedevotetl  himself  chieflv  to  model-
ling busts,  but  within  a  year  prothiced  his  statue
"  Eve  Tempted,"  which  was  pronouncitl  a  niaster-
|)iece  by  1  horwaldsen.  Another  statue  with  the
same  title  was  exe-
cuted in  1850.  In
1843  he-  produced
the  "GreeK  Slave,"
the  most  widely
known  of  all  his
works.  Of  this  stat-
ue six  duplicates  in
marble  have  been
made,  l>esides  innu-
merable casts  and
reduced  copies  in
Parian.  It  wasex-
hibite<l  in  England
in  1845,  and  again
at  the  Crystal  jial-
acein  1851,andalso
in  this  country.
1 1  isotherstatues  in-
dude  "The  F'isher-
Boy  "  (1846),  which

was  three  times  repeated  in  marble:  "America"
(1854).  desitrned  for  the  top  of  the  capitol  at  Wash-
ington, and  destrove<l  by  fire  in  18(J6;  "II  Pense-
roso"  (1856);  "California"  (1858);  and  "The  Last


J^.


98


POWERS


POWHATAN


of  the  Tribe,"  also  known  as  "The  Indian  Girl"
(1872).  Of  his  ideal  busts  the  best  known  are
"Ginevra"  (1840;  ISO."));  "  Proserpine "  (lf^-'>):
"  Psvche  "  (1840) ; "  Diana  *'  (1852) ;  "  Christ  "  {18««) ;
"Faith"  (1807);  "Clytie"  (1808);  "  lioiH*"  (18«9):
and  "  Charity  '*  (1871).  The  greater  part  of  his  work
consists  of  busts  of  distinguished  men,  including
John  Quincv  Adams,  Andrew  Jackson.  Daniel  Web-
ster. John  ('.  Calhoun,  John  Marshall,  ami  Martin
Van  Huren  (183.')) ;  Edward  Kverett  and  John  Pres-
t<in(lH4r));  and  Henry  W.  Longfellow  and  Philip
H.  Sheridan  (18(55).  'He  executed  also  statues  of
Washington  for  Louisiana,  of  Daniel  Webster  for
Massachusetts,  of  John  C.Calh<»un  for  South  Caro-
lina (1850),  and  of  Benjamin  Franklin  (1862)  and
Thomas  Jefferson  (18();i).  Powers  had  nnich  me-
chanical skill,  and  wtis  the  author  of  several  useful
inventions,  among  which  is  a  process  of  modelling
in  pljister  which  greatly  expedites  the  labors  of
the  sculptor  by  doing  away  with  the  necessity  of
making  a  clay  model.— His  son,  Preston,  b.  in
Florence,  Italv,  3  April,  1843,  studied  modelling
under  his  father  in  18(>7-'73.  His  first  important
work  was  the  statue  of  JacoljCoilamer  (1875),  which
was  originally  ordered  of  his  father.  It  was  placed
in  the  old  hiiil  of  representatives  in  Washington.
He  executed  also,  in  1881,  a  statue  of  Reuben
Springer  for  Music  Hall,  Cincinnati.  Like  his  fa-
ther, he  works  principally  in  portraiture,  and  has
made  numerous  busts,  including  those  of  Louis
Agassiz,  in  the  museum  at  Cambridge;  John  G.
Whit  tier,  in  the  Public  lil)rary,  Haverhill,  and  a
replica  in  the  Boston  public  library;  Emanuel  Swe-
denborg,  four  times  repeated  :  Charles  Sumner,
owned  by  Bowdoin  college ;  Ulysses  S.  Grant,  in
the  war  department,  Washington ;  and  Langdon
Clieves.  Of  his  ideal  works  the  figure  "Maud  Mul-
ler  "  and  the  busts  "  Evangeline  "  and  "  Peasant-
Girl"  are  best  known.  His  professional  life  has
been  spent  in  Florence  and  m  the  United  States.

POWERS.  Horntio  Nelson,  author,  b.  in  Ame-
nia,  N.  Y.,  30  April.  1826;  d.  in  Piermont,  N.  Y.,
6  Sept.,  1890.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  college
in  1850,  at  the  (Jeneral  theological  seminary  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church.  New  York  city,  and
was  ordained  a  deacon  in  Trinity  church.  New
York.  He  was  assistant  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  till
April,  1857 :  rector  of  St.  Ijuke's  church,  Daven-
jKirt,  Iowa,  in  1857-'(52 :  of  St.  John's  church,
Chicago,  in  18f)8-'74;  of  Christ  church,  Bridge-
port. (Jonn.,  in  1875-'84;  and  became  rector  of
Christ  church,  Piermont.  N.  Y.,  in  1886.  He  was
president  of  Griswold  college  in  1864-'7,  and  presi-
dent of  the  P\iundlings'  home,  Chicago,  in  1872-'4.
He  received  the  degree  of  I).  D.  from  Union  col-
lege in  1867.  Dr.  Powers  published  "  Through  the
Year"  (Boston.  1875);  "Poems,  Early  and  Late"
(Chicago.  1876);  and  "Ten  Years  of  Song"  (Bos-
ton, 1887) ;  and  was  one  of  the  authors  of  "  Homes
and  Haunts  of  our  Elder  Poets"  (New  York.  1881).
— His  brother,  Edward,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Ame-
nia,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  1  Sept.,  1830.  was  edu-
cated in  the  public  schools.  He  served  as  a  civilian
clerk  in  the  quartermaster's  department  during  the
civil  war,  afterward  taught  for  a  time,  and  then
l)ecame  a  civil  engineer.  In  1872  and  1874  he  un-
successfully petitioned  congress  that  an  experiment
might  l)e  performed  with  the  powder  and  cannon
of  the  United  States  to  determine  the  influence  of
explosions  on  rainfall,  with  a  view  to  the  preven-
tion of  droughts.  He  has  published  "  War  and  the
Weather,  or  the  Artificial  Production  of  Rain"
(Chicago.  1871).

POWHATAN,  Indian  sachem,  .b.  about  1550;
d.  in  Virginia  in  April,  1618. His  true  name  was


Wahunsonacook.  The  name  Powhatan  is  derived
from  his  early  home  at  the  falls  of  James  river,
near  tho  site  of  Richmond.  By  his  prowess  and
ability  he  rose  frgm  an  ordinary  chief  to  the  com-
mand of  thirty  tribes,  that  numbered  8,000  per-
sons, and  occupied  the  lands  between  James  and
York  rivers.  The  site  of  his  principal  village  is
now  occupied  by  the  town  of  Shelby,  on  the  north
side  of  York  river,  about  fifteen  miles  from  James-
town, in  the  county  of  Gloucester.  He  had  a
guard  of  forty  warriors,  and  was  always  attended
by  a  sentinel  at  night.  In  1(M)9,  when  Capt.  New-
port and  Cant.  John  Smith,  with  thirty  of  the  colo-
nists, visitea  him,  to  treat  for  a  supply  of  food,
he  received  them  with  hospitality,  lie  was  then
stalwart,  gray-haired,  and  .seemingly  about  sixty
years  old,  with  several  wives,  and  a  family  of  twen-
ty sons  and  ten  daughters.  In  the  intercourse  be-
tween the  whites  and  Indians,  lx)th  parties  endeav-
ored to  overreach  each  other.  One  of  Smith's
trades  was  the  exchange  of  two  pounds  of  blue
glass  l>eads  for  300  bushels  of  Indian  corn.  When
Capt.  Newport  returned  to  Virginia  from  England,
he  brought  with  hiui  a  gilded  crown  for  the  great
sachem,  and  at  the  ceremony  of  coronation  Powha-
tan was  declared  "  Emperor  of  the  Indies."  As  an
acknowledgment  of  the  honor  conferred,  Newport
was  decked  with  a  worn  mantle,  and  received  a
pair  of  cast-off  moccasins.  About  a  year  later
Capt.  Smith  made  an  attempt  to  capture  the  wary
emperor,  in  order  to  obtain  a  fresh  supply  of  In-
dian corn.  In  retaliation,  Powhatan  prepared  to
destroy  the  English  settlement:  but  his  purpose
was  frustrated  by  the  timely  warning  that  was
given  the  colonists  by  his  daughter  Pocahontas.
He  never  trusted  the  white  settlers,  never  visited
Jamestown,  and  on  the  occasion  of  the  marriage  of
his  daughter  sent  his  consent  by  an  Indian  repre-
sentative. —  His  daughter,  Pocahontas,  Indian
princess,  b.  about  1595 ;  d.  in  Gravesend,  Eng-
land, 21  March.  1617,  was  partial  to  the  white  peo-
ple, and,  it  is  lie-
lieved,  in  1607,
when  she  was
twelve  years  of
age,  saved  the  life
of  Capt.  John
Smith.  He  had
been  taken  pris-
oner by  some  of
the  tribe  under
Opechancanough,
wno  sent  him  to
his  brother,  Pow-
hatan. On  the
trial  of  Smith,
Powhatan  was
seated  in  an  ar-
bor of  boughs,
with  a  daughter
on  each  side  of
him.  There  were
present  about  200

warriors  and  many  women.  When  he  was  about
to  be  executed.  Pocahontas  threw  herself  over
Smith's  prostrate  body,  to  shield  him  from  de-
struction, and  her  subsequent  intercession  with
Powhatan  saved  his  life.  This  event  is  said  to
have  taken  place  at  Shelby,  in  Gloucester  county.
Smith's  account,  given  in  his  "General  History  of
Virginia,"  is  discredited  by  Charles  Deane,  LL.  D.,
in  his  edition  of  Smith's  "True  Relation,"  and  by
the  Rev.  Edward  D.  Neill,  in  his  "  History  of  the
Virginia  Company  of  London,"  on  ike  ^^round  that
the  incident  is  not  mentioned  in  Smith's  earlier


POWHATAN


POWNALL


99


narrutivf,  but  only  in  hU  "New  England  Trials"
(1U22),  uftiT  tlu'  lu-oininonco  Pm-HlKintas  hml  al-
laintHl  in  Kugland.  On  tho  otluT  hand,  Mr.  Will-
iam Wirt  llonry,  in  an  mUlresw  lH<foru  the  Virginia
historical  soc-ie'ty,  24  Ki'lt.,  1HH2,  points  out  that
a  |»art  of  Smith's  original  narrative  wjis  suppn'sstnl,
the  prefwe,  signed  "J.  11.."  saying:  *' Soniewhat
mon»  was  by  him  written,  which  In-ing  (as  1  thought)
fit  to  Ih'  private.  I  would  not  adventure  to  make
it  publicke."  Other  parts  of  the  preface  shuwthat
the  design  of  the  publication  was  to  encourage
cmigraticm  to  Virginia,  which  might  have  been
prevented  by  rejKirt  of  the  hostile  action  by  Pow-
iiatan.  Mr.  Henry  has  shown  that  the  grammati-
cal confusion  of  the  original  narrative  at  tho  jKjint
where  the  incident,  if  true,  should  have  ai)|)eared,
a(ids  probability  that  it  was  suppresse«l.  That  Po-
calKHitas  saved  Smith  and  the  colony  from  peril
is  attested  by  the  so-called  "Oxford  Tract"  ("The
Procetnlings" of  the  English  Colonic")  printed  in
1(J12.  four  years  l)efore  her  prominence  in  England.
"  Very  oft,^'  it  says,  "  she  came  to  our  fort  with
what  she  could  get  for  Capt.  Smith,  that  ever  loved
and  \ised  all  the  country  well,  but  her  es[)ecially  he
nmch  respectetl,  and  sfie  so  well  requited  it  that
when  her  father  intended  to  have  surprised  him,
she,  by  stealth  in  the  dark  night,  came  through  the
wild  woo«ls  and  told  him  of  it.  If  he  would,  he
might  have  married  her."  This  was  in  1609,  after
Smith's  release,  when  he  returned  to  Jamestown,  and
sent  presents  to  Pocahontas  and  her  father.  The
Indians  had  been  for  some  weeks  friendlier,  and  the
child  Pocahontas  was  often  seen  dancing  and  caper-
ing, much  to  the  amusement  of  the  colonists,  among
whom  she  was  a  general  favorite.  In  1612  Poca-
honta.-;  dwelt  away  from  her  father,  with  one  of  his
tributary  bands,  when  Capt.  Samuel  Argall  brilwd
their  leader,  for  a  copper  kettle,  to  betray  her  into
his  hands,  that  he  mignt  treat  atlvantageously  with
Powhatan  for  her  release.  But  nothing  came  of
this  nefarious  transaction.  During  Pocahontas's
captivity  in  Jamestown  an  attachment  arose  be-
tween her  and  a  young  widower,  John  Rolfe.  She
was  baptized  in  the  small  village  chapel,  on  5  April,
1613,  and  not  long  afterward,  in  1614,  they  were
married  by  the  Rev.  Alexander  Whittaker.  The
ceremony  was  witnessed  by  the  colonists,  her  broth-
ers, and  other  Indians,  and  Powhatan  sent  his  con-
sent. Pocahontas  wore  a  tunic  of  white  muslin,
over  which  hung  a  handsome  robe,  embroidered  by
herself,  her  forehead  was  decked  with  a  glittering
band,  her  hair  with  feathers,  and  she  wore  the
white  bridal  veil.  This  event  prcwluced  a  peace  of
many  years'  duration.  Pocahontas's  Indian  name
was  >fatoaka ;  at  her  l>aptism  she  was  christene<l
Reliecca.  In  1616.  at  the  end  of  April,  Mr.  and  Mrs.
John  Rt)lfe  bmle  farewell  to  the  colony,  and.  under
the  care  of  the  governor.  Sir  Thoma.s  t)ale,  in  com-

S>any  with  several  Indian  men  and  women,  sailed
or  England.  On  their  arrival,  on  12  June,  the
"  Jjady  I{el)ecca,"  as  she  was  called,  was  entertained
by  the  bishop  of  London,  visited  by  Sir  Walter  Ka-
leigh,  and  j)resented  by  Lady  I)e  la  Warr.  as  an
Indian  princess,  at  the  court  of  King  James.  She
was  graciously  received  and  royally  enterUiined  ;
but  his  majesty  found  great  fault  with  his  subject.
Rolfe,  for  venturing  to  marry  "  the  daughter  of  an
emjx^ror  "  b«'fore  obtaining  the  royal  consent.  The
"Lady  ReU-cca"  appi'are<i  at  the  London  theatres
and  other  public  plm-es,  an<l  was  an  object  of  much
interest  with  the  people.  "  La  Belle  Sauvage  "  Ije-
came  a  favorite  name  for  taverns.  On  the  eve  of
her  return  to  this  country  she  was  suddenly  at-
tacked by  small-}K)\,  and  died.  Her  remains  were
buried  in  Gravesend. The  church  register  describes


her  erroneously  as  tho  "wife  of  Thomas  Rolfe."
She  hwl  never  learned  to  write.  Among  the  nmny
memorials  of  Pocahontas  is  a  stained-glass  window
placinl  by  her  descendant)}  in  St.  Luke's  Episcopal
church.SmithJiehi,
Va.,  represi'Utetl  in
the  (ur(>«m|>anying
illustration.  It  is
the  oldest  Protest-
ant edifice  on  this
continent,  having
been  built  of  im-
ported brick  in
16:^2.  Since  the
destruction  of  the
cathetlral  at  St.
Augustine,  Fla.,  it
is,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  adotje
cathedral  at  Santa
Fe,  the  most  an-
cient Christian
monument  in  this
country.  John
Rolfe,  her  husband,  had  been  advanced  to  the  office
of  secretary  and  recorder-general  of  Virginia,  and
as  such  returned  to  the  colony.  Pocahontas  had
one  son,  Thomas,  Ixjrn  in  ICngland,  who  was  edu-
cated by  his  uncle,  Henry,  a  London  merchant.
On  attaining  manhof)d.  ho  followed  his  father  to
Virginia,  as  a  tobacco-i)lanter,  and  l>ecame  opulent
and  distinguished.  He  left  an  only  daughter,
from  whom  sprang  the  Virginian  families  of  Boi-
ling, Fleming,  Murray,  Guy,  Robertson,  Whittle,
and  Elbridge,  and  the  branch  of  Randolphs  from
which  John  Randolph,  of  Roanoke,  was  descende<l.
John  Randolph  was  proud  of  his  direct  descent
from  the  Indian  princess,  and  some  of  his  traits  are
ascribed  to  this  origin.  Among  Rolfe's  descend-
ants is  the  present  bishop  of  Virginia,  Dr.  Francis
M.  Whittle,  who  lately  confirmed  a  class  of  Indian
youth  at  Hampton  (formerly  Kecongtau),  where
t'ochino,  brother  of  Pocahontas,  was  commander.
See  a  critical  judgment  in  the  introduction  to
"Cai)tain  John  Smith's  Works."  edited  by  Edward
Archer  (Birmingham,  1884) ;  and  "  Pocahontas  and
her  Descendants,"  by  Wyndham  Robertson  (Rich-
mond, Va.,  1887).

POWNALL,  Thomas,  statesman,  b.  in  Lincoln,
England,  in  1720;  d.  in  Bath,  25  Feb.,  180.5.  His
father  had  l)een  connected  with  the  English  civil
service  in  India,  and
his  brother  John  was
long  the  secretary  to
the  lords  of  trade  and
plantations.  Thomas
first  came  to  this  coun-
try in  October,  1753,  as
Private  secretary  to  Sir
)anvers  Osborne,  royal
governor  of  New  York.
In  1754  he  attended
the  Albany  congress,  in
what  capacity  is  not
understood,  but  it  is
presumed  that  he  was
{)riyate  agent  of  the
colonial  authoritias  in
London.  While  in  Al-
l)any  he  first  [xrceiveil,
JUS  if  by  inspiration,  the
drift  of  American  political  tendencies.  He  next
advocated  the  delimitation  of  the  French  and
English  possessions  in  .Vmerica,  and  a  neutral  In-
dian territory  between  them. In  1755  he  was  ap-


I


100


POWNALL


PR  A  DO


pointed  commissioner  for  Massachusetts,  in  nego-
tiations with  the  colonial  authorities  in  New  York,
oonceming  military  operations  apainst  the  French,
and  in  the  same  year  ne  was  made  iieutenant-pov-
ernor  of  New  Jersey.  lie  was  present  at  the  meet-
ing of  the  colonial  povernor  with  Gen.  Edward
Braildcxk  at  Alexandria.  In  1756  Pownall  was
made  jjovenior  of  Massachusetts,  to  succeed  Shir-
ley. The  accompanyins:  enKravinjf  re|)r(»sents  the
old  Province  house,  liis  residence  in  Hoston.  While
conducting  the  government  of  that  province,  he
built  the  fort  that  was  named  after  him.  on  Penob-
scot river,  and  was  active  in  the  military  camnaign
against  the  French.  In  1700  ho  was  appoiiitetl  gov-
ernor of  South  t'arolina,  but  he  never  assumed  the
government  of  that  colony,  as  he  returned  to  Eng-
land an«l  was  almost  immediately  elected  to  parlia-
ment. He  was  next  made  "  director-general  of  con-
trol," and  joined  the  English  force  in  Germany.
After  the  peace  of  Paris  he  was  again  returned  to
parliament,  where  he  sjit  almost  continuously  till
1781.  lie  was  the  firm  and  consistent  friend  of  the
American  idea.  In  1767  he  op|X)sed  parliamentary
taxation  of  the  colonies.  In  1777,  six  years  before
the  peace,  he  was  the  first  to  announce  that  Eng-
land's "sovereignty  over  America  was  gone  for-
ever," and  he  then  advocate<l  a  commercial  treaty
in  order  to  frustrate  French  influence.  He  was
the  first  memlKT  of  parliament  to  bring  in  a  bill
for  j)eace  with  the  colonies.  Soon  after  the  Al-
bany congress  Pownall  formulated  a  plan  for  an

English-speaking
empire  whose  seat
of  authority  was
ultimately  to  be
in  this  country.
He  believed  that
theAmerieanshad
equal  constitu-
tional rights  with
the  English  in
England,  and  his
wonderful  saga-
city, f)enetrating
thefuture  so  clear-
ly as  to  make  him

_^^  ^ _  seem somewhat

'  "^  visionary  to  con-

temporary "  practical  politicians,"  made  him  an-
ticipate the  political  preponderance  of  the  English
race  in  America.  Because  he  was  wedded  neither
to  the  American  plan  for  independence  of  England
nor  to  the  English  jtian  for  colonial  subordination
to  the  political  emporium  in  London,  he  failed  to
exert  on  his  contemporaries  all  the  influence  that
his  singular  ability  warranted.  Yet  he  always  was
considered  in  parliament  the  chief  authority  on  all
exact  questions  of  American  affairs,  whether  relat-
ing to  South  or  North  America.  He  was  the  first
Englishman  of  note  that  made  politics  in  America
a  profound  study.  When  the  United  States  be-
came independent  he  proclaimed  that  he  regarded
the  future  iK)litical  supremacy  of  England  as  doubt-
ful, and  a<lmitted  that  the  aim  of  his  life — a  con-
solidated English-speaking  empire — was  frustrated.
As  a  scientist,  Pownall  was  much  esteemed  by  Ben-
jamin Franklin,  whose  close  friend  he  was.  even
during  the  trying  ordeal  of  the  Revolutionary  war.
As  an  antiauary,  scientist,  and  man  of  letters,  Pow-
nall st<jod  nigh  in  England.  He  wrote  extensively
on  Roman  antiquities  and  published  many  papere
in  the  "  Gentleman's  Magazine  "  on  widely  dififer-
ent  subjects.  But  his  great  literary  efifort  was  one
on  the  "Colonial  Constitutions"  (London,  1764).
Though  somewhat  deformed  by  classical  quota-


tions, it  works  out  in  detail  the  first  comprehen-
sive argument  for  the  equal  political  status  of  Eng-
lish freemen  in  America.  In  one  aspect  this  book
and  its  views  entitle  Pownall  to  be  regarded  as  al-
most the  first  American  statesman.  Certainly  he
merits  renown  for  Xmng  the  first  Englishman  of
eilucation  and  influence  that  devoted  his  entire
life  to  the  amelioration  of  American  political  con-
ditions. Pownall  was  a  member  of  tne  Society  of
antiquaries,  and  a  fellow  of  the  Roval  society.
By  some  he  wjis  thought  to  be  "Junius."  Pow-
nall's  political  history  is  yet  to  be  written.  When
it  is  written,  if  just  to  him,  it  will  magnify  the

[)lace  that  is  commonly  accorded  to  him  by  those
listorians  that  have  treated  the  entire  epoch  in
which  he  lived.  He  was  the  author  of  many  works,
including  "  Principles  of  Polity  "  (1752) :  "  The  Ad-
ministration of  the  Colonies  "  (1764) ;  "  Description
of  the  Middle  States  of  America"  (1776);  "A  Me-
morial to  the  Sovereigns  of  Europe  on  the  State  of
Affairs  l)etween  the  Old  and  tne  New  World"
(1780);  "  Memorial  to  the  Sovereigns  of  America"
(1783);  "Notices  and  Descriptions  of  the  Antiqui-
ties of  the  Provincia  Romana  of  Gaul"  (1788);
"Intellectual  Physics"  (1795);  "Letters  advocat-
ing Free-Trade"  (1795);  an  antiquarian  romance;
and  a  treatise  on  "  Old  Age."

POYAS,  Catharine  Oendron,  author,  b.  in
Charieston,  S.  C,  27  April,  1813 ;  d.  there,  7  Feb.,
1882.  Her  mother,  Elizabeth  Anne,  published,
under  the  title  of  "The  Ancient  Lady,"  several
small  books  and  pamphlets  relating  to  the  homes
and  genealogies  of  families  in  Carolina.  Her
daughter  was  educated  in  Charleston,  wrote  verses
at  an  early  age,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Huguenot
Daughters,  and  other  Poems"  (Charleston,  1849)
and  "  Year  of  Grief"  (1870).

POYl)RAS,Jullen,  philanthropist,  b.in  Nantes,
France,  3  April,  1746;  d.  in  Point  Coupee,  La.,  25
June,  1824.  He  was  fii-st  delegate  to  congress  from
the  territory  of  Orleans,  from  31  Mav,  1809.  till  3
March.  1811  He  gave  $100,000  for  the  founding
of  the  Poydras  orphan  iusylum  at  New  Orleans,  and
left  $200,000  for  a  college  at  Point  Coupee.

PR  A  DO,  Juan  de,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Leon,
Spain,  in  1716;  d,  about  1770.  He  entered  the
army,  took  part  in  some  of  the  wars  of  Spain  in
Africa,  and  was  appointed  governor-general  of
Cuba  in  1760,  but  did  not  take  possession  of  his
office  until  February,  1761.  On  6  July,  1762,  an
English  force  under  Lord  Albemarle  began  the
siege  of  Havana,  which  was  finally  taken  on  13
Aug.  On  Prado's  return  to  Spain,  the  Madrid
government  caused  him  to  be  tried  by  a  court-mar-
tial. Pie  was  convicted  of  incompetency  and  lack
of  energy  in  the  defence  of  Havana,  and  was  sen-
tenced to  death,  but  the  sentence  was  commuted
to  ten  years'  imprisonment. He  died  in  prison.

PR  A  DO,  Mariano  Ignacio  (prah'-do),  presi-
dent of  Peru,  b.  in  Huanuco  in  1826.  He  entered
the  army  early  and  served  in  the  provinces  of  the
south,  but  was  in  Lima  on  leave  of  absence  when
Gen.  Castilla's  revolution  against  Echenique's  gov-
ernment began  in  18^4,  in  which  he  participated.
He  was  taken  prisoner  and  banished  to  Chili,  but
soon  returned,  joined  Castilla  in  the  mountains,
and  marched  with  him  against  the  capital  as  chief
of  the  "  Columna  sagrada."  He  was  political  gov-
ernor of  Tacna  when  Admiral  Pinzon  occupied
the  Chinchas  islands,  14  April,  1864,  issued  a
proclamation  for  the  defence  of  the  country,  and
Decame  prefect  of  Arequipa.  But  when  the  Vi-
vanco-Pareja  treaty  was  signed,  Prado.  on  28  Feb.,
1865,  marched  against  Lima,  and  eijtered  the  capi-
tal on  6  Nov.  at  the  head  of  a  victonoos  army,  and


PRAT


PRATT


101


on  the  2fith  deoIan»d  hiiii<«clf  ilurtator.  Ho  si^rned
at  once  n  treaty  of  alliaiu-t*  with  Chili,  and  when,
aftor  the  l)oml»anlinent  of  Val|«r8J»o,  the  Spanish
fleet  apjM'artHl  Ijofore  Caliao,  Priwlo  dirwto<l  the  de-
fentM'of  2  May.  1H<K5.  At  the  In'^'inninR  of  18«7  he
assombleilfonpre!*'. >»'fii<"h  elect «h1  him  constitution-
al president,  but  his  nile  was  not  Hpprove<i  hy  the
country.  Castilla  nist*  in  arms  shortly  afterward
in  Tarajmoa,  but  died  on  the  march  to  Lima,  and
on  27  Sept.,  1807,  the  vice-^)resident,  Canseco,  j)ut
hims«'If  at  the  head  of  a  risinj;  in  Ar«iui|ja,  and
<'ol.  Jose  Balta  (q.  v.)  pronounced  afjainst  Prado  at
Chiclayo.  Prado  attempted  to  take  Annpiipa  by
assault  on  7  Jan.,  1808,  but  was  n>pelled.  and  re-
tired to  Chili.  Under  Pardo's  government  he
returne<l,  and  was  ele<-ted  president,  2  Aug.,  1876.
He  ma<le  several  ineffectual  attempts  to  come  to
an  arrangemetjt  with  foreign  lx»nd-holders,  and
when  the  quarrel  between  Bolivia  and  Chili  liegan,
aceonling  to  the  secret  defensive  treaty  with  the
former  republic,  he  espoused  its  cause,  and  war  was
declared  by  Chili,  5  April,  1879.  Prado  took  active
measures  to  prepare  for  defence,  and  on  16  May
left  Callao  to  take  command  of  the  army  then
assinnbling  at  Tacna.  He  proceeded  at  once  to
ins|H»ct  the  allie<l  army  at  Tarapaca.  where  he  was
j<jined  by  the  Bolivian  president.  Hilarion  Daza
(^.  f.).  After  the  battles  of  Jermania,  San  P'ran-
cisco.  and  Tarapaca.  Pratlo  seemed  to  despair  of
success,  and  on  26  Nov.  left  for  Lima,  ostensibly
to  prepare  and  hurry  forward  new  re-enforcements,
but  on  18  Dec.  left  the  vice-president.  La  Puerta,
in  charge  of  the  executive,  and  embarketi  secretly
on  a  British  mail-steamer,  according  to  a  manifesto
that  was  nublished  the  day  after  his  departure,  to
obtain  help  in  money  and  material  from  Europe
or  thf  United  States.'  He  retunied  in  1888.

PRAT.  Agrii^tin  Arturo,  Chilian  naval  of-
ficer, b.  near  Quirihue,  Itata,  3  April,  1848;  d.  at
sea,  21  May,  1879.  He  received  his  education  in
the  College  of  Santiago,  and  in  August,  1858,  en-
tered the  naval  academy  of  Valparaiso.  In  Janu-
ary', 1860,  he  shipjx'd  as  apprentice  on  board  the
"  Esmeralda,"  passing  his  examination  a.s  midship-
man, 15  June,  1862,  and  he  served  on  the  same  ves-
sel as  sub -lieutenant  during  the  capture  of  the
Spanish  gun-boat  '*  Covadonga."  26  Nov..  1865.  and
the  engagement  of  Abtao  in  February.  1866.  After
serving  in  Valdivia,  the  Chiloe  sound,  and  the
Strait  of  Magellan,  he  studied  law,  and  in  1878
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  the  supreme  court.
Soon  afterward  he  was  sent  by  the  government  on
a  mission  to  Uruguay  and  the  Argentine  Republic,
but,  on  hearing  of  the  war  against  Peru  and  Bo-
livia, returned  to  his  country,  and  during  April.
1879.  in  command  of  the  "  Covadonga."  assisted  in
the  blockade  of  Iquique.  When  Admiral  Juan
Williams  Rebolledo  {q.  v.)  left  with  the  fleet  for
Callao  on  16  Mav.  Prat  was  promoted  to  the  com-
mand of  the  "  t<3smeraUla."  and  with  the  '"Cova-
donda."  also  under  his  orders,  left  to  sustain  the
bUn-kjule  of  Iquique.  On  this  cruise  he  was  at-
tacked early  on  21  May  by  the  Peruvian  iron-clads
'  Huascar  and  *•  Independencia  "  under  Admiral
Miguel  Orau(9.  f.).  During  the  engagenient  one
of  his  boilers  burst,  and  he  fell  an  easy  prey  to  the
"  Huascar."  the  "  Inde|»endencia,"  in  chase  of  the
"  Covadonga,"  having  struck  on  a  reef.  The  turret-
ship,  to  bring  matters  to  an  issue,  rammed  the
"  Ksmeralda,"  and  Jis  the  latter  was  struck  behind
the  mizzen-nuist,  Capt.  Prat,  with  sword  and  re-
volver in  hand,  jumjxHl  on  board  the  "  Huasc-ar."
calling  on  his  men  to  follow  him.  but  the  two  ves-
sels imme<liately  separated,  leaving  all  but  one  man
behind. As  Prat  refused  to  obey  6rau*'8  summons


to  furronder.  and  killed  the  signal  officer  on  de<-k.
he  was  shot  down  fn)m  the  turret,  (i rau,  who  had
highly  esteemiHl  Prat  for  his  courage,  colIecte<l  his
nenM)hal  efre<>ts  and  sent  them  to  the  widow  with  a
letter  of  regret.  Prat's  country  has  honore«l  his
memory  by  erecting  a  granite  pyramid  with  his
bust  at  Atacama  in  Octolx-r.  1879,  and  bronze  stat-
ues at  his  native  town  of  Quirihue  in  1880,  and  in
Valpaniisf).  21  Mav.  1886.

PRATT,  Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  in  Cohasset,
Mass..  i;j  March.  1710;  d.  5  Jan..  17«:i  The  loss
of  a  limb  in  early  life  led  him  to  study.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvanl  in  1737.  studied  law.  and
soon  l>ecame  known  for  his  learning  and  eloquence.
He  was  a  representative  of  Boston  in  1737-'50,  and
was  a  zealous  lover  of  freedom.  The  friendship  of
Gov.  Thomas  Pownall  pr«x'ure<l  him  the  appoint-
ment of  chief  ju.stice  of  New  York.  He  was  a  man
of  great  research  and  learning,  wrote  some  fugi-
tive verses,  and  had  made  extensive  collections
with  the  intention  of  writing  a  history  of  New
England,  but  his  death  prevented  the  execution  of
his  design.  His  wife  was  the  daughter  of  Judg^
RolK'rt  Auchmuty.

PRATT,  CalVin  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince-
ton, Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  23  Jan.,  1828.  He
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1852,  and
practised  for  several  years  in  Worcester.  He  was
a  meml)er  of  the  Cincinnati  convention  which
nominated  James  Buchanan  for  president.  In
1859  he  removed  to  New  York  city  and  practisetl
till  1861,  when  he  raised  the  31st  regiment  of  New
York  volunteers,  and  commanded  it  at  the  first
battle  of  Bull  Bun.  With  his  regiment  he  after-
ward took  part  in  the  battles  on  the  [)eninsula.  the
second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  the  battle  of  Anti-
etam.  On  10  Sept.,  1862,  he  was  appointed  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  and  he  resigned,  25
April.  1863.  After  the  war  he  held  the  post  of
collector  of  internal  revenue  in  the  Brooklyn  dis-
trict, which  he  resigne<l  to  resume  his  law-practice.
In  the  autumn  of  1869  he  was  electetl  a  judge  of
the  supreme  court  of  the  state  of  New  York,  and
he  was  re-elected  in  1877  for  fourteen  years.

PRATT,
town,

1891.  He  was  educated  at  the  Wilbraham  acad-
emy, and  in  1850  came  to  New  York  city,  where
he  engaged  in  the  oil  and  paint  business.  In  1867
he  established  the  firm  of  Charles  Pratt  and  Co.,
which  was  merged  into  the  Standard  oil  company,
of  which  he  was  an  officer.  Mr.  Pratt  displaye<l
great  interest  in  educational  matters,  and  founded
in  Brooklyn  the  Pratt  industrial  institute.  This
receives  its  support  from  the  Astral  flats,  which
were  built  by  him,  and  conveyed  to  the  institute.

PRATT,  Daniel,  vagrant,  b.  in  Prattville,
Chelsea.  Mass.,  al>out  1809;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass..  21
June.  1887.  He  was  a  carpenter,  but  did  little
work,  and.  his  mind  becoming  affected,  he  spent  his
time  in  wandering  al)out  the  country,  living  on
charity.  He  was  widely  known  as  the  "great
American  traveller,"  which  was  the  name  by  which
he  called  himself.  For  many  years  he  made  the
tour  of  the  New  England  colleges  annually,  until
his  visits  came  to  be  regarded  almost  as  a  regular
feature  of  college  life.  His  addresses,  which  were
sometimes  delivered  to  hundnnls  of  students,  and
receive<l  with  great  applause,  were  remarkable  for
their  long  words.  l)oml)astic  phrases,  and  curious
figures  of  speech;  and  the  same  was  tnie  of  his
"proclamations"  and  other  contributions  that  oi--
casionally  found  their  way  into  print.  One  of  his
delusions  was  that  he  hat!  I)een  elected  president
of  the  United  States  but  defrauded  of  the  office.


as  re-eiecie<i  iii  iom  ior  lourieeii  years.

RATT,  Charles,  philanthropist,  h.  in  Water-
1,  Mjiss.,  2  Oct..  miO ;  d.  in  New  York,  4  May.


102


PRATT


PRATT


PRATT,  Daniel  Darwin,  senator,  h.  in  Paler-
mo, Me.,  20  Uct.,  l«ia;  d.  in  Ix>pin8port,  Intl.,  17
June,  1877.  When  he  was  a  child  his  iwrents  re-
niove<l  to  New  York.  lie  was  (fruduateu  at  Hamil-
ton collepe  in  1831,  and  in  1832  enj;age<l  in  teach-
ing in  Indiana.  In  1834  he  went  to  Indiana{x)lis
and  wa.H  einploveil  in  the  office  of  the  secretary  of
state,  studied  law,  and  in  1836  settled  in  Lojjans-
port,  wliere  he  iK'pin  the  practice  of  his  profession.
In  18.J1  and  lHr)3  he  was  elected  to  the  iejrislature,
and  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  National  Re-
publican convention  of  1860,  also  a(;ting  as  its
principal  secretary.  He  was  elected  to  congress
from  Indiana  in  1868,  but  before  taking  his  seat
was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  from  that  state  to  suc-
ceed Thomas  A.  Hendricks,  and  served  from  4
March,  1869.  till  3  March,  187").  In  187")  he  was
apj)ointed  commissioner  of  internal  revenue,  which
oflice  he  resigned  in  July,  1876.

PRATT,  Daniel  Jolinson,  educator,  b.  in
Westmon-land,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  8  March,  1827;
d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  12  Sept.,  1884.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Hamilton  college  in  1851,  and  was  for  ten
years  principal  of  Kredonia  academy.  He  after-
ward iH'came  assistant  secretary  of  the  regents  of
the  I'niversity  of  the  state  of  }^ew  York.  He  wa.s
one  of  the  originators  of  the  annual  convocation  of
the  professors  in  the  colleges  and  academies  of  New
YorK.  In  addition  to  many  reports  upon  educa-
tional subjects,  he  published  "  Biographical  No-
tice of  Peter  Wraxall"  (Albany,  1870),  and  "An-
nals of  Public  Education  in  the  State  of  New
York,  ir)2t)-1746"  (Albany,  1882),  and  was  the  au-
thor of  the  greater  part  of  the  "History  of  the
Boundaries  of  the  State  of  New  York  "  (2  vols.),
presented  to  the  legislature  as  a  report  by  the  re-
gents of  the  university.

PRATT,  Enoch,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middlebor-
ough,  Mass.,  in  1781  ;  d.  in  Hrewster,  Mass.,  2  Feb.,
18(50.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  universitv  in
1803,  and  ordained.  28  Oct.,  1807,  as  pastor  of" the
church  at  Barnstable.  Mass.,  where  he  remained  till
his  resignation  in  1837.  He  was  author  of  a  "  His-
tory of  East  ham,  Wellfleet,  and  Orleans,  Mass.,
1644-1844  "  (Yarmouth.  1844).

PRATT,  Enocli,  philanthropist,  b.  in  North
Midillel)orough,  Mass.,  10  Sept.,  1808.  He  was
graduated  at  Bridgewater  academy  at  the  age  of
fifttH'ii,  and  soon  afterward  secured  a  place  in  a
commercial  house  in  Boston.  In  1831  Mr.  Pratt  re-
moved to  Bal-
timore and  es-
tablished him-
self as  a  com-
mission mer-
chant. He  af-
terward found-
ed the  whole-
sale iron  house
of  Pratt  and
Keith,  and  la-
ter that  of
Enoch  Pratt
and  Brother,
but  gave  much
of  his  time  to
financial  enter-

f)rises  of  a  pub-
ic nature.  He
has  been  direc-
tor and  president  of  various  corporations,  presi-
dent of  the  House  of  reformation  and  instruc-
tion for  colored  children  at  Cheltenham,  which  he
founded,  and  to  which  he  gave  730  acres  of  his
farm  as  a  site,  and  president  of  the  Maryland  school


for  the  deaf  and  dumb  at  Frederick,  which  he  es-
tablished. In  1877  he  was  elected  by  the  city
councils  of  Baltimore  as  finance  commissioner.  lii
1867  Mr.  Pratt  had  endowed  an  academy  in  North
Middlelxjrough,  his  native  city,  in  the  sum  of  $30,-
000.  On  21  Jan.,  1882,  Mr.  Pratt  gave  notice  to  the
government  of  the  city  of  Baltimore  of  his  purpose
to  establish  a  free  cireulating  library,  to  be  called
the  Enoch  Pratt  free  library  of  the  city  of  Balti-
more, on  certain  conditions  of  co-operation  on  the
fiart  of  the  city,  which  were  promptly  accepted,
le  proceeded  immediately  to  erect  fire-proof  build-
ings for  the  library  (see  illustration)  and  four
branches,  which  were  completed  and  conveyed  to
the  city,  2  July,  1883.  Mr,  Pratt  intended  to* spend
|!1,000",000,  but  the  amount  had  reached  $1,145,-
833.33  at  the  completion  of  the  buildings.  The
library  was  formally  opened  on  4  Jan.,  1886.

PRATT,  Matthew,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  23
Sept.,  1734;  d.  there,  9  Jan.,  1805.  He  received  a
common-school  education,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen
was  apprenticed  to  his  uncle,  James  Claypoole,
from  whom  he  learned  "all  the  different  branches
of  the  painting  business,  particularly  portrait-
painting."  He  remained  m  Philadelphia  until
1757,  when  he  embarked  for  Jamaica  on  some  mer-
cantile enterprise.  The  following  year  he  returned
home,  and  began  to  pursue  regularly  the  profes-
sion of  a  portrait-painter.  About  i764  he  went
to  England  and  became  the  pupil  of  Benjamin
West.  Four  years  were  spent  there  in  study  and
the  practice  of  his  profession,  after  which  he  re-
turned to  Philadelphia.  He  made  another  trip
abroad  in  1770,  visiting  Ireland  and  England,  and
after  that  did  not  leave  his  native  city  again.  His
portraits,  in  the  execution  of  which  he  proved  him-
self an  artist  of  undoubted  talent,  include  those  of
Rev.  Archdeacon  Mann,  of  Dublin,  the  Duke  of
Portland,  the  Duchess  of  Manchester,  Gov,  Andrew
Hamilton,  and  Gov.  Cadwalader  Golden,  of  New
York  (1772).  He  painted  also  "  The  London  School
of  Artists,"  which  Thomas  Sully  pronounced  well
executed.  Pratt,  probably  finding  portrait-painting
not  sufficiently  remunerative,  occupied  himself  at
intervals  with  the  painting  of  signs.  Many  of  his
contemporaries  have  attested  the  fine  execution  of
these  sign-boards.

PRATT,  Parley  Parker,  Mormon  apostle,  b.
in  Burlington,  N.  Y.,  12  April,  1807;  d.  near  Van
Buren,  Ark.,  13  May,  1857.  He  joined  the  Mormon
church  in  1830.  and  was  a  member,  in  1835,  of  the
first  quorum  of  the  twelve  apostles,  Mr.  Pratt  was
one  of  the  earliest  Mormon  missionaries  that  trav-
elled from  the  Atlantic  seaboard  to  the  western
frontiers  of  Missouri,  and  among  his  converts  was
John  Taylor.  In  1840  he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to
England,  and  again  in  1846.  He  was  one  of  the
pioneers  to  the  valley  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake,  and
in  1847  explored  Utah  lake  and  valley ;  also  Ce<lar
and  Tooede  valleys,  and  Parley's  Caflon  and  Par-
ley's Peak,  east  of  Salt  Lake  valley,  were  named
after  him,  as  he  explored  them  in  1849  and  worked
a  road  up  the  cafion.  He  visited  the  Pacific  coast
in  1851  and  1854  on  missions,  and  set  out  on  a
similar  expedition  to  the  eastern  states  in  Sep-
tember, 1856,  but  was  assassinated  while  passing
through  Arkansas.  Some  of  Mr.  Pratt's  writings
were  pronounced  by  Joseph  Smith  to  be  standard
works  of  the  church.  He  established  the  "Mil-
lennial Star"  in  Manchester,  England,  and  was
its  editor  during  1840.  It  is  still  published.  Mr.
Pratt  was  the  author  of  numerous  pamphlets,
among  which  are  "  An  Appeal  to  the  State  of  New
York."  "  Immortality  of  the  Body,"  ';  Fountain  of
Knowledge,"  "Intelligence  and  Affection,"  "The


PRATT


PRATT


106


\


Anjjfl  of  the  Prairk's,"  uiul  was  the  author  of
*•  Voice  of  Warning  ami  Instruction  to  all  Pc<>ple,
or  an  IntrtMltiction  to  the  Faith  and  Doctrine  of
the  ljatter-l)av  Saints"  (New  York,  18:^7);  "His-
tory of  the  Persecutions  in  Missouri"  (I)ctroit.
IHIJi)) :  an«l  "  Kev  to  the  Science  «)f  Theology  "  (Liv-
er|MM>l,  1854).  llis  niarkc«l  Ilebniic  chanu-ter  and
tone  led  to  his  beinjjf  cullwl  the  Isaiah  of  his  peo-

t)le. — 11  is  brother.  Orson,  Mormon  a|H)stle,  b.  in
lartford.  X.  Y..  11)  Sept..  1811 ;  d.  in  Salt  l^akeCitv,
3  Oct..  1881.  He  was  educated  in  common  schcK>ls
in  Columbia  county,  and  acouired  an  extensive
knowltnlge  of  Hebrew  and  the  ni);her  mathematics.
In  Septeujber,  1830,  he  joined  the  Mormon  church,
which  he  followed  in  its  travels  to  Missouri,  and
became  an  eUler  in  18JJ1,  a  high-priest  in  18iJ2.  and
one  of  the  twelve  apostles  in  18Ji5.  Sckju  after  his
connection  with  the  church  he  was  stuit  on  numer-
ous preaching  missions,  extending  from  the  New
England  and  other  eastern  states  and  Canada  to
western  Missouri.  He  and  Krastus  Snow  were  the
first  Mormons  to  enter  the  valley  of  the  Gi-eat  Salt
Ijake.  and  he  was  the  first  to  stand  upon  the  site
where  Salt  Ijake  City  was  afterward  built.  Mr.
Pratt  went  on  successfid  missions  to  Great  Britain
in  1840. 1848.  1850, 1853, 185«.  1864.  1877,  and  1878,
and  was  twice  president  of  the  British  and  Euro-
pean missions,  and  in  1865  he  went  on  a  mission
to  Austria.  In  1852  he  went  on  a  mission  to  Wa-^h-
ington,  D.  C,  where  he  edited  and  published  "  The
Seer."  eighteen  monthly  numbers,  at  the  same  time
presiding  over  the  churches  on  the  Atlantic  slope
and  in  Canada.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legisla-
tive assembly  of  Utah  during  the  first  session,  and
also  of  every  other  session  when  he  was  in  the  ter-
ritory, and  was  seven  times  its  speaker.  For  some
time  he  held  the  professorship  of  mathematics  in
Deseret  university  and  in  1874  was  appointe*!  church
historian  and  general  church  recorder.  Mr.  Pratt
entered  into  theological  controversies  in  England,
and  in  1870  discusseil  polygamy  with  Dr.  John  P.
Newman  before  nearly  15.000  people  in  the  great
tabernacle  in  Salt  Lake  City.  These  discussions
were published in pamphlet-form  and  in  many

Ea{)ers  in  the  United  States.  His  mathematic
nowknlge  was  applied  in  his  discovery  of  the  *'  Law
of  Planetary  Rotation,"  showing  that  the  cubic
roots  of  the  densities  of  the  planets  are  as  the
square  roots  of  their  periods  of  rotation,  which  he
announcetl  in  November,  1854.  In  1845  he  wrote
and  puiilished  "The  Prophetic  Almanac."  which
he  calculated  for  the  latitude  and  meridian  of
Nauvoo  and  the  principal  cities  of  the  United
States.  His  publications  include  "  Divine  Authen-
ticity of  the  Book  of  Mormon  "  (0  parts) ;  "  Series
of  Pamphlets  on  Mormonism.  with  Two  Discus-
sions" (Liverpool,  1851);  "Patriarchal  Order,  or
Plurality  of  Wives "  (1853);  "Cubic  and  Bicjuad-
ratic  Equations "  (London,  18(>(i) :  "  Key  to  the
Universe"  (Liverpool,  1879);  "The  Great  First
Cause";  "The  Absunlities  of  Immaterialism ";
and  several  volumes  of  sermons.  Mr.  Pratt  left
in  manuscript  "  Lectures  on  Astronomy "  ami  a
treatise  on  "  Differential  Calculus."

PRATT,  Peter,  lawyer,  d.  in  New  London,
Conn.,  in  Noveml)er.  1730.  He  was  eminent  as  a
lawyer  and  publishe<l  "  The  Prey  tnken  from  the
Strong,  or  an  Historical  Acctmnt  of  the  Recovery
of  One  from  the  Dangerous  Errors  of  (Quakerism  "
(New  London.  1?25).

PRATT,  Phinehas,  pioneer,  b.  in  England  in
1590;  d.  in  Charlestown,  Mass..  19  April,  1(580.
He  came  to  Massachusetts  with  ('apt.  Thomas  Wes-
ton's colony  in  June,  1G22,  and  settled  at  Wessa-
guiiset,  afterward  called  Weymouth. On  the  fail-


'  lire  of  the  colony,  he  fled  from  the  place  in  Febru-
ary, 1623,  and  made  his  way  alone  through  the
forest,  pursued  by  Indians,  to  Plymouth,  tliirty
miles  (tistant.  lie  sul>se<|uently  resided  many
years  in  Plymouth  colony,  and  then  removed  to
Charlestown.  Ma.ss.  He  wrote  a  "  lX*claration  of
the  Affairs  of  the  English  Pecjple  that  First  inhab-
ited New  England,"  publishetl  in  the  "  Ma.ssachu-
setts  Historicjil  Collections"  (Boston,  1858).

PRATT,  Robert  M.,  artist,  b.  in  Binghamton.
N.  Y.,  in  1811;  d.  in  New  York  city.  31  Aug.,
1880.  He  studied  under  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse  and
Charles  C.  Ingham,  and  became  well  known  as  a
figure-  and  flower-painter.  Among  his  numerous
IM)rtraits  are  those  of  Aaron  D.  Shattuck  (1859)
and  George  H.  Smillie  (18(i5),  both  in  the  jmjsscs-
sion  of  the  Academy  of  design.  He  was  elected  an
associate  of  the  National  academy  in  1849,  and  an
academician  in  1851.

PRATT,  Samuel  Wheeler,  clergyman,  b.  in
Livonia,  Livingston  co.,  N.  Y.,  9  Sept.,  1838.  He
was  graduate<l  at  Williams  in  1860,  and  at  Auburn
theological  seminary  in  l8(Ki.  He  was  ordaine<l  a
minister  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  July,  18ffii,
and  preached  at  Brasher  Falls,  N.  Y.,  in  1863-'7 ;
at  Hammonton,  N.  J.,  in  1867-'71  ;  at  Pratts-
burg,  N.  Y.,  in  1872-'7 ;  and  at  Campbell.  N.  Y.,
in  1877-'83.  He  is  now  (1888)  stationed  at  Monroe,
Mich.  He  has  written  much  for  the  {K'riodical
press,  published  historical  discourses,  and  is  author
of  "  A  Summer  at  Peace  Cottage,  or  Talks  on
Home  Life"  (New  York,  1880),  and  "The  Gospel
of  the  Holv  Soirit  "  (1888).

PRATT,  Tnomas  Georare,  governor  of  Mary-
land, b.  in  Georgetown,  I).  C.,  18  Feb.,  1804 ;  d.  In
Baltimore,  Md.,  9  Nov..  1869.  He  was  educated  in
his  native  place,  studied  law,  and  in  1823  removed
to  Upper  Marlborough,  Md.,  where  he  engaged  in
practice.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1832-  5,  and
in  1837  was  chosen  president  of  the  last  executive
council  that  was  held  under  the  state  constitution
of  1776.  In  1838-'42  he  was  in  the  state  senate,
and  in  1844  he  was  the  Whig  candidate  for  gover-
nor on  a  platform  that  opjKJsed  the  repudiation  of
the  state  debt.  He  was  successful  after  one  of  the
fiercest  political  contests  that  was  ever  waged  in
Maryland,  and  during  his  term  the  finances  of  the
state  were  placed  on  a  solid  ba.>;is.  On  the  expira-
tion of  his  service  he  practised  his  profession  in
Annapolis  till  1849,  when  he  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  in  place  of  Reverdy  Johnson,  who  had
resigne<l  on  being  apfMinted  attorney-general.  He
was  re-elected,  and  held  his  seat  from  14  Jan.,  1850,
till  3  March,  1857.  During  his  term  he  l)eaime  an
intimate  friend  of  Daniel  Weltster,  and  he  often
entertained  Wel>ster  and  Henry  Clay  at  his  home
in  Annapolis.  Subsequently  he  remove<l  to  Balti-
more. At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  Gov.
Pratt  was  a  strong  advocate  of  secession,  and  was
confineil  for  a  few  weeks  in  Fort  Monn»e.  Va.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  conven-
tion at  Chicago  in  18(>4.  and  to  the  Philadelphia
Union  convention  of  18(>6.

PRATT,  Zadock,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Stephens-
town.  Rensselaer  co..  N.  Y.,  iH)  Oct..  1790;  d.  in
Bergen,  N.  J.,  6  April,  1871.  His  father,  of  the
same  name,  had  served  in  the  Rev«>lutionary  army,
and  was  a  tanner  and  sh(K>maker.  The  son  was
employed  in  his  father's  tan-yard,  and,  while  he
was  a\K)y,  invente<l  an  impn)ved  pump  for  raising
liquid  from  the  vats,  which  is  still  in  use.  He  was
apprenticed  to  a  saddler  in  1810,  U'gan  business  on
his  own  account  a  year  later,  and  in  1815  forme<l  a
partnership  with  his  brothers  in  the  tanning  busi-
ness, in  which  he  was  very  successful. In  1824  he


104


PRAY


PREBLE


built  whnt  he  intended  to  be  the  largest  tannery  in
the  world,  around  which  grew  the  jtresent  town  of
Prattsville,  X.  Y.  Ik'  was  also  iiiUTi'stod  in  eleven
similar  establishments.  In  18137  he  received  from
the  New  York  institute  the  first  silver  medal  that
was  ever  awanknl  for  heml<K'k  sole-leather.  He
was  el(H'ted  to  congresiis  a.s  a  Democrat  in  18136  and
in  1843,  servinjf  one  term  each  time.  During  his
congressional  career  he  was  active  in  his  efforts  for
the  ri'duction  of  postage,  estai)lished  the  National
bureau  of  statistics,  and  as  one  of  the  committee  on
public  buildings  advocated  the  usp  of  granite  or
marble  in  their  construction,  instead  of  saiulstone.
The  post-otTlce  buildings  in  Washington  were
erected  according  to  his  plans.  He  was  also  one  of
the  earliest  advocates  of  a  Pacific  railroad,  and  in
1845  offered  a  resolution  for  the  distribution  of  en-
gmvings  of  patent  devices  through  the  country  for
the  IxMiefit  of  mechanics  and  the  stimulation  of  in-
vention. In  18;3(j  and  1852  he  was  a  presidential
elector.  He  founded  a  bank  in  Prattsville,  and
contributed  largely  toward  the  growth  of  that  town.
He  was  a  colonel  of  militia  in  1828,  and  was  gen-
erally known  bv  his  title.— His  sou,  (ieorge  nat-
80n,"soldier,  i).  in  Prattsville.  N.  Y.,  18  April,  18:30;
d.  near  Manassjvs,  Va.,  21  July,  18()1,  was  educated
in  Poughkeepsie,  X.  Y.,  and  in  Europe,  receiving
the  degree  of  Pii.  I),  at  the  University  of  Erlangen,
Bavaria.  He  engaged  in  business,  took  an  active
interest  in  politics,  and  served  in  the  state  senate.
At  the  Ix'ginning  of  the  civil  war  he  became  colo-
nel of  the  20th  New  York  regiment,  and  at  the
time  of  his  death,  at  the  battle  of  Hull  Run,  he  was
acting  brigadier-general.  Col.  Pratt  was  the  au-
thor of  an  elaborate  review  of  Gen.  George  13.
McClellan's  report  on  the  Crimean  war.

PRAY,  Isaac  Clark,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  15  May,  1813 ;  d.  in  New  York  city.  28  Nov.,
1869.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Boston  merchant,  and
was  educated  at  Harvard  and  Amherst,  where  he
was  gra<luated  in  18:33.  He  edited  the  Boston
"  Pe^rl "'  in  1834,  and  the  Boston  "  Daily  Herald  "
in  1835-'7,  and  was  also  connected  with  the  '"Jour-
nal of  Commerce  "  in  New  York.  In  1836  he  be-
came manager  of  the  National  theatre  in  the  latter
city,  where  he  produced  his  original  tragedy  of
"  Giulietta  Gordoni  "  (1836),  and  he  also  m-oduced
at  the  Park  theatre  a  farce  entitled  "The  Old
Clock,  or  Here  She  Goes  and  There  She  Goes,"
dramatized  from  his  story  written  for  the  "Sunday
Morning  News,"  of  which  he  was  the  editor.  He
was  also  editor  of  the  "  Dramatic  Guardian  "  and
the  "  Ladies'  Companion."  He  was  in  England  in
1846-'7  and  acted  the  parts  of  Hamlet,  Othello,  Sir
Giles  Overreach,  and  otlier  characters,  at  the  Queen's
theatre,  London,  and  at  the  Royal  theatres  in  Liver-
pool and  (.'ork.  In  1850  he  was  engaged  on  the
editorial  staff  of  the  New  York  "  Herald "  as
musical  and  dramatic  critic,  and  subsequently  he
became  a  theatrical  manager,  and  translated  and
wrote  several  plavs,  including  "  Paetus  Coecinna"
(1847)  and  "  The  Hermit  of  Malta  "  (1856).  He
was  the  author  of  "  Prose  and  Verse "  (Boston,
1835);  "Poems"  (1837):  "Book  of  the  Drama"
(New  York.  1851);  "Memoirs  of  James  Gordon
Bennett"  (1855);  and  numerous  contributions  to
magazines  and  reviews.

PRAY,  Lewis  Glover,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Quincy,  Mass.,  15  Aug.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,
7  Oct.,  1882.  He  received  a  common-school  educa-
tion and  went  to  Boston  in  1807,  where  he  became
a  shoe-dealer  in  1815.  He  was  a  member  of  the
primary-school  committee  in  1823,  its  secretary  in
1834-'5,  and  organized  a  model  school,  but  resigned
in  1842. He  was  a  member  of  the  common  council


in  1827-'8.  and  served  in  the  legislature  in  1833  and
1840.  Mr.  Pray  retired  from  business  in  18:38,  and
removed  to  Roxbury  in  1853.  He  was  connected
with  the  principal  charitable,  religious,  and  tem-
jwrance  societies  in  Boston  and  Roxburv.  and  pub-
lished "  Boston  Sunday-School  Hvmn-lWk"  (Bos-
ton. 18:3:3);  "The  Chikl's  First  Book  of  Thought"
(18:39);  "History  of  Sundav-Schools  and  of  Relig-
ious Education  from  the  tiarliest  Times"  (1847);
"  The  Svlphid's  Sch<x)l  and  Other  Pieces  in  Verse  "
(1862);  "and  "Historical  Sketch  of  the  Twelfth
Congregational  Society  in  Boston"  (1863).

PRAY,  Piibliiis  Kntlling  Rufiis,  jurist,  b.  in
Maine  in  1795;  d.  in  Pearlington,  Miss.,  11  Jan.,
1840.  He  removed  to  the  south,  practised  law  in
Hancock  county.  Miss.,  served  in  the  legislature  in
1828,  and  was  president  of  the  convention  that
adopted  the  revised  constitution  of  1832.  In  1833
he  was  appointed  by  the  legislature  to  revise  the
laws  of  the  state,  which  work  he  completed  after
great  labor.  Prom  November,  1887,  till  his  death
he  was  judge  of  the  high  court  of  errors  and  aj>-
peals.  He  published  "  Revised  Statutes  of  the
State  of  Mississippi  "  (Jackson,  1836).

PREBLE,  Jedediah,  soldier,  b.  in  Wells,  Me.,
in  1707;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  11  March,  1784.  He
began  life  as  a  sailor,  and  in  1746  became  captain
in  a  provincial  regiment,  settling  in  Portland  about
1748.  He  was  a  lieutenant-colonel  under  Gen.  John
Winslow  in  Acadia  in  1755,  became  colonel,  13
March,  1758.  and  brigadier-general,  12  March,  1759.
He  was  for  twelve' years  a  representative  in  the
general  court,  and  became  a  councillor  in  1773.  On
27  Oct.,  1774,  he  was  commissioned  brigadier-gen-
eral by  the  Provincial  congress  of  Massachusetts,
and  he  was  afterward  made  major-general,  but  re-
fused on  account  of  age.  Gen.  Preble  was  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in  1778,  and  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  senate  in  1780. — His  son,  Edward,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,  15  Aug.,  1761 ;  d.
there,  25  Aug.,  1807.  When  he  was  seventeen  years
old  he  ran  away
and  shipped  in
a  privateer,  and
on  his  return
was  appointed
midshmman  in
the  Massachu-
setts state  ma-
rine, participat-
ing in  the  "Pro-
tector" in  a  gal-
lant  attack  on
the  British  pri-
vateer "Admi-
ral Duff,"  which
took  fire  and
blew  up.  In
1779  he  was
captured  in
the  "  Protec-
tor" and sent

to  the  "  Jersey  "  prison-ship  in  New  York.  After
his  release  he  served  in  tne  state  cruiser  "Win-
throp,"  and  took  a  British  armed  brig.  After  the
peace  of  1783  he  cruised  around  the  world  in  the
merchant  marine.  Upon  the  organization  of  the
navy  he  was  one  of  the  first  five  that  were  commis-
sioned as  lieutenants,  9  Feb.,  1798,  served  as  acting
captain  of  the  brig  "  Pickering,"  and  was  commis-
sioned captain,  15  May,  1799,  commanding  the
"  Essex  "  on  a  cruise  to  China,  whence  he  convoyed  a
fleet  of  fourteen  merchantmen,  valued  at  many  mill-
ions. He  married  Mary  Deering  in  1^01.  In  May,
1803,  he  commanded  the  "  Constitution."  and  the


C't>^u^a/rd  ty-^^2^e'^'€e^


PREBLE


PREBLR


106


8(iUH(ln>n  to  oiKTute  afn^inst  the  Barlmrv  states,
with  the  "  Philailolphia,"  C'apt.  Baiiibrufcre :  the
"Argus,"  under  Lieut.  Iltill ;  the  "Siren,  Lieut.
Stewart;  the  "Enterprise."  Lieut.  Deeaturjthe
"  Nautihis,"  Lieut.  Somers ;  an<l  the  "  Vixen,"  Lieut.
Smith.  On  6  Oct.,  1H(XJ.  the  fleet  arrive«l  off  Tan-
jfiers,  where,  by  display  of  force  and  Ann  demands,
ne  com|)elie«l  the  sultan  of  Mohk-co  to  renew  the
treaty  of  17H6.  The  "  PhilH<lelphia"  was  sent  to
blo<-ka<le  Tripoli,  and.  while  <'hasinjj  Tri|Hilitan  j;un-
boats,  ran  f>n  a  reef  and  was  captured,  after  the  >funs
had  l)een  thrown  ovcrUmnl  iti  vain  efforts  to  float
the  shin.  Subsetjuently  the  Trijujlitans  removed
her  to  tne  inner  harltor  Preble  arrived  off  Trijx)Ii.
17  Dec,  180y.  reconnoitred  the  harljor,  received
letters  from  Bainbridge  in  prison,  and  matured  a
plan  for  the  destruction  of  the  "  Philadelphia  "  that
nad  been  suggested  by  Bainbridge.  He  sailed  to
Syracuse,  whore  he  detailed  Decatur  with  volun-
teers in  the  cjii)turetl  Tripolitan  ketch  re-named
"Intrepid,"  to  destroy  the  "  Phila<lolphia."  Deca-
tur {q,  r.) accomplished  the  feat  and  rejoined  Preble
at  Syracuse,  19  Feb.,  1804.  Preble  cruised  along
the  fiarbary  coast,  blockade<l  Tripoli,  and  collected
a  force  of  .small  vessels,  until  25  July,  1804,  when
he  arrived  off  Trijx)li  with  a  frigate,  three  brigs,
three  sch«x>ners,  two  bomb-vessels,  and  six  gun-
boats. The  town  was  defended  by  forts  with  45,-
000  Arabs,  l)esides  two  schooners,  a  brig,  and  nine-
teen gun-lwats.  Preble  conducted  six  spirited
attacks,  in  which  three  Tripolitan  vessels  were  cap-
tured and  three  were  sunk.  The  pacha  sued  for
peace,  offering  to  waive  all  claim  for  future  tribute,
and  reduce  the  ransom  of  American  prisoners  from
$1,000  to  |500  each.  Preble  insisted  on  equal  ex-
change, and  continued  operations.  The  relief
squadron  arrived  on  10  Sept.,  1804.  under  Com.
Barron,  Preble's  senior,  and  the  latter,  being  re-
lieved, sailed  home  after  settling  negotiations  with
Italian  authorities  for  the  vessels  and  supplies  that
had  been  furnished.  Preble's  strict  discipline,  pru-
dent and  energetic  measures,  and  perseverance  are
demonstrated  by  the  details  of  this  series  of  the
most  gallant  attacks  that  are  recorded  in  naval
history.  No  gun  was  fired  against  Tripoli  after  he
left.  His  or)erations  resulted  in  the  peace  signed
8  June,  1805,  bv  which  the  tribute  that  European
nations  had  paid  for  centuries,  and  the  slavery  of
Christian  captives,  were  abolished.  His  officers
wrote  a  letter  expressing  their  esteem  and  affection,
he  was  given  an  enthusia.stic  welcome  on  his  return,
and  congress  gave  him  a  vote  of  thanks  and  an
emblematical  gold  medal.  He  was  the  first  officer
to  receive  a  vote  of  thanks  after  the  adoption  of
the  constitution.  In  180<5  Jefferson  offered  him  a
seat  in  the  cabinet  as  the  head  of  the  navy  depart-
ment, but  feeble  health  prevented  his  acceptance  :
he  returned  to  Portland,  where  hedie<l  of  consump-
tion.—Ekiward's  nephew,  (jeorge  Henry,  naval
officer,  b.  in  Portland,  Me..  25  Feb.,  181«5:  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  1  March,  1885.  entered  the  navy  as
midshipman,  10  Oct.,  18;i5.  cruised  in  the  Mediter-
ranean in  the  frigate  "  United  States"  in  183(>-'8,
l)ecame  iwissed  midshipman  22  June,  1841,  served
in  the  Florida  war  in  1841-'2,  and  circumnavigated
the  world  in  the  "  St.  Louis  "  in  184S-'5,  when  he
took  ashore  the  first  American  force  that  landed
in  China.  In  the  Mexican  war,  in  184ft-'7,  he  par-
ticipated in  the  capture  of  Alvarado,  Vera  Cruz,
and  Tuxpan.  He  became  a  master.  15  July,  1847,
and  lieutenant.  5  Feb..  1848,  8erve<l  in  the  frigate
"St.  liawrence  "  in  1853-'6,  took  g<iods  to  the  Ijon-
don  exhibition,  joined  Com.  Matthew  C.  Perrv's
expetlition  to  China,  and  fought  Chinese  pirates,  for
which  the  English  authorities  gave  him  their  thanks.


He  Biirveyed  the  harlMirs  of  Keelung.  Formosa,
Jeddo.  and  HakiKladi.  Japan,  and  prepare<l  sailing
directions  for  Siipjapore,  which  wen-  published  ex-
tensively. In  185(1-7  he  was  light-house  instx'ctor,
in  1857-'9  he  served  at  the  navy-yard  at  Charles-
town,  Ma.ss.,  and  in  1851>-'fll  he  was  executive  of
the  steamer  "  Narragansett "  in  the  Pacific.  In
January.  1802,  he  took  command  of  the  steamer
"  Katahdin,"  in  which  he  participated  under  P'arra-
gut  in  the  capture  of  New  Orleans,  and  substHpient
oiH'rations  in  the  Mississii»pi  and  (Jrand  gulf.  He
was  commissioned  commander.  10  July,  1802.  For
failure  to  capture  the  Confederate  cruis<>r  "  Florida"
on  the  blockade  he  was  summarily  dismisse<l  the
navy,  but  the  captain  of  the  "'Florida"  testified
that  his  su[>erior  8()eed  alone  saved  him,  and  the
dismissal  was  revoked,  he  was  restored  to  his  rank,
and  given  command  of  the  "  St.  Louis."  which  he
joined  at  Lisl)on,  cruising  after  Confederate  rf)vers.
riie  "  Florida  "  again  escaped  him  at  Madeira  while
he  was  becalmed.  He  next  commanded  the  fleet
brigade  from  24  Nov.,  1804,  till  April,  1805,  and
co-operated  with  Gen.  William  T.  Snerman.  With
the  steamer  "  State  of  Georgia,"  in  1805,  he  rescued
six  hundred  passengers  from  the  wreckwl  steamer
"Golden  Rule,"  near  Aspinwall.  He  became  cap-
tain on  10  March,  1807,  was  at  the  Boston  navv-
yard  in  1805-'8,  and  served  as  chief  of  staff  and  in
command  of  the  flag-ship  "  Pensacola"  in  1808-'70
in  the  Paciflc.  After  being  commissioned  commo-
dore, 2  Nov.,  1871.  he  was  commandant  of  the  navy-
yard  at  Philadelphia  in  1873-'5,  was  promoted  to
rear-admiral.  30  Sept.,  1870,  and  on  25  Feb.,  1878,
was  retired  by  law,  being  sixty-two  years  old.  Ad-
miral Preble  constantly  contributed  to  the  profes-
sional periodical  press,  and  was  a  member  of  vari-
ous historical  societies.  A  collection  of  navy
registers,  naval  tracts,  and  other  works  from  his
library  constitute  the  rarest  sets  of  U.  S.  naval
publications  in  existence.  They  are  now  in  the
navy  department,  serving  in  many  cases  to  supply
information  for  the  biographies  of  naval  ofllicers
that  is  not  otherwise  obtainable.  His  writings,
many  of  which  were  printe<l  privately  and  in  small
editions,  include  "  Cna.se  of  the  Rebel  Steamer  of
War  'Oreto'"  (Cambridge,  1802):  "The  Preble
Family  in  America"  (Boston.  1808);  "  First  Cruise
of  the'U.  S.  Frigate  '  Essex ' "  (Salem,  1870) ;  "  His-
tory of  the  American  Flaj?"  (Albany,  1872);  and
"  riistory  of  Steam  Navigation "  (Philadelphia,
1883).— Jedidiah's  granddaughter,  Harriet,  trans-
lator, b.  in  Lewes,  England,  in  1795;  d.  in  West
Manchester,  near  IMttsburg,  Pa.,  4  Feb.,  1854,  was
the  daughter  of  Henry  Preble,  who  l)ecame  a  mer-
chant in  Paris,  France.  She  was  e<lucated  at  the
school  of  Madame  Campan  in  St.Germain-en-Laye,
came  to  the  United  States  with  her  mother  in  1830,
and  in  1832  established  a  school  in  Pittsburg,  which
feeble  health  compelle<l  her  to  alHindon  in  1830,
She  published  translations  into  French  prose  of
Bulwer's  poem  "The  Rebel,"  with  an  historical  in-
troduction (Paris,  1827),  and  of  James  Fonimore
Cooper's  "  Notions  of  the  Americans  "  (4  vols.,  1828),
and  left  several  works  in  manusc-ript.  See  "  Me-
moir of  Harriet  Preble,  containing  Portions  of  her
Correspondence.  Journal,  and  other  Writings,"  by
Prof.  Richard  H.  Lee  (New  York,  1850).

PREBLE,  WilUani  Pitt,  jurist,  b.  in  York,
Me.,  27  Nov.,  178;i :  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  11  Oct..
1857.  He  was  gnwluated  at  Harvard  in  1800,  and
was  tutor  in  mathematics  there  in  1809-'ll.  In
1813  he  was  apjK>inted  U.  S.  district  attorney  and
Ix^came  a  leader  of  the  Democratic  party.  In  1818
he  removetl  to  Portland,  which  he  represented  in
the  State  coDstitutionai  convention  of  1810,  and


106


PRftFONTAINE


PRENTISS


WRs  one  of  its  most  influential  members.  On  the
inauguration  of  the  new  state  government  of  1820
he  was  ap]>ointc(l  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court.
In  1829  he  was  made  U.  S.  minister  to  the  Nether-
lands, and  he  subsefjuently  held  other  public  ofTices.
He  was  the  first  president  of  the  Atlantic  and  St.
Lawrence  railroau  company  in  1847,  and  publislied
pamphlets  relating  to  this  corjx)ration  (lK45-'7).
liowdoin  gave  him  the  degree  of  LIj.  I),  in  1829.

PKftFONTAINE,  Ayiiiery,  Chevalier dc  (pray-
fon-tane).  French  8<ildier,  b.  in  Coutances  in  1720;
d.  in  Cayenne  in  1767.  He  entered  the  army  very
early,  and  served  all  his  life  in  the  French  posses-
sions of  South  America,  holding  the  post  of  police
lieutenantof  Cayenne  from  1759  till  his  death.  He
contributed  much  to  the  imj)rovement  of  the  col-
ony, promoted  emigration,  and  presented  several
papers  to  the  king's  councils  in  advocation  of  the
scheme  of  "  France  eouiuoxiaie."  He  published
several  works,  incluuing  "  Maison  rustique  h
I'usage  des  habitants  de  la  partie  de  la  Ji  ranee
equinoxiale  connue  sous  le  nom  de  Cayenne "
(Paris,  17&3).  to  which  is  prefixed  a  dictionary  of
the  (talibi  dialect  and  a  grammatical  essay,  which
was  afterward  reprinted  by  Lesueur.  and  is  yet  con-
sidered as  one  of  the  Ixjst  treatises  on  the  language
of  the  (luiana  Indians.

FRENCE,  or  PRINCE,  Thomas,  governor  of
Plvmouth  colony,  b.  in  England  in  1001  ;  d.  in
Plvmouth,  Mass..  29  March,  1678.  He  sailed  for
this  country  on  the  "  Mayflower,"  and  was  a  signer
of  the  first  coiuiMKt  that  was  drawn  up  by  the  pas-
sengers of  the  vessel  before  their  landing,  under
date  of  11  Nov.,  1620.  He  was  one  of  the  first
settlers  of  Nansett,  or  Eastham,  was  chosen  gover-
nor of  Plymouth  colony  in  16;M,  serving  until  1688,
and  again  from  16.57  till  1678,  and  was  an  assistant
in  l()8.')-'7  and  l(i89-'57.  He  was  an  impartial
magistrate,  was  distinguished  for  his  religious
zeal,  and  opposed  those  that  he  believed  to  be
heretics,  particularly  the  Quakers.  In  opposition
to  the  clamors  of  the  ignorant  he  procured  revenue
for  the  support  of  grammar-schools  in  the  colony.
Gov.  Prence  gave  to  Wamsutta  and  Pometacom.
the  sons  of  Massasoit,  the  names  of  Alexander  and
Philif)  as  a  compliment  to  their  warlike  character.
PRENTICE,  Oeorge  Denison,  journalist,  b.
in  Preston,  Coim.,  18  Dec,  1802 ;  d.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  22  Jan.,  1870.  Before  the  age  of  fifteen  he
was  principal  of  a  public  school.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1828,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar
in  1829,  but  never
practised  his  pro-
le-ssion.  In  1825
he  was  the  editor
of  the  "  Connecti-
cut Mirror,"  and
in  1828  he  took
charge  of  the  "New
England  Weekly
Review,"  which  he
conducted  for  two
years,  and  then  re-
moved to  Louis-
ville, Ky.  In  1831
he  became  editor
of  the  Louisville
"  Journal."  a  daily
paper,  which  he
made  the  principal  advocate  of  the  Whig  party
in  that  region,  and  won  a  reputation  for  political
ability,  wit,  and  satire.  In  1860  he  sustained  the
Union  party,  but  although  maintaining  its  cause
during  the  civil  war  he  was  not  a  zealous  sup-


'U^-^'Tr^l^-eyvCtz^CjO'


porter  of  President  Lincoln's  administration.  He
resigned  his  oflflce,  but  contributed  to  this  journal
until  its  consolidation  with  the  "  Courier  under
the  name  of  the  "Courier  Journal."  He  also  fur-
nished a  column  of  wit  and  humor  \a)  the  "  New
York  Ledger  "  for  several  years.  He  wrote  numer-
ous poems,  which  have  been  collected  in  book-form
and  publishetl,  with  a  biography,  by  John  James
Piatt  (Cincinnati,  1875).  Mr.  Prentice  was  the
author  of  a  "  Life  of  Henry  Clay  "  (Hartford,  1831).
A  selec'tion  of  his  writings  was  published  under
the  title  of  "  Prenticeana ;  or.  Wit  and  Humor  "
(New  York,  1859;  2d  ed.,  with  biographical
sketch  by  Gilderoy  W.  Griffin,  Philadelphia,  1870).
See  also  a  "  Memorial  Address  "  by  his  successor,
Ilenrv  Watterson  (Cincinnati,  1870).

PRENTISS,  Benjamin  Muyberry,  soldier,  b.
in  Belleville,  Wood  co.,  Va.,  28  Nov.,  1819.  He
removed  with  his  parents  to  Missouri  in  1835,  and
in  1841  settled  in  Quincy,  111.,  where  he  learned
rope-making,  and  subsequently  engaged  in  the
commission  business.  In  1844-'5  he  was  1st  lieu-
tenant of  a  company  that  was  sent  against  the
Mormons  in  Hancock.  111.  He  served  in  the  Mexi-
can war  as  captain  of  volunteers,  and  on  his  re-
turn was  an  unsuccessful  Republican  candidate  for
congress  in  1860.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war he reorganized his  old  company, was  ap-

Eointed  colonel  of  the  7th  Illinois  regiment,  and
ecame  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  17  May,
1861  He  was  placed  in  command  of  Cairo,  after-
ward served  in  southern  Missouri,  routed  a  large
body  of  Confederates  at  Mount  Zion  on  28  Dec,
1861,  and  joined  Gen.  Grant  three  days  before  the
battle  of  Shiloh,  on  the  first  day  of  which  he  was
taken  prisoner  with  most  of  his  command.  He
was  released  in  October,  1862,  and  appointed  ma-
jor-general of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.  He  was  a
member  of  the  court-martial  that  tried  Gen.  Fitz-
John  Porter  (q.  r.).  He  commanded  at  the  post  of
Helena,  Ark.,  and  on  3  July,  1863,  defeated  Gen.
Theophilus  H.  Holmes  and  Gen.  Sterling  Price,
who  attacked  him  there.  Gen.  Prentiss  resigned
his  commission  on  28  Oct.,  1863.

PRENTISS,  Charles,  editor,  b.  in  Reading,
Mass.,  8  Oct.,  1774;  d.  in  Brimfield,  Mass.,  20  Oct.,
1820.  His  father,  Caleb,  was  pastor  of  a  church  in
Reading.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1795,  and  in  that  year  became  editor  of  the
"  Rural  Repository,"  a  short-lived  weekly  journal,
at  Leominster,  Mass.  Subsequently  he  edited  "  The
Political  Focus,"  which  was  afterward  called  the
"  Washington  Federalist,"  in  Georgetown,  D.  G.,
the  "  Anti- Democrat,"  and  a  literary  paper  called
"  The  Child  of  Pallas  "  in  Baltimore.  In  1804  he
visited  England,  in  1809  he  published  "The
Thistle,"  a  theatrical  paper  of  brief  duration,  and
after  1810  he  reported  the  congressional  proceed-
ings in  Washington,  where  he  edited  "  The  Inde-
pendent American."  He  was  the  author  of  "A
Collection  of  Fugitive  Essays  in  Prose  and  Verse  "
(Leominster,  1797) ;  "  Life  of  Robert  Treat  Paine  "
(Boston,  1812);  "Life  of  Gen.  William  Eaton,"
printed  anopvmouslv  (Brookfield.  1813) ;  "Poems"
(1813);  a  "  History  o'f  the  United  States";  and  the
"Trial  of  Calvin  and  Hopkins"  (1819).

PRENTISS,  George  Aldrich,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Keene,  N.  H..  in  1809 ;  d.  near  Charleston,  S.  C,
8  April,  1868.  His  father,  John  (1777-1873),  served
in  the  New  Hampshire  legislature,  established  the
"  New  Hampshire  Sentinel,"  which  he  conducted
for  forty-nine  years,  and  at  his  death  was  the  oldest
editor  in  New  England.  The  son  entered  the  U.  S.
navy  as  midshipman  on  1  March,  1825,  was  on  duty
at  the  Portsmouth  navy-yard.  served*iu  the  sloop-


PRENTISS


PRENTISS


107


in


of-war  "Ijexinpton"  in  1827,  imd.  after  a  three-
years'  cruise,  rcturiKHl  to  this  country,  lie  v/u»
on  the  sl«K>j)-of-war  "  lioston  "  in  the  Weditermnean.
was  nroinoted  lieutenant  on  9  Fell.,  lKi7,  and  was
attaened  to  the  reeeivinjf-ship  "Ohio"  at  lioston.
Mass.,  in  IS-iH.  On  14  Sept.,  184.5,  he  iKKranic  com-
niaiider,  and  un  Kt  July,  18(K),  he  was  made  coin-
in<Hl()n»  on  the  retin*d  list,

PRENTISS,  Samuel,  jihysician,  b.  in  Ston
ton.  Conn.,  in  175}»;  d.  m  Northfleld,  Muss.
1818.  He  was  the  s<m  of  Col.  Samuel  l'renti.ss,
who  served  in  the  Revolutionary  war.  After  re-
ceiving; a  ^ood  education,  he  studied  medicine,  and
entered  the  Revolutionary  army  as  assistant  sur-
geon. After  the  war  he  went  to  Worcester,  Ma.ss.,
and  afterward  to  Northfleld,  where  he  gained  a
large  practice,  and  for  many  years  was  the  princi-
pal operator  in  the  vicinity.  He  was  ma<le  a  fel-
low of  the  Massjichusetts  medical  stK-iety  in  1810.
— His  s<m,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Stonington,  Conn.,
31  March,  1783;  d.  in  Montpelier,  Vt.,  15  Jan.,
1857,  studietl  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1802,
and  began  to  practise  in  Montpelier  in  180!^,  soon
acquiring  a  reputation  for  eloquence  and  integrity.
He  served  in  the  legislature  in  1824-'5,  and  in  1829
was  elected  chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of
V'ermont.  He  was  then  chosen  to  tne  U.  S.  senate
as  a  Whig,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1831,  till  11  April,
1842,  when  he  resigned.  During  his  term  he  ef-
fected the  passage  of  a  bill  against  duelling  in  the
District  of  Columbia.  In  1842  he  was  appointed
judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  of  Vermont,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death. — Another  son,  John
Holmes,  journalist,  b.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  17
April,  1784:  d.  in  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  26  June,
1861.  learned  the  printer's  trade,  and,  settling  in
Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  established  there,  in  1808,
"The  F'reeman's  Journal,"  which  he  conducted
until  1849.  He  was  elected  a  representative  to
congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  4  Sept.,
1837,  till  3  March,  1841. — The  second  Samuel's  son,
Theodore,  lawyer,  b.  in  Montpelier,  Vt.,  10  Sept.,
1815,  entered  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1838,
but,  owing  to  impaired  health,  left  in  the  same
year,  and  travelled  in  the  south.  He  studied  law
under  his  father,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1844,
and  in  1845  removed  to  Watertown,  Wis.  He  was
a  member  of  the  convention  of  1846,  acting  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  the  acts  of  congress
for  the  admission  of  the  state,  and  reported  the
article  upon  that  subject,  which,  after  a  single
amendment  that  he  suggested,  was  mlopted.  He
was  also  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention of  1847-'8.  Mr.  Prentiss  served  in  the
Wisconsin  legislature,  and  was  three  times  elected
raavor  of  Watertown.

PRENTISS,  Sergeant  Smith,  orator,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  30  Sept.,  1808;  d.  at  Longwood,
near  Natchez,  Miss.,  1  July,  1850.  In  his  Inivhood
he  was  remarkable  for  his  mental  sprightliness,
and  for  the  keen  appetite  with  which  he  devoure(l
all  the  books  on  which  he  could  lav  his  hand.  He
was  a  cripple  all  his  life,  and  could  walk  until  his
ninth  year  only  with  crutches;  but  afterward  he
required  but  a  cane.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  en-
tered the  junior  class  of  Bowdoin,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1826.  In  1827  he  went  to  Natchez,
Miss.,  in  the  vicinity  of  which  he  taught  in  a  pri-
vate family,  and  read  law.  In  1829  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  l)ar,  and  removed  to  V^icksburg.
where  he  rose  to  the  front  rank  in  reputation  and
the  extent  of  his  practice.  In  1835  Mr.  Prentiss
was  elected  as  a  representative  to  the  legislature  of
Mississippi,  in  which  he  made  several  speechets  that
were  remarkable  for  wit,  sarcasm,  and  argumenta-


^<^.<^  c::^i^2^i^


tive  power.  In  1837  he  wa»  ele<!ted  to  the  lower
house  of  congress,  and,  finding  his  seat  precK-cu-
pied  by  Col.  Claibionte,  the  Dt-mocratic  candidate
at  the  election,  he  vindicated  his  claim  in  a  speech
nearly  three  days  long,  which  established  his  repu-
tation as  one  of  the
ablest  (larliameiitary
orators  in  the  coun-
try. His  claim  hav-
ing been  rejected  by
the  casting  vote  of
the  speaker,  James
K.  Polk,  he  went
back  to  Mississippi,
and  after  a  vigorous
canvass  of  the  state
was  again  elected
bv  a  large  majority,
ilis  principal  sj)eech
at  this  session  was
made  against  the
sub-treasury  bill.  In
1838  he  visited  his
nativecity,and  while
there  accepted  an  invitation  to  attend  the  public
dinner  to  be  given  in  July  to  Daniel  Webster  in
Faneuil  hall.  His  speech  on  this  occasion  was  de-
clared many  years  afterward  by  Edward  Everett
to  have  been  "  the  most  wonderful  siwH-imen  of  a
sententious  fluency  which  I  have  ever  witnessetl."
Mr.  Webster,  when  asked  b^  Mr.  Everett  if  he  had
ever  heard  anything  like  it,  replied,  "  Never,  ex-
cept from  Mr."  Prentiss  himself.  In  1839.  on  his
way  home  from  Washington,  he  stayed  a  week  in
Kentucky,  and  defended  his  friend.  Judge  Wilkin-
son, who  had  been  charged  with  murder,  in  a  speech
that  was  a  masterpiece  of  forensic  eloquence.  In
1840 he  canvasse<l  the  state  of  Mississippi  as  can-
didate for  presidential  elector,  making  a  series  of
speeches  that  severely  taxed  his  physical  strength.
During  the  next  four  years  he  delivered  many
speeches,  marked  by  extraordinary  energy  and  ele-
vation of  tone,  against  the  repudiation  by  that
state  of  its  bonded  debt.  In  1845.  regarding  the
state  as  "disgraced  and  degraded"  bv  that  act,  he
began  the  study  of  the  civil  law.  and  removed  to
New  Orleans,  La.,  where,  in  1850,  a  fatal  disease
closed  his  brilliant  and  brief  career.  As  an  orator
Mr.  Prentiss  had  a  gift  akin  to  that  of  the  Italian
improvisatore.  When  addressing  a  large  assem-
blage of  men,  he  experienced  an  electrical  excite-
ment, at  times  "  almost  maddening,"  and  he  seemed
to  himself  to  be  rather  spoken  from  than  speak-
ing. New  thoughts  came  rushing  into  his  mind
unbidden,  which  surprised  himself  as  much  as  his
hearers,  and  which,  he  said,  "  he  could  no  more  re-
produce when  the  excitement  was  over  than  he
could  make  a  world."  The  printed  reports  of  his
speeches  are  hardly  more  than  skeletons,  giving  lit-
tle idea  of  his  eloquence.  His  manner  of  sjieakinff
was  at  once  natural  and  dramatic,  and  he  combined
in  a  remarkable  degree  logical  power  with  intense
passion,  keen  wit.  pathos,  and  a  vivid  imagination.
At  the  bar  his  chief  characteristics  were  his  mas-
tery of  his  subject,  his  readiness,  adroitness,  fer-
tility of  resources,  and  absolute  command  of  all  his
mental  stores.  In  a  jury  trial,  to  give  him  the
concluding  address  was  nearly  equivalent  to  giving
him  the  verdict.  With  all' his  readiness  he  was
indefatigable  in  his  legal  studies,  ami  spared  no
lal>or  on  his  cases.  A  legal  acquaintance  who  knew
him  well  said  that  his  forte  was  Ix'st  seen  in  the
analysis  of  a  {Ktint  of  law.  or  the  discussion  of  a
constitutional  question.  "His  style  then  became
terse,  simple,  severe,  exhibiting  a  mental  discipline


108


PRRSCOTT


PRESCOTT


and  a  faculty  of  concentration  in  striking  contrast
with  tlio  natural  exulierance  of  his  fancy."  Mr.
Proiitiss  had  fiuo  social  (jualitios,  and  his  conversa-
tion snarklwl  with  the  shrewd  sense,  wit,  and  bril-
liant fancy  that  characterized  his  si)eeche.s.  See  a
memoir  by  his  brother,  Rev.  George  L.  Prentiss
(2  vols..  New  York,  IBST),  new  ed.,  1870).— His  broth-
er, Oeorxe  Lewis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Gorham.  Me.,
12  May,  IHIO.  after  graduation  at  Howdoin  in  1835.
was  a.ssistant  in  Gorham  academy  in  183G-'7,  and
studied  th»Milogy  at  Halle  and  IJerlin  universities
from  WW  tiir  1841.  He  l)ecame  pastor  of  the
South  Trinitarian  church,  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  in
April,  1845,  and  in  1851  was  made  pastor  of  the
Mercer  street  Presbyterian  church  in  New  York
city,  but  owing  to  impaired  health  he  resigned  and
travelled  in  Eurone.  On  his  return  he  established
the  "  Church  of  the  Covenant,"  New  York  city,  of
which  he  was  pastor  from  18G2  till  1873,  when  he
resigned  to  become  professor  of  pastoral  theology,
church  jjolity,  and  missionary  work  in  Union  theo-
logical seminary.  Bowdoin"  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  1854!  In  atldition  to  sermons,  address-
es, and  contributions  to  periodicals,  he  has  pub-
lished, l)esides  the  memoir  of  his  brother  men-
tioned above,  "  Discourse  in  Memorv  of  Thomas
Harvey  Skinner,  I).  I)..  LL.  D."  (1871).  and  "Life
and  Letters  of  J^lizabeth  Prentiss  "  (1882  ;  new  ed.,
1887).— George  Lewis's  wife,  EHzabeth  Pajrson,
author,  b.  in  Portland,  Me..  26  Oct.,  1818;  d.  in
Dorset,  Vt.,  13  Aug.,  1878,  was  a  daughter  of  the
Rev.  Edward  Payson  {q.  v.).  She  was  educated  in
Portland  and  Ipswich,  and  taught  in  Portland  and
Richmond  in  1840-'3.  In  1845  she  married  Mr.
Prentiss,  and  after  the  loss  of  her  two  children  de-
voted herself  to  writing.  She  was  the  author  of
numerous  books,  which  include  the  "  Little  Susy
Series"  (New  York,  1853-'6);  "  The  Flower  of  the
Familv  "  (1854) ;  "  Only  a  Dandelion,  and  Other
Stories"  (1854):  "Fred,  Maria,  and  Me"  (1868);
"  The  Percys  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Home  at  Greylock  "
(1876);  "  Peraaquid ;  a  Story  of  Old  Times  in  New
England  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Avis  Benson,  with  Other
Sketches "  (1879).  Her  chief  work,  "  Stepping
Heavenward."  which  was  first  published  in  the
"Chicago  Advance"  (1869),  has  been  translated
into  various  languages,  and  it  is  estimated  that
100.000  copies  have  been  sold.

PRESCOTT,  Albert  Benjamin,  chemist,  b.  in
Hastings,  N.  Y.,  12  Dec,  1832.  He  was  graduated
at  the  medical  department  of  the  University  of
Michigan  in  1864,  and  at  once  entered  the  iT.  S.
volunteer  service  as  assistant  surgeon,  with  charge
successively  of  hospitals  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  and  in
Jeffersonville,  Ind..  also  serving  as  a  member  of
the  medical  examining  board  in  Louisville,  Ky.  In
1865  he  returned  to  the  University  of  Michigan  as
assistant  professor  of  chemistry,  and  lecturer  on
organic  chemistry,  and  in  1870  was  made  professor
of  organic  and  applied  chemistry  and  of  pharmacy.
He  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  revision  of
the  "  U.  S.  Pharmacopoeia  "  in  1880.  Since  1876  he
has  served  as  dean  of  the  school  of  pharmacy,  and
since  1884  as  director  of  the  chemical  laboratory  in
the  same  university.  Prof.  Prescott  is  a  member  of
many  scientific  societies,  and  was  elected  in  1876  a
fellow  of  the  London  chemical  society,  in  1886  presi-
dent of  the  American  chemical  society,  and  in  the
same  year  vice-president  of  the  American  associa-
tion for  the  advancement  of  science,  delivering,  in
1887,  a  retiring  address  on  "  The  Chemistry  of  Nitro-

f:en  as  disclosed  in  the  Constitution  of  the  Alka-
oids."  He  has  been  a  contributor  to  the  periodical
liteniture  of  chemistry  from  1869.  his  work  includ-
ing reports  of  scientific  work  under  his  direction  in


the  chemical  laboratory  of  the  University  of  Michi-
gan, and  his  various  chemical  investigations,  chiefly
in  analytical  organic  chemistry.  Prof.  Prescott  has
published  "  Qualitative  Chemical  Analysis,"  with
Silas  H.  Douglas  (Ann  Arbor,  1874;  4tn  ed.,  with
Otis  C.  Johnson.  New  York,  1888) ;  "  Outlines  of
Proximate  Organic  Analysis"  (New  York,  1875);
"Chemical  Examination  of  Alcoholic  Liquors"
(1875) ;  "  First  Book  in  Qualitative  Chemistry "
(1879);  and  "Organic  Analysis;  a  Manual  of  the
Descriptive  and  Analytical  Chemistry  of  Certain
Carbon  Compounds  in  Common  Use  "  (1887).

PRESCOTT,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Con-
cord, Mass.,  16  Sept.,  1687 ;  d.  in  Danvers,  Mass.,
28  May,  1777.  He  was  the  son  of  Capt.  Jonathan
Prescott,  of  Concord,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1709,  and  ordained  minister  of  Danvers,  23  Sept.,
1713.  He  resigned  his  charge,  16  Nov.,  1756.  Mr.
Pre-scott  was  the  author  of  "  Examination  of  Cer-
tain Remarks  "  (Boston,  1735);  "  Letter  to  Joshua
Gee  "  (1743) ;  "  Letter  to  Rev.  George  Whitcfleld  "
(1745) ;  and  "A  Free  and  a  Calm  Consideration  of
the  Unhappy  Misunderstandings  and  Debates  be-
tween Great  Britain  and  the  American  Colonies  "
(Salem,  1768).

PRESCOTT,  George  Bartlett,  electrician,  b.  in
Kingston,  N.  H.,  16  Sept.,  1830.  He  was  educated
at  private  schools  in  Portland,  Me.,  and  from  1847
till  1858  was  manager  of  telegraph  offices.  He  be-
came in  1858  sujterintendent  of  the  American  and
in  1866  of  the  Western  union  telegraph  companies'
lines,  and  in  1869  electrician  of  the  Western  union
telegraph  company.  Mr.  Prescott  was  also  electri-
cian of  the  International  ocean  telegraph  company
from  1873  till  1880.  In  1873  he  visited  Europe  in
the  interest  of  the  Western  union  telegraph  com-
pany for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  various
systems  of  telegraphy  in  operation  there,  with  a  view
of  incorfjorating  any  improvement  that  he  might
discover  into  the  system  in  the  United  States.  He
found  many  important  objects  of  recommendation,
and  among  others  that  were  adopted  was  the  sys-
tem of  transmitting  messages  in  cities  by  pneu-
matic tubes,  which  he  introduced  in  New  York  in
1876.  Mr.  Prescott  also  introduced  the  duplex  and
quadruplex  telegraphs  in  1870  and  1874.  He  was
vice-president,  director,  and  member  of  the  execu-
tive and  finance  committee  of  the  Gold  and  stock
telegraph  company  in  1873-'81,  and  president  of
the  American  speaking  telephone  company  in
1879-'82,  also  director  and  member  of  the  execu-
tive committee  of  the  Metropolitan  telephone  and
telegraph  company,  and  of  the  Bell  telephone  com-
pany 01  Philadelphia.  His  inventions  include  an
nnprovement  in  telegraph  insulators  (1872)  and
an  improvement  in  quadruplex  telegraphs  (1876),
which  he  patented  in  the  United  States  and  Great
Britain.  Mr,  Prescott  has  contributed  many  ar-
ticles to  periodicals,  and  has  published  "  History,
Theory,  and  Practice  of  the  Electric  Telegraph "
(Boston,  1860);  "  The  Proposed  Union  of  the  Tele-
graph and  Postal  Systems "  (New  York,  1869) ;
"  The  Government  and  the  Telegraph  "  (18?2) ;
"  Electricity  and  the  Electric  Telegraph  "  (1877) ;
"The  Speaking  Telephone,  Talking  Phonograph,
and  other  Novelties"  (1878) ;  "The  Speaking  Tele-

fhone.  Electric  Light,  and  other  Recent  Electrical
nventions  "  (1879) ; "  Dynamo-Electricity ;  its  Gen-
eration, Application,  Transmission,  Storage,  and
Measurement "  (1884) ;  and  "  Bell's  Electric  Speak-
ing Telephone ;  its  Invention,  Construction,  Ap-
plication, Modification,  and  History  "  (1884).

PRESCOTT,  Mary  Newmarcn,  author,  b.  in
Calais,  Me.,  2  Aug.,  1849;  d.  near  Newburvport,
Mass.,  14  June,  1888. She  afterward  temo veil  with


PRBSCOTT


PRKSCOTT


109


her  pHrontu  tn  Xewbury|H>rt.  Mans.,  where  she  was
iHliicMttHl.  partly  under  the  «linH-tion  of  her  xister,
Harrift  l*n'«<-«tt,  afterward  Mrs.  S|)«iffi>rtl.  She
bepiii  to  write  prose  aiul  vers««  tunm  after  leav-
ing wh<M>'..  Her  first  story,  printed  in  "  Harper's
Monthly."  was  written  for'a  st-hool  exercist>.  She
wrote  iiiuch  for  children,  and  niany  of  her  mature
stori<*s  and  jKjems  have  U'en  widely  ooiiied.  Iler
first  l»ook  for  children  was  '•  Matt's'  P'ollies"  (lios-
ton.  1S73).  She  never  matle  a  collection  of  her  niis-
cellrtniH)us  writing's.  She  spent  18H5  and  part  of
lyyO  in  Kunme,  hut  her  honje  was  in  Newbul-yport.

PRKSCOTT,  Richard,  British  officer,  b.  in
Knjjland  in  l?2o;  d.  there  in  Octol)er.  1788.  He
was  ap|K>inte<l  a  major  of  the  3;W  fiM)t,  20  Dec.,
175(J,  and  in  May,  1702,  lx»came  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  ."iOth  f(X)t.  with  which  n'jjinuMit  he  served  in
Germany  during  the  seven  years'  war.  He  w»is
afterward  brevette<l  colonel  of  the  7th  foot,  with
which  he  came  to  Canada  in  1773.  On  the  reduc-
tion of  Montn?al  by  the  Americans  in  1775,  Col.
Prescotr,  who  hatl  the  local  rank  of  brigadier-gen-
eral, attempted  to  descend  to  Quebec  with  the
British  tnwps  and  the  military  stores,  but  was
obliged  to  surrender  to  the  Americans  on  17  Nov.
In  Septemlier,  1776,  he  w^as  exchanged  for  Gen.
John  Sullivan,  in  Novemlx'r  he  Injcame  colonel  of
his  regiment,  and  in  Decenjber  he  was  third  in
command  of  the  expedition  against  Rhode  Island,
where  he  reniaineu  in  command  of  the  British
forces  until  he  was  made  prisoner,  10  July,  1777,  by
Lieut.-Col.  William  Barton  (q.  v.).  He  wjus  final-
ly exchanged  for  Gen.  Charles  Lee,  and  resumed
riis  comnuind  at  Rhode  Island,  but  was  almost  im-
me<liately  superseded  by  Sir  Robert  Pigot.  He  be-
came a  major-general,  29  Aug.,  1777,  and  lieutenant-
general.  2G  Nov..  1782.  His  treatment  of  American
prisoners  was  harsh  and  cruel.  See  "  The  Capture
of  Prescott  by  Lieut.-Col.  William  Barton,"  an  ad-
dress at  the  centennial  celebration  of  the  exploit,
by  Jeremiah  Lewis  Diman  (Providence,  1877).

PRESCOTT,  Robert,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Un-
cashire,  England,  in  1725;  d.  near  Battle,  Sussex,
21  Dec.,  181(5.  He  l)ecame  captain  of  the  15th  f<x)t,
83  Jan.,  1755,  and  served  in  theexf)editions  against
Rochefort  in  1757,  and  Louisburg  in  1758.  He
actixi  as  aide-tie-camp  to  Gen.  Amherst  in  1759.
and  afterward  joined  the  army  under  Gen.  James
Wolfe.  On  22  March.  1761.  he  was  apfminted  ma-
jf)r  of  the  95th  foot,  which  formed  part  of  the  force
that  was  sent  under  Gen.  Robert  Monckton  to  re-
duce Martinieo.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  28th  regiment,  8  Sept.,  1775,  and  was  present  at
the  l)attle  of  Long  Island,  the  several  engagements
in  Westchester  county,  and  the  storming  of  Fort
Washington  in  November,  1775.  He  was  attached
to  the  ex[)edition  against  Philadelphia  in  1777,  ap-
point«il  colonel  by  brevet  on  29  Aug.,  and  engaged
m  the  battle  of  the  Brandywine.  In  1778  he  was
apjxiinted  first  brigadier-general  in  the  expedition
under  Gen.  James  Grant  against  the  French  West
Indies.  He  iKt-ame  colonel,  13  Oct.,  1780;  major-
general.  19  Oct.,  1781 ;  was  appointinl  colonel  of
the  28th  regiment,  6  July,  178l>;  and  lieutenant-
general.  12  Oct.,  1793.  In  Octol)er,  1793.  he  was  or-
aered  to  Barbadoes  to  take  command  there,  and  in
February,  1794,  he  sailed  with  the  troops  to  Marti-
nique, where  he  lande<l  without  opposition.  He
effected  the  complete  reduction  of  the  island  and
forts,  which  capitulatinl  on  22  Man-h.  and  was  after-
ward ap|)ointi'd  civil  governor  of  the  island.  His
wise  ami  judicious  management  of  affairs  prevented
an  ui)rising  of  the  natives.  From  Martinique  he  was
sent  to  Guadalou[>e,  where  he  pursued  the  same  firm
and  conciliatory  policy,  and  at  this  time  he  refused


the  proffett'd  g(»vernorship  of  .St.  Lucia.  Finding  it
impossible  to  effect  much  at  (iuadalou|ic,  he  with-
drew the  British  tr<M)ps  there,  and  sent  some  to
Antigua  and  Dominica,  ami  the  rest  to  Martinique,
where  he  retunietl.  His  health  failing,  he  applied
for  leave  to  return  to  England,  where  he  arnved,
10  Feb..  1795.  On  12  July.  17WK  he  succeeded
Ix)rd  Dorchester  as  governor  of  Canada,  and  on
his  arrival  in  Quel)ec  he  began  strengthening  the
fortifications  of  that  city.  In  1797  he  was  also
ap[N>inte<l  governor  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  he  remaine<l
at  the  head  of  the  government  of  that  colony.  an«I
of  Canada  and  New  Brunswick,  til!  ITJMi,  when  he
was  recalleil  and  succeedwl  bv  Sir  R<»bert  .Shore
Milnes.  The  nrincifuil  event  oi  his  administration,
during  which  he  was  ma<le  full  general,  was  rtie  at-
tempt of  David  McLean  to  excite  the  [K^ople  to  in-
surrection, and  to  capture  the  city  of  Queliec,  in
which  attempt  McLean  lost  his  life.  (Jen.  Pres-
cott retunu»d  to  England,  and  settled  at  liose
Green,  near  Battle,  where  he  died.

PRESCOTT,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Groton,
Mass.,  20  Feb.,  1726;  d.  in  PepiH>rell.  Mass.,  13
Oct.,  1795.  His  father.  Judge  Benjamin  Prescott,
was  the  grandson  of  John,  of  Lincolnshire,  Eng-
land, an  early  settler  of  Lancaster.  Ma.ss.  The  son
inherited  a  large  estate  and  residwl  at  Pepperell.
In  1755  he  served  successively  as  lieutenant  and
captain  in  the  provincial  army  under  Gen.  John
Winslow  during  the  expedition  against  Nova  Sco-
tia. His  conduct  in  that  campaign  attracte<l  the
attention  of  the  British  general,  who  offered  him  a
commission  in  the  regular  army,  which  he  declined,
and  after  the  war  he  retired  to  his  estate  at  Pep-
perell. In  1774  he  was  ap|iointed  to  command  a
regiment  of  minute-men,  with  which  he  marched,
on  19  April,  1775,  to  Lexington,  to  opjKjse  the  ex-

Sedition  that  was  sent  out  bv  (Jen.  Thomas  Gage,
efore  Prescott  arrived  the  liritish  had  retreated,
and  he  then  proceeded  to  Cambridge,  where  he  en-
tered the  provincial  army,  the  majority  of  his
officers  ana  men
volunteering  to
serve  with  him
during  his  first
cami>aign.  On
16  June.  1775,  he
was  ordered  to
Charlestown  with
1,000  men.  and  di-
rected to  throw
up  works  on
Bunker  Hill.  On
arriving  at  the
ground,it  was  per-
ceived that  tilt'
neighboring  ele-
vation, called
Breed's  Ilill,  was
a  more  suitable
station,  and  on  it
the  defences,  con-
sisting of  a  re-
doubt and  breast  -
work,  were  erect-
ed during the

night.  The  following  day  a  large  British  force
commanded  by  Gen.  William  Howe  attacked  the
Americans,  and,  after  the  latter  had  re|>elUHl  two
assaults,  and  had  exhauste<l  their  ammunition,  suc-
ceeded in  dislodging  them.  In  this  twttle.  which
owes  its  im|)ortance  to  the  fact  that  it  demon-
strated the  ability  of  the  provincials  successfully
to  oppose  British  regulars,  Bancroft  says  that
"  no  one  appeared  to  have  any  command  but  CoL


110


PRESCOTT


PRESGOTT


Prescott."  and  that  "his  bravery  could  never  be
enotif^h  Hcknowlodge<l  and  applaudod."  lie  was
one  of  the  lju*t  to  leave  the  intronchments  when
he  fomid  it  ncfcssary  to  order  a  retreat,  and  im-
mediately oflferi'd  to  retake  the  |M)sition  if  the
commander-in-chief  would  jjive  him  three  regi-
ments. Ik'fore  the  attack  Gage.  re<'onnoitrinjj  the
works,  saw  Prescott  walking  on  the  paraf)et,  and
asked  Counsellor  Willard  who  he  was.  and  if  he
would  flphtt  The  latter  replied.  "That  is  Col.
Pn'scott — he  is  an  old  soldier,  and  will  fight  as
long  as  a  drop  of  bl<x>d  remains  in  his  veins."
Karly  in  1777  he  resigned  and  returned  honu',  but
in  autumn  of  that  year  he  joined  the  northern
army  under  (len.  Horatio  Gates  as  a  volunteer,  and
was  pfesent  at  Saratoga.  After  this  battle  he  re-
turne<l  home  and  sat  in  the  legislature  of  Massa-
chusetts for  several  years.  He  wrote  "A  Letter
from  a  Veteran  to  the  OfTicers  of  the  Army  en-
camped at  Boston"  (Boston.  1774).  See  Samuel
Swett's  "  History  of  Bunker  Hill  Battles"  (Boston,
1S27 ;  new  ed..  with  notes.  1835). The  illustration  on

{lage  109  represents  the  statue  by  Story  erected  on
binker  Hill  in  1881.  on  which  occasion  an  oration
was  delivered  by  Robert  C.  Winthron. — His  broth-
er. Oliver,  soldier,  b.  in  Groton.  Mass..  27  Anril.
1731  ;  (1.  there.  17  Nov..  1804.  was  graduateu  at
Harvard  in  17."»0,  and  practised  medicine  in  his  na-
tive town.  Before  the  Kevoluticm  he  was  succes-
sively major,  lieutenant-colonel,  and  colonel  in  the
militia,  early  in  1776  he  was  appointed  a  brigadier-
general  of  militia  for  the  county  of  Middlesex,  and
U'came  a  member  of  the  board  of  war.  In  1777  he
wa,s  elected  a  nuMnlier  of  the  supreme  executive
council  of  the  state,  in  1778  he  was  appointed  third
major-general  of  militia  in  the  commonwealth,  and
in  1781  he  became  second  major-general,  but  soon
afterward  he  resigned.  In  this  year  he  was  com-
missioned by  the  government  to  cause  the  arrest
and  committal  of  any  perscm  whose  liberty  he  con-
sidered dangerous  to  the  commonwealth.  From
1775)  till  his  death  he  was  judge  of  probate  for
Middlesex  county.  He  was  very  influential  in
suppressing  Sliays's  rebellion.  In  1780  he  became
a  fellow  of  the  Academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and
he  was  a  trustee.  j)atron,  and  benefactor  of  Groton
acatlemy. — Olivers  son,  Oliver,  phvsician,  b.  in
Groton,  Mass.,  4  April.  1702;  d.  in  S'ewburyport,
26  Sept.,  1827.  was  gradiuited  at  Harvard  in  1783,
studied  medicine  with  his  father,  and  was  surgeon
of  the  forces  that  suppressed  the  Shays  insurrec-
tion in  1787.  Leaving  a  large  practice  in  Groton,
he  removed  to  Newburyport  in  1811.  practising
successfully  there  till  his  death.  He  was  often  a
representative  in  the  legislature,  and  was  a  founder,
trustee,  and  treasurer  of  Groton  academy.  He
contributed  valuable  articles  to  the  New  England
•'Journal  of  Medicine  and  Surgery,"  but  is  l)est
known  by  the  annual  discourse  before  the  Massa-
chusetts medical  society  in  1813,  entitled  a  "Dis-
sertation on  the  Natural  History  and  Medicinal
Effects  of  Secalc  Cornutum.  or  Ergot."  which  was
republished  in  London,  and  translated  into  French
and  German. — William's  son.  William,  jurist,  b.
in  Pepperell.  Ma.ss.,  19  Aug.,  1702;  d.  in  Boston,  8
Dec,  1844,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1783,  and
taught  first  at  Bnwklvn,  Conn.,  and  afterward  at
Beverly,  Mass.,  where  he  studied  law  with  Nathan
Dane,  and  practised  successfully  from  1787  till
1789.  In  the  latter  year  he  removed  to  Salem,  and
after  representing  that  town  for  several  years  in
the  legislature,  he  was  elected  a  state  senator  by
the  Federal  party  for  Essex  countv,  first  in  1806,
and  again  in  1813.  He  twice  declined  a  seat  on
the  bench  of  the  supreme  court  of  Massachusetts.


In  1808  he  removed  to  Boston,  and  was  for  .several
years  a  memWr  of  the  governor's  council.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  Hartford  convention  in  1814.
in  1818  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  for  Suffolk,  which  post  he  soon  re-
signed, and  in  1820  was  a  delegate  to  the  State
constitutional  convention.  He  was  a  meml)er  of
the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences. —
The  second  William's  son,  William  Hicklin^,
historian,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  4  May.  1796;  d.  ni
Boston.  Mass.,  28  Jan.,  1859,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1814,  and  would  have  devoted  him-
self to  the  law  but  for  the  results  of  an  act  of
folly  on  the  part  of  an  undergraduate,  who  threw
at  random  a  large,
hard  piece  of  bread,
which  struck  one
of  Prescott's  eyes
and  practically  de-
stroyed it.  His
other  eve  was  soon
sympathetically  af-
fected, and  the
youthful  student
was  now  obliged  to
turn  his  back  upon
the  sun,  and  at  a
later  period  for
many  months  to  re-
main in  a  darkened
room.  "  In  all  that  ^y
trying  season,"  said  CT/Z  ^''^  /^
his  mother,  "  I  nev-  //^  (y/.  Or^^tc^ccrti. —
er  groped  my  way

across  the  apartment  to  take  my  place  by  his  side
that  he  did  not  greet  me  with  some  hearty  expres-
sion of  good  cheer,  as  if  we  were  the  patients  and
it  was  his  place  to  comfort  us."  His  literary  as-
pirations were  not  subdued  by  the  sad  results  of
this  misfortune.  "  I  had  early  conceived,"  he
wrote  to  the  Rev.  George  E.  Ellis,  "a  strong
passion  for  historical  writing,  to  which  perhaps
the  reading  of  Gibbon's  autobiography  contrib-
uted not  a  little.  I  proposed  to  make  myself  a
historian  in  the  best  sense  of  the  term,  and  hoped
to  produce  something  which  posterity  would  not
willingly  let  die.  In  a  memorandum-book,  as  far
beck  as  the  year  1819,  I  find  the  desire  intimated ;
and  I  proposed  to  devote  ten  years  of  my  life  to
the  study  of  ancient  and  modern  literatures,  chiefly
the  latter,  and  to  eive  ten  years  more  to  some  his-
torical work.  I  have  had  the  good  fortune  to
accomplish  this  design  pretty  nearly  within  th6
limits  assigned.  In  the  Christmas  of  1837  my  first
work,  the  '  History  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,'  was
given  to  the  world.  I  obtained  the  services  of  a
reader  who  knew  no  language  but  his  own.  I
taught  him  to  pronounce  the  Castilian  in  a  manner
suited.  I  suspect,  much  more  to  my  ear  than  to
that  of  a  Spaniard,  and  we  liegan  our  wearisome
journey  through  Mariana's  noble  history.  I  cannot
even  now  call  to  mind  without  a  smile  the  tedious
houi"s  in  which,  seated  under  some  old  trees  in  my
country  residence,  we  puj^sued  our  slow  and  melan-
choly way  over  pages  which  afforded  no  glimmer-
ing of  light  to  him.  and  from  which  the  light  came
dimly  struggling  to  me  through  a  half-intelligible
vocabulary.  But  in  a  few  weeks  the  light  became
stronger,  and  I  was  cheered  by  the  consciousness  of
my  own  improvement,  and  when  we  had  toiled  our
way  through  seven  quartos.  I  found  I  could  under-
stand the  book  when  read  about  two  thirds  as  fast
as  ordinary  English.  i\ly  reader's  office  required
the  more  patience;  he  had  not  even  tjjis  result  to
cheer  him  in  his  labor. I  now  felt  that  the  great


PRESCOTT


PRESCOTT


111


difflciilty  couM  l»e  overpome,  mul  I  obf«tne<l  the
sorviros'of  a  n-niler  whoso  iicqimintAnoe  with  mrxl-
crn  Hiid  Riifii'nt  tonjriu's  .supplitHl,  as  far  as  it  could
1)0  sujtplioil.  tho  «U>floiom'v  of  oycsijjht  on  my  fwirt.
But.  though  in  thi«  way  1  could  examine  various
authorities,  it  was  not  easy  to  arranvre  in  mv  mind
the  ri'sults  of  my  reading,  drawn  from  different
and  often  contradictory  accounts.  To  do  this.  I
<lictated  ctipious  notes  as  I  went  alonj;.  and  when  I
had  read  enoujjh  for  a  chapter  (from  thirty  to  forty,
and  sometimes  fifty,  pap>s  \n  lenf^h),  1  had  a  mass
of  memoranda  in  mrown  languaf^e,  which  would
easily  brinjj  lH>fore  me  at  one  view  the  fruit  of  my
res«'arches.  These  notes  were  can'fully  ri'ad  to  me,
an«l  while  my  rwent  studies  were  fresh  in  my  rec-
ollection I  ran  over  the  whole  of  my  intended
chapter  in  my  mind.  This  pnx'ess  I  rejx'ated  at
least  half  a  d«>7.en  times,  wi  thiU  when  I  finally  put
my  pen  to  pajwr  it  ran  off  pretty  fflil>Iy,  for  it  was
an  effort  of  memorv  rather  than  composition.  This
meth(Hl  had  the  a<l vantage  of  saving  me  from  the
perplexity  of  frequently  referring  to  the  scattered
fMiges  in  the  originals,  and  it  enabled  me  to  make
the  corrections  in  my  own  mind  which  are  usually
made  in  the  manuscript,  and  which  with  my  mode
of  writing,  as  I  shall  explain,  would  have  much
embarrassed  me.  Yet  I  must  admit  that  this
methtnl  of  composition,  when  the  chapter  was  very
long,  was  somewhat  too  heavy  a  burden  on  the
memory  to  be  altogether  recommended.  Writing
presentetl  me  a  difficulty  even  greater  than  read-
ing. Thierry,  the  famous  blind  historian  of  the
Norman  conquest,  advised  me  to  cultivate  dicta-
tion :  but  I  have  usually  preferred  a  substitute
that  1  found  in  a  writing-case  matle  for  the  blind,
which  I  procured  in  London  forty  years  since.  It
is  a  .-Jimple  apparatus,  often  described  by  me  for
the  benefit  of  persons  whose  vision  is  imperfect.
It  consists  of  a  frame  of  the  size  of  a  sheet  of  pa-
per, traversed  by  brass  wires  as  many  as  lines  are
wanted  on  the  page,  and  with  a  sheet  of  carbon-
ated paper,  such  as  is  use<l  for  getting  duplicates,
pasted  on  the  reverse  side.  With  an  ivory  or  agate
stvlus  the  writer  traces  his  characters  between  the
wires  on  the  carbonated  sheet,  making  indelible
marks,  which  he  cannot  see,  on  the  white  page
l)elow.  This  treadmill  operation  has  its  defects;
and  I  have  repeatedly  supjMjsed  I  had  accomplished
a  gootl  page,  and  was  proceeding  in  all  the  glow  of
corapf)sition  to  go  ahead,  when  I  found  I  had  for-
gotten to  insert  a  sheet  of  writing-paper  below,
that  my  labor  had  all  been  thrown  away,  and  that
the  leaf  liM)ked  as  blank  as  mysi'lf.  Notwithstand-
ing these  and  other  whimsical  distresses  of  the
kind.  I  have  found  my  writing-case  my  liest  friend
in  my  lonely  hours,  and  with  it  have  written  nearly
all  that  1  have  sent  into  the  world  the  last  forty
years."

The  success  of  the  history  of  the  "  Reign  of  Fer-
dinand and  Isabella  the  Catholic  "  (3  vols..  Boston.
18;W)  was  great  and  immediate.  It  was  published
in  France.  Germany,  and  Spain  in  the  languages
of  those  countries,  appeare<l  in  an  Italian  version
at  Florence  (3  vols..  1847-'8),  and  early  in  1858  a
translation  was  announced  in  Russia.  Thus  en-
couragetl.  Mr.  Prescott  again  resumed  his  lal)ors,
and  in  184ii  published  a  "History  of  the  Conquest
of  Mexico,"  and  in  1847  a  "  History  of  the  Con-
quest of  Peru."  These  works,  the'  fruits  of  the
most  painstaking  investigation  into  manuscrii)t
authorities.  procure<i  from  Spain,  proved  that  the
critics  had  nfit  l)een  too  hasty  in  assigning  a  high
place  to  Mr.  Prescott  from  the  day  of  the  publica-
tion of  the  •*  Ilistorv  of  the  Reign  of  Ferdinand
and  Isabella." At  least  one  of  the  Mexican  edi-


tions of  the  "Conquest  of  Mexico"  was  garbled  bjr
the  translator  to  suit  the  [ioliti(ral  and  religious  at-
mosphere of  the  count r>'.  The  Madrid  e<lition  is
comj)leto.  To  the  French  translation,  by  M.  Am^-
(h'-o  Pichot,  a  reference  by  Mr.  Prescott  will  be
found  in  the  prefju-e  to  the  "Conquest  of  Pern."
Mr.  Prescott  wrote  memoirs  of  John  Pickering  and
Abbott  Ijawrence,  and  in  184.1  published,  under
the  title  of  "Biographical  and  t'ritical  Miscella-
nies." a  sele<'tion  «>f  twelve  pa|)ors  frr»m  his  articles
contribute*!  to  the  "North  American  Review"  Ik"-
tween  1821  and  184J},  and  a  "  Memoir  of  Charles
Brockden  Brown."  originally  published  in  Sj)arks's
"American  Biography"  in  i8Ji4.  In  the  edition  of
the  "Miscellanies'  issue<l  since  MVA  will  be  found
a  valuable  paper  entitlc<l  "Spanish  Literature."  a
criticism  published  in  the  "North  American  Re-
view" for  January.  18.W,  of  (Jcorge  Ticknor's  ad-
mirable "  History  of  Spanish  Literature."  In  the
summer  of  1850  Mr.  Prescott  visite<l  England,  an<I
in  the  autumn  sjient  a  short  time  in  Scotland  and
on  the  continent.  In  1855  he  publisheti  the  first
two  volumes,  and  in  December.  1858,  the  third,  of
what  would  have  proved,  had  it  been  completed,
his  greatest  work.  "The  History  of  the  Reign  of
Philip  II.,  King  of  Spain."  A  translation  of  the
first  two  volumes  api)eared  in  Russia  in  1858.  In
1857  Mr.  Prescott  added  to  a  new  e<lition  of  Rob-
ertson's "  History  of  the  Reign  of  Charles  V."
(3  vols..  Boston)  a  supplement  (vol.  iii.)  entitled
"The  Life  of  Charles  V.  after  his  Abdication."
Early  in  1858  he  exj)erienced  a  slight  stroke  of
paralysis,  from  the  eftects  of  which  he  never  en-
tirely recovered,  although  he  was  soon  able  to
resume  his  usual  walks,  and  to  devote  some  hours
daily  to  his  books  and  papers.  On  28  Jan..  1859,
he  received  a  second  stroke,  which  terminate<l
his  life  about  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  Mr.
Prescott  left  a  widow,  two  sons,  and  a  daughter.

It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  the  portion  of  history
selected  by  Prescott  for  illustration  in  his  "Reign
of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella"  had  been  neglected  bv
the  scholars  of  Germany.  France,  and  England,
and  only  superficially  touched  by  Italian  writers;
it  is  equally  certain  that  at  an  earlier  date  no  faith-
ful narration  of  the  events  of  this  reign  could  have
l)een  given  to  the  world.  Prescott  had  the  advan-
tage of  the  tragic  annals  of  Llorente,  the  political
disqiiisitions  of  Mariana,  Sempere,  and  Capmany.
the  literal  version  of  the  Snanish-Arab  chronicles
by  Conde,  the  invaluable  illustration  of  Isabella's
reign  by  Mr.  Secretary  Clemencin,  many  rare  works
and  curious  manuscripts  purchased  bv  his  friend
George  Ticknor.  in  Spain,  for  his  own  librarv,  and.
unpublished  documcnt,s  of  priceless  value,  collecte<l
from  all  available  quarters,  under  the  directions  of
the  historian  by  the  zealous  agency  of  Alexander
H.  Everett,  Arthur  ]\Iiddleton.  and  the  learned
bibliophile,  Olwdiah  Rich.  His  "  Histor>'  of  the
Conquest  of  Mexico"  is  founded  upon  alniut  eight
thousand  folio  pages  of  unpublishe<l  duplicate  of
manuscripts  in  the  collections  of  Don  Martin  Fer-
nandez de  NavarettA.  other  original  authorities.
an<l  such  printed  works  on  the  subjects  discussed
as  had  previously  been  given  to  the  world.

In  the  preparation  of  his  "  History  of  the  Con-
quest of  Peru  "  Prescott  used  a  ixirtion  of  the
manuscript  collections  that  were  useu  for  the  "  Con-
quest of  Mexico,"  a  part  of  the  unpublished  docu-
ments formerly  in  the  possession  of  Ix)rd  Kings-
l)orough.  and  other  original  materials  collecteii  at

freat  ex|>ense  in  England  and  on  the  continent,
n  the  preparation  of  the  "  History  of  the  Reign
of  Philip  ll."  he  is  said  to  have  employed  six
years. A  letter  written  by  him  from  Brussels  in


112


PRESCOTT


PRESTON


the  summer  of  1850  shows  the  enthusiasm  with
which  he  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the  age  of
Charles  V.,  uiui  will  prolwbly  remiml  the  reader  of
the  "musin^js"  of  the  historian  of  the  "Decline
and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  amidst  the  Ruins
of  the  Capitol,  while  the  BareffMjietl  Friars  were
sinking  Ves|)ers  in  the  Temple  of  Jupiter."  Vol-
umes i.  and  ii.  bring  down  the  story  to  the  execu-
tion of  Counts  Egmont  atid  lloorn  in  1568,  and  to


iprisi

the  colkftion  of  materials  for  this  history  Mr.
Prescott  spared  neither  time.  cost.  |)ersonal  labor,
nor  the  s<>rviees  of  willing  friends.  Public  and
private  collections  were  freely  opened  to  his  use,
and  the  long-closed  doors  of  the  ancient  archives
of  Simancjis  and  of  other  secret  depositories  flew
open  at  the  name  of  the  magician  whose  genius
had  reanimated  the  glories  of  the  Old  World,  and
depicttnl  with  a  vivid  pencil  the  sorrows  and  deso-
lation of  the  Xew.  The  reign  of  Charles  V.  is  the
interme<liate  link  between  the  reigns  of  Ferdinand
and  Isal)ella  and  Philip  II.,  and  completes  an  un-
broken period  of  150  years  of  the  Spanish  annals.
To  the  life  of  the  emperor  subsequent  to  his  ab-
dication six  or  seven  pages  only  are  devoted  by
Dr.  Roberts<in,  and  these  contain  many  errors.
Robertson  was  unable  to  obtain  the  information
then  locked  up  in  the  archives  of  Simancas.  Of
this  information  and  of  the  labors  of  his  predeces-
sors, Stirling,  Pichot.  Gachard,  and  Mignet,  Mr.
Prescott  freely  availed  himself.

Prosper  Merimee  sjiys  of  Prescott :  "  Of  a  just
and  upright  spirit,  he  hml  a  horror  of  paradox.  He
never  allowe<i  himself  to  be  drawn  away  by  it,  and
often  condemned  himself  to  long  investigation  to
refute  even  the  most  audacious  assertions.  His
criticism,  full  at  once  of  good  sense  and  acuteness,
wjis  never  deceived  in  the  choice  of  documents,  and
his  discernment  is  as  remarkable  as  his  good  faith.
If  he  may  lie  reproached  with  often  hesitating,
even  after  a  long  investigation,  to  pronounce  a  defi-
nite judgment,  we  must  at  least  acknowledge  that
he  omitted  nothing  to  prepare  the  way  for  it,  and
that  the  author,  too  timid  perhaps  to  decide,  al-
ways leaves  his  reader  sufnciently  instructed  to
need  no  other  guide."  Prof.  Cornelius  C.  Felton
wrote:  "  It  is  a  saying  that  the  style  is  the  man  ;
and  of  no  great  author  in  the  literature  of  the
world  is  that  saying  more  true  than  of  him  whose
loss  we  mourn.  For  in  the  transparent  simplicity
and  undimmed  beauty  and  candor  of  his  style  were
read  the  endearing  qualities  of  his  soul,  so  that  his

1>ersonal  friends  are  found  wherever  literature  is
:nown,  and  the  love  for  him  is  co-extensive  with
the  world  of  letters,  not  limited  to  those  who  speak
our  Anglo-Saxon  mother  language,  to  the  litera-
ture of  which  he  has  contributed  such  splendid
works,  but  co-extensive  with  the  civilize<l  lan-
guages of  the  human  race."  The  illustration  on
this  page  represents  Prescott's  birthplace.


PRESCOTT,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Gil-
manton,  N.  II.,  2»  Dec.,  1788;  d.  there,  18  Oct.,
1875.  He  was  indentured  to  a  farmer  at  sixteen
years  of  age,  received  few  educational  advantages,
taught,  studied  medicine,  and  in  1815  was  gr^u-
ated  at  Dartmouth  medical  college.  He  practised
in  Uilmanton  ahd  Lynn,  and  served  in  both
branches  of  the  legislature.  Dr.  Prescott  was  an
enthusiastic  collector  of  minerals  and  shells,  and
was  a  member  of  many  literary  and  scientific  so-
cieties. He  wrote  the  "  Prescott  Memorial  "  (Bos-
ton. 1870).

PRESSTMAN,  Stephen  Wilson,  clergyman,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  1  Oct..  1794;  d.  in  New-
castle, Del.,  in  1843.  He  obtained  a  good  educa-
tion in  Baltimore,  Md.  When  the  war  of  1812  was
declared  he  applied  for  and  received  a  commission
in  the  U.  S.  Army,  becoming  ensign  in  the  5th
infantry  on  14  April,  1812,  and  2d  lieutenant  in
July.  He  was  in  active  service  on  the  Canada
frontier,  gained  credit  on  several  occasions  in  bat-
tle, especially  at  Lvon's  Creek,  and  was  wounded
in  the  attac^k  on  La  Cole  mill,  30  March,  1814.
He  engaged  in  business  for  several  years,  but,  hav-
ing a  desire  to  enter  the  nunistry  of  the  Episcopal
church,  he  studied  for  orders  under  a  clergyman
in  Baltimore.  He  was  ordained  deacon,  11  July,
1822,  by  Bishop  Richard  C.  Moore,  and  priest,  15
June,  1823,  by  the  same  bishop.  While  a  deacon
he  served  the  church  in  Dumfries,  Va.,  and  in  1823
he  was  called  to  the  rectorship  of  Immanuel  church,
Newcastle.  Del.  This  post  he  held  during  the  re-
mainder of  his  life.  Mr.  Presstman,  though  pub-
lishing no  contributions  to  theological  or  general
literature,  was  very  active  and  useful  in  various
departments  of  church  work.  He  was  for  many
years  president  of  the  standing  committee  of  the
diocese  of  Delaware,  and  was  uniformly  elected  a
clerical  deputy  to  the  triennial  general  convention
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.

PRESTON,  Ann,  physician,  b.  in  West  Grove,
Pa.,  1  Dec,  1813;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  18  April,
1872.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Amos  Preston,
a  Quaker,  and,  owing  to  the  delicate  condition  of
her  mother's  health,  the  family  was  early  placed
under  her  care.  Meanwhile  she  received  her  edu-
cation in  the  local  school,  and  evinced  more  than  a
usual  fondness  for  her  books.  In  1850  the  Wom-
an's medical  college  of  Philadelphia  was  founded,
and  she  studied  there  until  her  graduation  in  1852.
Settling  in  Philadelphia,  she  began  the  practice
of  her  profession,  in  which  she  achieved  deserved
success.  In  1854  she  was  electe<l  professor  of
physiology  and  hygiene  in  the  college  where  she  was
graduated,  and  in  1866  to  the  office  of  dean,  which
places  she  held  until  her  death.  Her  lectures  and
addresses  were  filled  with  striking  thoughts  and
practical  knowledge.  Dr.  Preston  was  active  in
the  establishment  of  the  Woman's  hospital  of
Philadelphia,  and  was  from  its  beginning  one  of
the  managers,  its  corresponding  secretary,  and  its
consulting  physician.  The  Philadelphia  county
medical  society  in  1867  made  public  objections  to
the  practice  of  metlicine  by  women,  and  Dr.  Pres-
ton at  once  defended  the  claims  of  her  sex  so  ably
that  much  of  the  adverse  criticism  was  disarmed  ;
indeed  her  infiuence  in  removing  prejudices  against
female  physicians  was  very  extended.  She  pub-
lished various  essays  on  the  medical  education  of
women,  and  was  the  author  of  a  book  of  poems  en-
titled "  Cousin  Ann's  Stories  for  Children  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1848).

PRESTON,  Charles  Finney,  missionary,  b.  in
Antwerp.  N.  Y.,  36  Julv.  182»:  d.  in  Jlong  Kong,
China,  17  July,  1877. lie  was  graduated  at  Union


PRESTON


PRESTON


118


in  1850,  an<l  at  Princoton  theological  sominarv  in
185;J.  In  .liint<  of  (hat  year  ho  wiut  liirnsiMl  to
prt'ach  by  the  Pri'sbytery  of  Albany,  ami  ho  was
onlainod  by  the  sanjo  prcsbvl<'ry  on  14  Nov.  lie
wattthen  roinn>issione«l  niisMionary  to  (,'hina  by  the
Presbyterian  Inianl  of  foreign  missions,  and  n»ach«d
Hong  Kong  in  May.  Ib54.  PriMfe«ling  U)  Canton
he  s|H'nt  two  years  in  that  city  studying  the  lan-

fuage.  and  during  the  Chinese  war  was  in  Macat).
n  NoveiiiU'r,  IH.X,  he  returned  to  Canton,  and
soon  built  a  cIiu|m>I  from  funds  raised  chiefly  by
his  own  I'lTorts.  where  ho  prem-hed  until  his  last
illness.  lie  was  also  the  stated  supply  of  the  2d
native  Presbyterian  church  in  Cantt)n  from  1872.
«nd  likewise  preache«l  regularly  in  the  cha()el  of
the  Medical  missionary  society.  Mr.  Prtsston  de-
vote<l  much  time  to  the  translation  of  the  New
Testament  into  the  Canton  vernm-ular;  he  i)re-
pared  a  hymn-l)ook  in  Chinese,  and  wrote  many
valual)lc  articles  and  treatises,  besides  giving  theo-
logical instructicm  to  native  evangelists.

PRESTON,  David,  banker,  b.  in  Harmony,
N.  Y.,  2()  Sent.,  182«:  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  24
April,  1887.  lie  was  e<lucated  at  common  schools,
and  at  the  jicatlomy  in  Westfleld,  N.  Y..  meanwhile
teaching  during  the  winters.  In  1848  he  move<l  to
Detroit,  where  he  Ix^came  clerk  in  a  Imnking-house.
Four  years  later  he  established  himself  as  a  banker
in  Detroit  and  Chicago.  Mr.  Preston  gave  about
f  200.000  to  charities,  and  pledged  himself  to  raise
from  the  {)eople  of  Michigan  $60,000.  giving  him-
self nearly  one  half  this  sum,  for  Albion  college,
of  which  he  was  a  trustee  from  1862  till  his  death.
During  the  civil  war  ho  was  active  in  the  Christian
commission,  and  he  was  president  of  the  Young
men's  Christian  a'^sociation  of  Detroit  in  1869-'70.
He  was  the  candidate  of  the  Proiiibition  party  for
governor  in  1884.  Besides  being  a  delegate  to  the
general  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  1876,  and  delegate  to  the  Centenary
conference  of  Methodism  in  Baltimore  in  1884,  he
was  active  in  other  matters  pertaining  to  his  de-
nomination, and  was  regarded  at  the  time  of  his
death  as  the  foremost  memlxjr  of  the  Methodist
chiirch  in  the  state  of  Michigan.

PRESTON.  Harriet  Waters,  author,  b.  in
Danvers,  Mass.,  about  1843.  She  was  educated
chiefly  at  home,  and  l)egan  her  literary  lal)ors
about  1865  as  a  translator  from  the  French,  her
first  work  being  "The  I^ife  of  Mme.  Swetchine."
Then  followed  "The  Writings  of  Mme.  Swetch-
ine"; a  selection  from  Sainte  Beuve,  "  Portraits  de
femmes''  (first  series),  under  the  title  of  "Cele-
brated Women";  "Mme.  Deslmnles- Valmorc."
from  the  sjime  author;  and  the  "Life  of  Alfred
de  Musset,"  by  his  brother.  Paul  de  Musset.  She
has  also  published  "  Aspendale"  (Boston,  1872);  a
translation  of  Mistral's  "Mireio"  (Boston,  1873);
"  Ix)ve  in  the  Nineteenth  Century"  (Boston,  1874);
*'  Troidmilours  and  Trouveres  "  (fioston,  1876) ;  "  Is
That  All  f"  in  the  "No  Name  "series  (Ikiston,  1876);
a  translation  of  the  "Georgics  of  Virgil"  (Boston,
IHH\) :  and  "  A  Year  in  Eden  "  (1886).  She  has  con-
tributed freauent  critical  napers  to  the  "  Atlantic
Monthly."  Miss  Preston  has  reside<l  abroad  for
some  time,  mostly  in  France  and  Great  Brittiin.

PRESTON,  Jonas,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Che«5ter
county.  Pa.,  25  Jan.,  1764;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  4
Jan..  1*56.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was  a
physician.  His  grandfather,  William  Preston,  a
Ouaker.  in  1718  emignited  from  Huddersfield.
?ingland.  and  settled  in  Pennsylvania.  Jonas  en-
tere<l  on  the  study  of  me<licine' under  Dr.  Thomas
Bond,  of  Philadefiihia,  and  cnncludiMl  hisstudiesin
the  medical  schools  ot  Edinburgh  and  Paris,  being
vol..  V. — 8


graduated  from  the  former  alxjut  1785.  On  his
return  he  settle<l  in  \Vilmingt<m.  Del.,  afterward
removed  for  a  time  to  Georgia,  but  returning  to
Chester.  Pa.,  suifotnliHl  in  establishing  an  exten-
sive practice,  particularly  in  otxitetricti,  in  which
he  was  celebrate*!.  At  the  |>eriod  of  the  whiskey
insurrection  he  volunteere<l  his  medical  aid,  and
served  with  the  troops.  He  wa«  for  manv  years  a
memlx'r  of  the  legislature,  serving  in  Imth  the  as-
sembly and  the  senate.  Alxiut  1812  he  removed
to  Philmlelphia,  when*  he  tiKik  an  active  interest
in  several  benevolent  and  other  institutions,  such
as  the  Pennsylvania  hospital.  Friend's  asylum,
Penn  l)ank,  and  Schuylkdl  navigation  company.
His  extensive  observation  in  the  jiractice  of  his
profession  le<i  him  to  form  the  opinion.  exi>res8ed
m  his  will,  "  that  there  ought  to  t)e  a  Iving-in  ho«-
|)ital  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia  for  indigent  mar-
ried women  of  good  chanwter,"  and  he  U-queathed
alxiut  $4(X),000  for  the  founding  of  such  an  insti-
tution. Within  a  few  months  after  his  deatli  the
legislature  of  Pennsylvania  passed  an  act  incorpo-
rating "  The  Preston  Retreat."  The  corner-stone
of  the  hospital  building  was  laid,  17  July,  1837,  and
the  institution  is  one  of  the  noted  charities  in
Philadelphia.

PRESTON,  Margaret  Jnnkln,  poet,  b.  in
Philadel|)hia,  Pa..  alK)Ut  1K25.  She  is  a  daughter
of  Kev.  George  Junkin,  and  the  wife  of  Prof.  John
T.  L.  Preston,  of  the  Virginia  military  institute.
Her  first  contributions  to  the  press  appeared  in
"  Sartain's  Magazine  "  in  1849-'50,  and  she  »ubse-
ouently  published  a  novel  entitle<l  "Silverwood  "
(New  York,  1856),  but  she  has  since  devote<i  herself
to  poetical  composition.  She  was  an  ardent  sympa-
thizer with  the  south,  and  her  most  sustained  vol-
ume of  verse.  "  Beechen brook."  a  |)oem  of  the  civil
war.  enjoyed  a  wide  {>opularity,  and  contains  the
familiar  lines  on  "Stonewall  Jackson's  (Jrave"and
the  lyric  "  Slain  in  Battle  "(New  York,  1866).  Her
other  works  include  many  fugitive  poems,  "  Old
Song  and  New,"  the  dedication  of  which  has  been
much  admired  (1870),  "  Cartoons  "  (1875),  and  "  For
Love's  Sake  "(1887).  Her  writings  are  vigorous,
suggestive,  and  full  of  religious  feeling.  Her
translation  of  the  "  Dies  Iras"  which  ap{>eared  in
1855.  has  been  highly  praised.

PRESTON,  Samuel,  b.  in  Patuxent,  Md.,  in
1665;  d.  in  Philadeli.hia,  10  Sept.,  174^1  He  was
brought  up  as  a  QuaKer.  Removing  from  Mary-
land to  Sussex  county  on  the  Delaware,  hcwjis  sent
to  the  legislature  from  the  latter  place  in  1693,
and  again  in  1701,  and  was  chosen  sheriflf  in  1695.
Alxiut  170Ji  he  took  up  his  residence  in  Philadel-
phia, where  he  Ixx-ame  a  merchant,  and  stcKid
among  the  most  influential  of  the  Quakers  of  his
day.  In  1708  he  was  unanimously  electe<l  ahler-
man.  During  the  same  year  James  Logan,  desir-
ing Penn  to  consider  whom  to  mid  to  the  property
commission,  wrote  to  him,  saying:  "Samuel  Pres-
ton is  also  a  very  good  man.  and  now  makes  a  figure,
and.  indee<l,  Rachel's  husband  ought  particularly
to  l)e  taken  notice  of.  for  it  has  too  long  lx>en  neg-
lected, even  for  thy  own  interest."  (His  wife  was
daughter  of  Thomas  Lloyd,  president  of  Penn's
council.)  Almost  imme<liately  afterwanl  Preston
was  called  to  the  council,  and^je  continued  a  mem-
lier  until  he  died.  He  was  chosen  nmyor  of  Phila-
delphia in  1711.  and  in  1714  Un^nme  the  treasurer
of  the  province,  retaining  theolTice  until  his  death.
In  1726  he  l)ecame  a  justice  of  the  jieace  and  of
the  court  of  common  pleas  and  in  1?28  one  of  the
commissioners  of  pro|H>rty.  which  ofllce  he  held
many  years.  He  was  also  one  of  the  trustees  under
William  Penn's  will.


114


PRESTON


PRESTON


PRESTON,  Thomas  Scott,  clerpyman,  b.  in
Ilartfoni,  Conn.,  23  July.  1824.  He  was  jjradu-
atiHl  at  Trinity  in  184J).  and  at  the  jjencral  theo-
logical seminary  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church  in  1840,  after  which  he  was  assistant  rec-
tor of  the  Church  of  the  Annunciation,  and  subse-
quently of  St.  Luke's,  in  New  York  city,  until
1849.  Acceptinji  the  Roman  Catholic  faith,  he
then  went  to  St.  Joseph's  theological  seminary  in
Fordham.  and  was  ordained  to  the  priesthood  in
18v)0.  After  serving  as  an  assistant  in  the  cathe-
dral in  New  York  citv,  and  as  pastor  of  St.  Mary's
church  in  Yonkers,  ^^  Y.,  he  was  in  185;i  appoint-
ed chancellor  of  the  archdiocese  of  New  York,  and
in  ISTii  l)ecanie  vicar-general  in  connection  with
the  duties  of  the  chancellorship.  Since  1861  he
has  been  pastor  of  St.  Ann's  church,  and  in  1881
he  was  appointed  a  domestic  prelate  of  the  pojw's
household,  with  the  title  of  monsignor.  The  de-
rec  of  S.  T.  I),  was  conferred  on  him  by  Seton
lall  college.  N.  J.,  in  1880.  He  has  published
Ark  of  the  Coverumt.  or  Life  of  the  Blessed  Vir-
in  Mary  "(New  York.  1860);  "Life  of  St.  Mary
lagdalene"  (18()0);  "Sermons  for  the  Principal
Sejisons  of  the  Sacred  Year"  (1864);  "Life  of  St.
Vincent  de  Paul  and  its  Lessons"  (1866);  "Lec-
tures on  Christian  Unity,  Advent,  1806"  (1867);
"The  Purgatorian  Manual,  or  a  Selection  of  Pray-
ers and  Devotions"  (1867);  "Lectures  on  Reason
and  Revelation"  (1868);  "The  Vicar  of  Christ"
(1871);  "The  Divine  Sanctuary:  Series  of  Medi-
tations upon  the  Most  Sa^-red  Heart  of  Jesus"
(1878) ;  ••  Divine  Paraclete  "  (1880) ;  "  Protestantism
and  the  Bible"  (1880);  "Protestantism  and  the
Church"  (1882);  "God  and  Reason"  (1884);  and
"  Watch  on  Caivarv  "  (1885).

PRESTON.  William,  soldier,  b.  in  County
Donegal,  Ireland,  25  Dec,  1729;  d.  in  Montgomery
county.  Va.,  28  July,  1783.  His  father,  John,  emi-
grated to  this  country  in  1735,  and  settled  in  Au-
gusta county.  William  received  a  classical  educa-
tion, and  in  early  life  acquired  a  taste  for  litera-
ture. Ho  became  deputy  sheriff  of  Augusta  coun-
ty in  1750,  was  elected  to  the  house  of  burgesses  a
short  time  afterward,  and  accompanied  Gen.  Wash-
ington on  several  exploring  expeditions  in  the
west.  This  led  to  a  correspondence  and  a  friend-
ship between  them,  which  continued  till  Preston's
death.  He  was  appointed  one  of  two  commission-
ers to  make  a  treaty  with  the  Shawnee  and  Dela-
ware Indians  in  1757,  and,  by  negotiations  with
Cornstalk,  secured  peace  along  the  western  fron-
tiers for  several  years.  The  privations  that  the
party  suffered  on  their  return  journey  compelled
them  to  eat  the  "tugs"  or  straps  of  rawhide  with
which  their  packs  were  fastened,  and  Preston,  in
memory  of  the  event,  called  that  branch  of  the
Big  Sandy  river  "Tug  Fork,"  which  name  it  still
retains.  He  became  surveyor  of  the  new  county
of  Montgomery  in  1771,  was  early  engaged  in  the
organization  of  troops  for  the  lievolutionary  war,
l>ecame  colonel  in  1775,  and  led  his  regiment  at
Guilford  Court-House,  S.  C,  where  he  received  in-
juries that  caused  his  death  in  the  following  July.
— His  son.  Francis,  congressman,  b.  at  his  resi-
dence in  Greenfield,  near  Amsterdam,  Botetourt
CO.,  Va.,  2  Aug.,  1765;  d.  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  25
May,  1835,  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in
178:3,  studied  law  under  George  Wythe,  practised
with  success  in  Montgomery,  Washington,  and
other  counties,  and  in  1792  was  elected  to  congress,
serving  two  terms.  He  then  declined  re-election
and  removed  to  Abingdon,  Va.,  where  he  subse-
quently resided.  At  the  beginning  of  the  second  war
•with  Great  Britain  he  enlisted  with  the  appoint-


ment of  colonel  of  volunteers,  and  marched  with
his  regiment  to  Norfolk,  and  subsequently  he  was
appointed  brigadier-general  and  major-general  of
militia.  He  was  frequently  a  member  of  the  Vir-
ginia house  of  delegati>s  and  of  the  state  senate^
where  his  ability  in  debate  and  graceful  elocution
gave  him  high  rank.  He  was  the  personal  friend
of  Matlison,  Jefferson,  Monroe,  anu  Chief-Ju.xtice
Marshall.  He  married  in  1792  Sarah,  the  daugh-
ter of  William  CamjdK'll,  the  hero  of  King's  Moun-
tain.— Their  son,  >\illiam  Campbell,  senator,  b.
in  Philiulelphia,  Pa.,  27  Dec,  1794;  d.  in  CoUimbia,
S.  C,  22  May,  1860,  l)egan  his  education  at  Wash-
ington college,  Va.,  but  was  sent  to  the  south  on
account  of  his  delicate  lungs,  and  was  graduated
at  the  College  of  South  Carolina  in  1812.  On  his
return  to  Virginia  he  studied  law  under  William
Wirt,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  failing
health  again  compelled  him  to  seek  a  change  of
climate,  and,  after  an  extensive  tour  of  the  west  on
horseback,  he  went  abroad,  where  on  his  arrival
he  formed  the.  beginning  of  a  life-long  intimacy
with  Washington  Irving.  Through  Mr.  Irving  he-
was  placed  on  terms  of  intimacy  at  Abbotsford,
and  in  the  intervals  of  his  law  studies  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Edinburgh,  where  Hugh  S.  Legare  was-
his  fellow-student,  he  made  several  pedestrian
tours  with  Irving  through  Scotland,  northern
England,  and  Wales.  Together  they  witnessed
many  of  the  scenes  of  the  "  Sketch-Book."  He  re-
turned to  Virginia  in  1820,  and  settled  in  South
Carolina  in  1822,  where  he  at  once  won  a  brilliant
reputation  as  an  advocate  and  orator.  He  was
in  the  legislature  in
1828-'32,  was  an  ar-
dent advocate  of  free-
trade  and  state  rights,
became  a  leader  of  the
nullification  party,
and  in  1836  was  elect-
ed to  the  U.  S.  senate
as  a  Calhoun  Demo-
crat. Among  the  most
carefully  prepared
and  eloquent  of  his
speeches  in  the  senat*
wasthaton  the  French
spoliation  claims,
which  was  praised  by
Henry  Clay,  Daniel
Webster,  and  states-
men of  all  parties.
Differing  with  nis  col-
league, John  C.  Cal-
houn, and  also  with  his  constituents,  in  regard  to
the  support  of  President  Van  Buren's  policy,  he
resigne<I  his  seat  and  resumed  his  law-practice  in
1842.  He  was  president  of  the  College  of  South
Carolina  from  1845  till  his  retirement  in  1851.
When  he  accepted  the  office  the  institution  had  lost
many  memliers,  but  under  his  guidance  it  rose  to  a
prosjierity  that  it  had  never  liefore  enjoyed,  and
became  the  most  popular  educational  institution  in
the  south.  He  also  established  the  Columbia  Ivce-
um,  and  gave  it  a  large  and  valuable  library,  flar-
vard  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1846.  As
a  popular  orator  Mr.  Preston  was  the  peer  of  his
maternal  uncle,  Patrick  Henry,  in  many  instances
arousing  his  audiences  to  enthusiasm  and  the  next
moment  moving  them  to  tears.  His  style  has  l)een
descrilied  as  florid,  but  his  vocabulary  was  large,
and  the  illustrations  and  classical  allusions  that
ornamented  his  speeches  were  as  naturally  em-
ployed in  his  familiar  conversation.  He  was  a
profound  classical  scholar,  and  it  w'as  universally


PRESTON


PRESTON


110


I


mlniitte<l  that  he  was  the  most  flnishiHl  omtor  tho
south  has  over  |»ro(luce<l.  His  distrt'ss  nt  the  wt-os-
sioii  of  the  southern  Democrulic  party  in  IWM)  hiij«-
tcnwl  his  I'lul,  When  he  wa.s  ilvinj;.  his  frien(l,
James  L.  Petijiru,  saitl  to  him  :  "  i  envy  you,  Pres-
ton ;  you  are  Icnviiif;  it,  an«l  I  slmll  have  to  stay
and  see  it  all."  Preston  8if;nifie<l.  with  a  si|;h  of
relief,  that  the  words  were  true.  He  left  no  chil-
dren.— Another  son  of  Fniiicis.  John  Smith,
soldier,  b.  at  the  Sidt  Works,  near  Abinirdon,  Va.,
20  April.  ISOft;  d.  in  t'olumhia.  S.  C,  1  .Mav,  IKHI,
was  ^niduatiHl  at  Ilam(Mlen  .Sidney  college  in  1H24,
attended  lectures  at  the  University  of  Virjfinia  in
lH2i'>-'t{,  and  read  law  at  Harvard.  He  marrie<l
Caroline.  dau);hter  of  (ten.  Wade  Hampton,  in
18^iO,  and  setthnl  first  in  Ahinmlon.  Va.,  and  sub-
8»'C|uently  in  Columbia,  S.  C.  He  en>;afjed  for  sev-
eral years  in  su^ar-plantinj;  in  Louisiana,  but  also
devoted  much  time  to  literary  pursuits  and  to  the
collection  of  paintinjjs  and  sc-ulptures.  He  aidctl
strufjj^linfj  artists  lil)erally,  notably  Hiram  Powers,
whose  genius  had  been  recognized  by  hi*,  brother
William.  Mr.  Powers,  as  a  token  of  his  apprecia-
tion, gave  him  the  first  renlica  of  the  "Greek
Slave."  He  also  became  widely  known  as  an  ora-
tor, delivering,  among  other  addresses,  the  speech
of  welcome  to  the  Palmetto  rr-giment  on  its  re-
turn from  the  Mexican  war  in  1848,  which  gained
him  a  national  reputation.  This  wjis  increased  by
his  orations  before  the  "Seventy-sixth  associa-
tion of  Charleston  "  and  the  literary  societies  of
St>uth  Carolina  college,  and  those  at  tfie  7oth  anni-
versary of  the  battle  of  King's  Mountain  and  at
the  laying  of  the  corner-stone  of  the  University  of
the  south  at  Sewanee,  Tenn.  He  was  an  ardent
secessionist,  and  in  May,  1800,  was  chairman  of
the  South  Carolina  delegation  to  the  Democratic
convention  that  met  at  Charleston,  S.  C.  After
the  election  of  President  Lincoln  he  was  chosen  a
commissioner  to  Virginia,  and  in  February,  1861,
made  an  elal)orate  plea  in  favor  of  the  withdrawal
of  that  state  fn)m  the  Union,  which  was  regaixled
as  his  greatest  eflfort.  He  was  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
Beauregard  in  18(51-"2,  participated  in  the  first
battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  was  subsequently  trans-
ferred to  the  conscript  department  with  the  rank
of  brigadier-general.  He  went  to  England  shortly
after  the  close  of  the  war,  and  remained  abroad
several  years.  After  his  return  he  delivered  an
address  at  a  commencement  of  the  Universitj^  of
Virginia,  which,  as  a  fervent  assertion  of  the  right
of  secession,  incurred  the  criticism  of  the  conserva-
tive press  throughout  the  country.  His  last  pub-
lic ap[K»an»nce  was  at  the  unveiling  of  the  Confed-
erate monument  at  Columbia,  S.  C,  when  he  was
the  orator  of  the  otrcasion.  Gen.  Preston  was  more
than  six  feet  in  height,  and  of  a  |xiwerful  and
symmetrical  frame.  —  Another  son  of  Francis,
Thomas  LewiH,  planter,  b.  in  Botetourt  county,
Va..  28  Nov.,  1812,  was  educated  at  the  University
of  Virginia,  studied  law,  but  never  practised,  and
for  many  years  engaged  m  Washington  and  Smith
counties,  Va.,  in  the  manufacture  of  salt,  in  which
he  ma«le  material  improvements.  He  was  twicre  a
meml)er  of  the  legislature,  for  many  years  a  visitor
of  the  University  of  Virginia  and  twice  its  rector.
He  was  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston
during  the  first  year  of  the  civil  war.  and  his  aide-
de-camp  at  the  "first  Iwttle  of  Bull  Run.  He  has
published  "  Life  of  ElizaU'th  Russell.  Wife  of  Gen.
William  Camplx>ll  of  King's  Mountain"  (Univer-
sity of  Virginui.  1880). — PVancis's  brother.  James
Patton,  statesman,  b.  in  Montgomery  countv,  Va,
in  1774;  d.  in  Smithfield.  Va.,  4  May,  184i^,  was
graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  itOO,  and  set-


tled as  a  planter  in  Montgomery  countv,  Va  Hft
iHH-ame  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  I2th  V.S.  infant-
ry in  1812,  colonel,  5  Aug..  181H,  and  receive*!  at
Chrystler's  field  a  wound  that  crij»ple«l  him  for
life.  He  was  governor  of  Virginia  m  18HJ-'iy,  and
subsequently  served  frecjuently  in  the  state  senate.
He  married  Ann,  daughter  of  (Jen.  ItolM-rt  Tavlor,
of  Norfolk,  Va— Their  wm.  WilUum  liaMard,
secretary  of  war,  b.  in  Smithfield.  Montgrunerv  co.,
Va,  2r)'Nov..  180.');  d.  then-,  1(5  Nov..  18«2,'  was
educatcnl  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  a4lopted
law  as  a  |)rofes-
sion,andachieyc<l
signal  success  in
its  practice.  He
servetl  several
times  in  the  Vir-
ginia house  of
delegates  and  sen-
ate, and  was  nev-
er throughout  his
career  defeated  in
any  popular  elec
tion.  He  was
chosen  to  con-
press  as  a  Whig
in  1846,  and  on
the  accession  of
Gen.Zachary  Tay-
lor to  the  presi-
dency he  held  the
[Kirtfolio  of  the  navy  until  Gen.  Taylor's  death,
when  he  retired  to  private  life,  but  was  several
times  presidential  elector  on  the  Whig  ticket.  He
was  sent  by  the  government  on  a  mission  to
France  in  18.'>8-'J),  the  object  of  which  was  to  es-
tablish a  line  of  steamers  between  that  country
and  Virginia  and  a  more  extended  commercial
relation  between  the  two  countries.  The  scheme
failed  on  account  of  the  approaching  civil  war.
He  was  a  niemljer  of  the  \  irginia  se<'ession  con-
vention in  1861,  and  resiste<l  all  efforts  toward
the  dis.solution  of  the  Union  till  he  was  satisfied
that  war  was  inevitable.  In  1861-'2  he  was  a
member  of  the  Confederate  senate,  in  which  he
siTved  until  his  death. — Francis's  nephew.  Will-
iam, lawyer,  b.  near  Louisville,  Ky..  16  Oct.,  1806;
d.  in  Lexington,  Kv.,  21  Sept.,  1887.  His  edu-
cati(m  was  under  the  direction  of  the  Jesuits  at
liardstown.  Ky.  He  afterward  studied  at  Vale,  and
then  attended  the  law-school  at  Harvanl,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1838.  He  then  Ijcgan  the  prac-
tice of  law,  also  taking  an  active  part  in  |>olitics.
He  served  in  the  Mexican  war  as  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  4th  Kentucky  volunteers.  In  1851  he  was
elected  to  the  Kentucky  house  of  representatives  as
a  Whig,  and  in  the  following  year  he  was  chosen  to
congress  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  Gen.  Hum-
phrey Marshall's  resignation,  serving  from  6  Dec.,
1852,  till  3  March,  18rM.  He  was  again  a  candidate
in  1854,  but  was  defeated  by  his  predecessor.  Gen.
Marshall,  the  Kn»w-Nothing  candidate,  after  a
violent  campaign.  He  then  IxK-ame  a  D«'mfH>rat,
and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Cincinnati  convention  of
1856,  which  nominateil  Buchanan  and  Breckin-
ridge. He  was  api>oinled  U.  S.  minister  to  S[>ain
under  the  Buchanan  administration,  at  the  close
of  which  he  returneil  to  Kentucky  and  warmly  es-
poused the  cause  of  the  south.  He  joinwl  Gen.
Simon  B.  Buckner  at  Bowling  Green  in  18(51.  and
was  made  colonel  on  the  staff  of  his  brother-in-law,
(ien.  AlU'rt  .Sidney  Johnston,  when  that  officer  as-
sume«l  comman<l.  He  S4'rved  through  the  Ken-
tucky campaign,  was  at  the  fall  of  Fort  Donel.son,
the  battle  of  Shiloh,  where  Uen.  Johnston  died  in


116


PRfeVALAYE


PR^VOST-PARADOL


his  arms,  and  the  siege  of  Corinth.  He  was  also
in  many  hanl-foujfht  Imttles,  especially  at  Mur-
freoslK)n).  At  the  close  of  the  war  ho  returne<l  to
his  home  in  lioxinjrtun,  Ky..  in  1H(»7  ho  wiis  olect-
e<l  to  tho  lopislaturo,  and  in  18S()  ho  wjis  a  dolo-
gato  to  t ho  convention  that  nominated  Gen,  Han-
cock for  tho  prosidoncy. — William  Ballard's  cousin,
Isaac  Trimble,  jurist,  h.  in  Il(X'khridi;e  county,
Va..  in  ITJW :  d.  on  Ijake  Pontchartrain,  La..  5  July,
1852.  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1812,  and  studio<l  at
Litchfield  law-seh<x»l,  but  resigno<l  his  profession
in  1K1;{  to  servo  as  captain  of  a  vohmteer  company
in  tho  war  with  (Jivat  Britain.  He  resumed  his
legal  studios  under  William  Wirt  in  1H1(5,  was  ad-
mitted to  tho  bar.  and  ri'inovcd  to  New  Orlojins,
where  ho  practised  with  success.  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  was  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
Louisiana.  His  death  was  the  result  of  a  steam-
ix)at  <iisastor.

PRfiVALAYE,  Pierre  Dimas  (pray-vah-lay).
Marquis  do,  French  naval  oflicer,  h.  in  tho  castle  of
Pn'valave.  near  Brest,  in  174.5;  d.  there,  28  July,
1810.  lie  was  descended  from  a  family  that  was  dis-
tinguished in  the  annals  of  tho  French  navy.  His
father.  Pierre  Bernardin  (1 714-'8(5.)  served  in  Canada
in  1742  and  175.5.  In^came  "chef  d'escadre,"  com-
manded tho  station  of  the  Antilles,  and  as  gover-
nor of  Brest  in  1778  was  charged  to  superintend
tho  armament  of  the  Hoot  that  was  sent  to  the  suc-
cor of  the  American  patriots.  The  son  became  a
midshipman  in  17(K),  and  took  jmrt  as  lieutenant,
and  afterward  as  commander,  in  the  war  for
Amerii  an  independence.  He  served  under  d'Es-
taing  at  Newport  in  1778,  participated  in  the
operations  against  8t.  Lucia  and  Grenada,  directed
the  batteries  at  the  siege  of  Savannah,  in  October,

1779.  was  attached  to  the  fleet  of  De  Guichen  in

1780.  and  served  under  De  Grasse  at  Yorktown,  in
October,  1781,  and  under  De  Verdun,  De  Borda,
and  Vaudreuiiies  in  the  West  Indies.  In  1783  he
was  sent  to  carry  to  congress  the  treaty  of  peace
that  acknowledged  the  independence  of  the  United
Stales,  and  was  promoted  commodore.  He  was
afterward  appointed  a  member  of  the  board  of  ad-
miralty, emigrated  in  1790,  served  in  the  army  of
Condo.  and,  returning  to  France  in  1801,  lived
quietly  in  his  ancestral  castle,  which  the  neighbor-
ing peasants,  l)eing  much  attached  to  his  family,
had  preserved  from  destruction.  Refusing  the
offers  of  Napoleon  of  a  commission  in  the  navy,
he  devoted  his  last  years  to  science,  founded  an
astronomical  observatory  in  Brest,  and  became  a
member  of  the  Academy  of  marine  of  that  city.
Louis  XVIII.  made  him  a  rear-admiral  in  1815.
Ue  published  "  Memoiro  sur  la  campagne  de  Bos-
ton en  1778"  (Brest,  1784);  "  Memoire  sur  les  ope-
rations navales  de  rarmee  du  Comte  d'Estaing  pen-
dant la  guerre  d'Amerique"  (Paris,  1778);  •'  Me-
moire sur  une  machine  propre  a  faire  connoitre  h
tout  moment  le  tirant  d'oau  dcs  naviros  "  (Brest.
1807);  and  several  treatises  on  naval  architecture.

PREVOST,  Augustine,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Geneva,  Switzerland,  about  1725;  d.  in  Bernett,
England.  5  May.  1786.  His  father  was  an  officer
in  tho  English  army.  The  son  also  entered  the
army,  became  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  March.  1701,
colonel,  29  Aug.,  1777.  and  major-general.  27  Feb.,
1779.  He  served  as  captain  of  the  60th  regiment
or  Royal  Americans  under  Wolfe  at  t^uolwc,  cap-
tured the  fort  at  Sunbury,  Ga.,  in  Docendwr,  1778,
and  defeated  Gen.  John  Ashe  at  Brier  creek  in
March,  1779,  but  was  foiled  in  an  attempt  to  cap-
ture Charleston  in  May,  1779.  In  OctoWr,  1779,
he  successfully  defended  Savannah  against  the
Americans. Gen.  Prevost's  widow  married  Aaron


Burr.— His  son.  Sir  (jeorge,  bart,,  British  soldier,
b,  in  New  York,  19  May.  1767:  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 5  Jan..  1816,  entered  the  army  in  his  youth,
served  with  credit  at  St.  Vincent,  where  He  was
severely  wounded,  and  was  also  at  Dominica  and
St.  Lucia.  He  was  created  a  baronet,  6  Dec.,  1805,
and  apfKiinted  major-general  in  January  of  the
sjimo  year,  and  lieutenant-general  in  June,  1811.
Soon  after  his  return  from  the  West  Indies  he  was
appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  Portsniouth,  with
the  command  of  the  trfK){)s  in  that  district.  In
IHOH  he  became  lieutenant  -  governor  of  Nova
Scotia,  and  in  the  autumn  of  that  year  he  pro-
ceeded with  a  division  of  troops  from  Halifax  to
the  West  Indies,  and  was  second  in  command  at
the  capture  of  Martinique.  He  afterward  re-
turned to  his  government  in  Nova  Scotia,  and  in
June,  1811,  he  succeeded  Sir  James  Craig  as  gov-
ernor-in-chief and  commander  of  the  forces  in  all
British  North  America.  During  the  war  of  1812
he  rendered  important  services  in  the  defence  of
Canada  against  the  armies  of  the  United  States.
His  attempt  to  penetrate  into  the  state  of  New
York  was  rendered  alwrtive  by  his  engagement
with  the  Americans  under  Gen.  Macomb  at  Platts-
bnrg,  11  Sept.,  1814,  which  forced  him  to  retreat
into  Canada.  He  soon  afterward  returned  to  Eng-
land, and  demanded  an  investigation  of  charges
that  had  l^een  made  against  him  for  the  disaster  at
Plattsburg.  He  died  before  this  was  completed,
but  the  result  vindicated  his  character.

PREVOST,  Ciiarles  Mallet,  soldier,  b.  in  Bal-
timore, Md.,  19  Sept.,  1818;  d.  in  Philmlelphia,  5
Nov.,  1887.  His  father.  Gen.  Andrew  M.  Prevost,
who  commanded  the  first  regiment  of  Pennsylvania
artillery  in  the  war  of  1812,  was  born  in  6eneva,
Switzerland,  of  Huguenot  ancestry,  and  his  grand-
father, Paul  Henry  Mallet  Prevost,  a  Geneva
banker,  came  to  the  United  States  in  1794  and
purchased  an  estate  at  Alexandria  (since  called
Prenchtown),  Hunterdon  co.,  N.  J.  Charles  M.
Prevost  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  shortly  afterward  was  appointed  U.S.  marshal
for  the  territory  of  Wisconsin,  and  he  was  subse-
quently deputy  collector  of  the  port  of  Philadel-
phia. He  was  an  active  memlwr  of  the  militia,
and  at  the  l)eginning  of  the  civil  war  had  com-
mand of  a  company.  Soon  afterward  he  was  ap-
pointed assistant  adjutant-general  on  the  staflf  of
Gen.  Frank  Patterson.  He  was  engaged  in  the
peninsular  campaign,  later  was  appointed  colonel
of  the  118th  (Corn  exchange)  regiment  of  Pennsyl-
vania volunteers,  and  commanded  it  at  Antietom.
The  severity  of  the  attack  comf)elled  his  regiment
to  fall  back,  and  Col.  Prevost  seized  the  colors  and
ran  to  the  front  to  rally  his  men.  While  encour-
aging them,  he  was  struck  in  the  shoulder  by  a
Minie  ball,  and  also  by  a  fragment  of  shell,  and
so  severely  wounded  that  he  never  recovered.  The
brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteer  was  con-
ferred on  him  on  13  March,  1865.  for  his  bmvery
in  this  action.  After  his  partial  recovery  he  re-
turned to  the  command  of  his  regiment,  and  took
part  in  the  battle  oj  Chaneellorsville  with  his
arm  strapped  to  his  body.  After  this  engagement
he  was  ordered  to  take  charge  of  a  camp  at  Harris-
burg  for  the  organization  of  the  Veteran  reserve
corps,  and,  finding  that  his  health  would  not  per-
mit him  to  engage  in  active  service,  he  entered
that  corps,  as  colonel  of  the  16th  regiment,  and
served  in  it  through  the  war.  On  his  return  home
he  was  appointed  major-general  of  the  1st  division
of  the  Pennsylvania  national  guard.

PRfcVOSt-PARADOI^  Lucl^n  Anatole,
French  author,  b.  in Paris,  8  July,  1829 ;  d.  in


PRICE


I'UICK


117


Washinjrton,  0.0..  11  Aujf..  1870.  He  wah  the  only
8«m  of  the  notn^w  Lii(>inila  l'n»vost-I'ani«lo|,  hikI
early  show«Ml  liti-ntry  talfiit.  He  rwcivinl  his  edu-
cation in  Paris,  >Hyaine  in  1H54  alitor  of  "  Im  Kevue
d'histoin*  universelle,"  was  ^radiiatctl  in  tiie  follow-
ing year  as  LL.  I).,  and  a|>point4-<l  professor  of  litera-
ture'in  the  University  of  Aix  in  Provence.  In  IKVl
he  iHH-anie  chief  wlitor  of  the  Paris  "Journal  des
iKUmts,"  and  from  that  time  till  his  death  he  was
one  of  the  most  brilliant  journalists  of  his  time.
He  was  a  formidahle  adversary  to  Xapokntn  III.,
and  his  witty  criticisms  wen'  lutrticularly  ob-
noxious to  that  monarch,  who  trieu  in  vain  to  con-
ciliate him.  In  IWK),  after  a  short  service  as  editor
of  "  La  Presse,"  he  retununl  to  "  l^es  Di'liats,"  where
he  oppose<l  the  French  intervention  in  Mexico  in  a
series  of  articles  which,  by  arousiii^j  public  indi^;-
nation,  cause«l  the  emixTor  first  to  nMluco  the  i)n>-
powMl  invading  army,  and  ultimately  to  recall  his
tr(K)ps  in  IHOO.  Three  times,  at  Paris  in  IHOJJ  and
1803,  and  at  Nantes  in  1S69.  Prt'vost-Paradol  was
a  candidate  for  the  corps  legislatif,  but  failed,
owing  to  the  opposition  of  the  a<lministration.
Aft«r  the  promulpition  of  the  liberal  amend-
ment to  the  constitution  in  18()9,  and  the  accession
of  the  j^mile  (.)llivier  cabinet,  he  became  reconciled
to  the  empire,  and  accepted  the  appointment  of
minister  to  the  United  States,  13  June,  1870.  He
arrivetl  in  Washington  towani  the  middle  of  July,
but  was  coldly  received  in  society,  owing  to  the
Franco-German  war,  which  public  opinion  dis-
approved. He  complaine<l  bitterly  of  this,  espe-
cially of  the  attitude  of  President  Grant.  In  the
night  of  11  Aug.,  1870,  he  rose,  and,  after  putting
his  papers  in  order,  took  position  before  a  mirror
and  delil)eratelv  shot  hitnself  through  the  brcjist.
Prevost-Paradol  was  a  remarkable  writer,  and  his
editorials  are  vet  considered  models  for  journalists.
His  works  include  "  Kssais  de  ]>olitique  et  de  littc-
rature"  (Paris,  1859);  "  Du  gouvernement  parle-
Dientaire"  (1860);  and  "  Nouveaux  essais  de  poli-
tiaue  et  de  littt'rature  "  (18G5).

PRICE,  Bruce,  architect,  b.  in  Cumberland,
Md.,  13  Dec.,  1845.  He  studied  his  profession
with  James  Crawford  and  with  John  Rudolph
Niernsee  in  Baltimore,  after  which  he  spent  a  vear
abroad.  In  1809  he  settled  in  Haltimore  ancf  l)e-
gan  bis  professional  career.  Soon  afterward  he
moved  to  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  where  he  remained
five  years,  and  in  1877  he  established  himself  in
New  York.  His  work  has  included  designs  for
the  cathetlral  in  Siivannah,  (Ja.,  the  Methmlist
church  in  Wilkeslwrre.  Pa.,  and  the  Lee  Memorial
churc-h  in  I>'xington,  Va..  which  are  considered  ex-
cellent exam|>les  of  nxxlern  American  ecclesiasti-
cal architecture.  He  designetl  the  cottages  and
club-house  at  Tuxe<lo  Park,  N.  J.,  the  West  Kncl
botel  at  Bar  Harlwr,  Me.,  and  the  Ix)ng  Beach
hotel.  N.  Y.  The  hotel  at  Long  Beach  was  built
by  him  in  sixty  days.  Mr.  Price  invented,  pat-
ented, and  built  the  parlor  bay-window  cars  for
the  Pennsylvania,  and  Boston  and  Albany  rail-
roa<ls.  He  is  the  author  of  "  A  Large  C'ountry
House"  (New  York.  1880).

PRICE,  David  Edward,  Canadian  senator,  b.
In  guelM'c  in  1H2«:  d.  there,  22  Aug.,  1883.  He
was  the  son  of  William  Price,  a  native  of  En'gland,
and  a  merchant  of  the  city  of  Quel)ec.  He  re-
ceiv»Ml  a  classical  e(lucation.  and  l)ecame  senior
member  of  a  firm  of  lumlwr  merchants  in  Quelnx-.
He  was  a  candidate  for  Chicoutimi  and  Ta<lousac
in  1854,  but  withdn-w  in  favor  of  the  commis-
sioner of  crown  land,  and  repres<'ntefl  those  con-
stituencies in  the  Canada  assembly  from  1855  till
1857. From  the  Utter  date  be  represented  Chi-


coutimi and  Saguenay  until  he  waA  elected  to  the
legislative  council  in  W14  for  the  Ijaurentiilm
(livision.  and  h**ld  his  seat  till  he  was  calltnl  to  the
senate  in  Mav.  1H07.  He  is  colonel  of  the  2d  l»at-
talion  of  Chicoutimi  militia,  and  vice-consul  at
Saguenay  for  Denmark,  Swwlen,  Norway,  ami  the
Argentine,  Chilian,  and  Penivian  republics,  and
consular  agent  for  the  United  States.

PRICE,  Ell  Kirk,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bradfonl,
Chester  co..  Pa.,  20  Julv,  1797  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  14  Nov.,  1884.  His  ancestor.  Philio,  a  Welsh
Quaker,  came  to  this  coimtry  with  William  Penn,
and  settled  on  a  tract  of  1,000  acres  in  Montgomery
county.  Pa.  Kli  was  educate*!  in  his  native  coun-
ty, and  entered  the  shinping-house  of  Thomas  P.
Coke  in  1815,  but  abanclonwl  merchandise  for  law,
and  l)ecame  a  student  in  the  oflice  of  John  Ser-
geant. He  was  admitted  to  the  \mr  in  1822.  and
soon  established  a  reputation  as  a  chancery  and
realn-state  lawyer.  It  is  said  that  no  other  mem-
ber of  the  Philadelphia  bar  was  ever  intrusted
with  so  large  a  numU'r  of  valuable  estates.  He
was  in  active  practice  for  sixty  years,  and  had  lit-
tle to  do  with  politics,  except  as  a  memU-r  of  the
state  senate  in  1854-'7.  During  this  service  he
was  the  author  of  several  acts  for  the  l)etter  secu-
rity of  real-estate  titles  and  the  rights  of  married
women,  and  originated  and  secured  the  passage  of
the  "Consolidation  Act,"  by  which  the  towns  that
are  included  in  the  present  city  of  Philadelpliia
were  united  in  one  municipal  government.  The
year  before  his  election  to  the  senate  he  framed
and  succeefled  in  making  a  law  that  is  known  as
the  "  Price  Act,"  relating  to  the  sale  and  convey-
ance of  real  estate.  He  was  an  originator  of  Fair-
mount  park,  and  a  commissioner  from  its  founda-
tion in  1807,  and  as  chairman  of  its  committee  on
the  purchase  of  real  estate  examined  all  the  titles
of  lands  that  were  inclosed  within  its  Inirders
and  acquired  by  the  city  of  Philadelphia.  He  was
an  active  memlwr  of  i)\e  American  philos<inhical
society  and  a  constant  contributor  to  its  "  Trans-
actions," a  member  of  sevenil  foreign  s<"ientific  and
litemry  societies,  president  of  the  University  hos-
jtital,  of  the  Pre^iton  retreat,  of  the  Pennsylvania
colonization  society,  and  of  the  Numismatic  and
antiquarian  society,  a  vice-president  of  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society,  and  a  trustee  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania.  He  published  "  I^aw  of
Limitations  and  Ijiens  against  Real  Estate  "(Phila-
delphia, 1851);  several  treatises  that  were  contrib-
uted to  the  American  phiU)sophical  society ;  and
the  memorial  volumes  "  Philip  and  Rachel  Price  "
(printed  privately,  1852);  "  Re»)ecca  "  (18<)2):  and
tlie  "Centennial  Meeting  of  the  Descendants  of
Philip  and  Rachel  Price '  (1804).  See  a  "  Memoir  "
by  James  T.  Rothrock  (Philadelphia,  1880),  and
"  Address  on  the  late  Eli  K.  Price,"  deliverpd  by
Benjamin  H.  Brewster  before  the  Bar  association
of  Philadelphia  (1880).

PRICE,  Hiram,  congressman,  b.  in  Washing-
ton county.  Pa..  10  Jan..  1814.  He  received  a  com-
mon-school e<lucation,  was  for  a  few  years  a  farmer,
and  then  a  merchant.  He  removeil  to  Davenport,
Iowa,  in  1844,  was  sch(M>l-fund  commissi<mer  of
Scott  county  for  eight  years,  and  as  such  hail  the
school  lands  allotteil  and  appraised.  He  was  col-
lector, treasurer,  and  reconler  of  the  county  dur-
ing seven  years  of  the  time  when  he  was  school-
fund  commissioner,  and  was  president  of  the  State
l»ank  of  Iowa  during  its  existence,  except  for  the  first
year.  When  the  civil  war  U-gan.  the  state  of  Iowa
had  no  availal>le  fumls.  and  he  funiishtnl  from  his
individual  means  quarters  and  subsistence  for  sev-
eral months  for  about  5.000  men. infantry  and


118


PRICE


PRICE


cavalry.  With  Ezekiel  Clark  he  advanced  about
$25.(XK)  to  pay  to  the  1st,  2(1.  and  'M  Iowa  ri'jji-
mcnts  their  "state  pay,"  and  carried  the  same  to
them,  at  much  jicrsonal  risk  from  the  "  bush-
whackers "in  northern  Missouri.  Mr.  Price  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  serving  in
IStKVO.  He  declined  to  Ui  a  candidate  again,  and
spent  some  time  al)road.  He  was  again  elected  in
1S7(5  and  187H.  and  then  again  declined  re-election.
He  was  appointed  commissioner  of  Indian  affairs
in  1881.  and  served  in  that  office  until  shortly
after  the  inauguration  of  President  C'leveland.

PRICE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  England;  d.  in
Maryland  in  KJfJl.  He  emigrated  to  Maryland,
and  represented  St.  Michael's  hundred  in  the
general  assembly  of  Wi9.  He  servinl  with  cre<lit
as  a  soldier,  received  the  public  thanks  of  Lord
Baltimore,  and  was  a[)pointed  muster-master-
general  in  1648.  He  was  made  a  privy  councillor
the  same  year,  and  was  an  ardent  supporter  of
the toleration act of 1649. He took an active

Fart  in  the  rebellions  of  1645,  and  commanded  St.
nigo's  fort  at  a  critical  moment,  and  it  was  in  a
freat  mea.'^ure  owing  to  his  exertions  that  Gov.
iconard  Calvert  recovered  his  authority.
PRICE,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  'in  Tynton,
Glamorganshire,  Wales,  23  Feb.,  1723;  d.  in  Lon-
don, England,  10  March,  1791.  He  was  the  son  of
a  dissenting  Calvinistic  minister,  was  educated  at  a
dissenting  academy,  and  held  several  appointments
in  and  alwut  London.  Of  his  "  Observatitms  on
Civil  Liberty  and  the  Justice  and  Policy  of  the  War
with  America"  (London  and  Boston,  1776)  60,000
co{)ies  were  soon  distributed.  For  this  work  he  re-
ceived the  thanks  of  the  corporation  of  London
and  the  freedom  of  the  city,  besides  being  invited,
in  1778,  by  the  congress  of  the  United  States,  to
become  a  citizen  of  this  country.  This  request  he
declined,  but  referred  to  the  infant  republic  as  "the
hope  and  the  future  refuge  of  mankina."  His  other
works  refer  to  religion,  ethics,  politics,  and  finance.
He  received  the  degree  of  I).  I),  from  the  Univer-
sity of  Aberdeen  in  1769,  and  that  of  LL.  I),  from
Yale  in  1781.  His  biography  was  written  by  his
nephew,  William  Morgan.  IX  D.  (London,  1815).

PRICE,  Rodman  McCamley,  governor  of  New
Jersey,  b.  in  Sussex  county,  X.  J.,  5  May,  1816.  At
an  early  age  he  became  a  student  at  Princeton,  but
before  completing  the  course  was  obliged  to  leave
on  account  of  his  health.  He  afterward  pursued  for
some  time  the  study  of  the  law,  and  finally,  in
1840,  was  appointed  jiurser  in  the  U.  S.  navy.  For
ten  years  he  was  connected  with  this  branch  of  the

service,  and  in  1848
he  was  made  navy
agent  for  the  Pacific
coast.  When  the
American  flag  was
raised  in  this  re-
gion, he  was  the
first  to  exercise  judi-
cial functions  under
it  as  alcalde.  On
returning  to  his
home  in  1850,  he
was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  congress,  and
served  from  1851
11111853.  On  8  Nov.
of  the  latter  year
he  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  New  Jer-
sey, which  office  he  filled  for  three  years.  Through
his  instrumentality  mainly  the  normal  school  of
that  state  was  established,  and  the  militia  system


.y^.  i:^e<


greatly  improved.  In  1861  he  was  a  delegate  to
the  Peace  congress.

PRICE.  Roger,  clergyman,  b.  in  f>ngland
alK)ut  1696;  d.  in  Leigh,  Essex,  8.  Dec,  1762.  He
was  educated  at  Oxford,  and  admitte<l  to  orders
in  the  Church  of  England  in  1720.  Prom  1725
onward  he  held  several  livings  in  England.  On
the  death  of  the  Rev.  Samuel  Myles,  in  1728,  Mr.
Price  was  sent,  the  year  following,  by  the  bishop
of  London,  to  succeed  Mr.  Myles  in  the  rector-
ship of  King's  chapel,  Boston,  Mass.  The  next
vear  he  was  appointed  the  bishop's  commissary.
In  April,  1734,  he  laid  the  comer-stone  of  Trinity
church,  Boston,  and  in  August,  1735,  he  delivered
the  first  sermon  in  it.  Although  an  able  preacher,
he  appears  to  have  had  various  difficulties  and  dis-
|)utes  with  his  parishioners,  and  became  quite
dissjitisfied  with  the  state  of  affairs  in  general.
Alx)ut  1744  he  purchased  a  tract  of  land  in  Hop-
kinton,  Mass.,  did  missionary  duty  for  two  or
three  years,  built  a  church  at  his  own  expense,
and  devised  it,  with  a  glebe  of  180  acres  of  land,  to
the  Society  for  propagating  the  gospel,  in  trust
for  supjjorting  a  minister  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land. In  1753  he  went  to  England,  where  he  spent
the  rest  of  his  life  as  "incumbent  of  the  parish  of
Leigh,  in  the  deanery  of  Broughing,  and  archdea-
conry of  St.  Albans."  Mr.  Price  published  two
sermons,  delivered  on  special  occasions  in  Boston,
one  on  the  death  of  John  Jekyll,  Esq.,  collector
of  customs  (1733),  the  other,  on  the  death  of  the
queen,  wife  of  George  II.  (1738).

PRICE,  Samnel,  senator,  b.  in  Fauquier  county,
Va.,  18  Aug.,  1805;  d.  in  Leesburg,  W.Va.,25Feb.,
1884.  He  removed  to  Preston  county,  Va.  (now
W.  Va.),  at  twelve  years  of  age,  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  settled  in  the  practice  of  law
in  Nicholas  county.  After  serving  two  terms  in
the  legislature  he  removed  to  Wheeling,  and  sub-
sequently to  Lewisburg,  and  represented  Green-
brier county  for  many  years  in  the  legislature.  He
was  a  leader  in  all  schemes  for  internal  improve-
ment west  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  and  an  originator
of  the  proposition  to  establish  a  railroad  from
Tidewater,  Va.,  to  Ohio  river.  He  was  a  member
of  the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1851,  and
of  the  Secession  convention  in  1861,  and  earnest-
ly opposed  disunion  in  the  latter  body,  but,  on
the  passage  of  the  ordinance  of  secession,  sup-
ported the  measures  that  followed.  He  was  elected
lieutenant-governor  in  1863,  and  served  as  presi-
dent of  the  state  senate  till  the  close  of  the  war.
He  was  api)ointe<l  a  circuit  judge  in  1865,  but  de-
clined to  take  the  test  oath  and  did  not  serve.
He  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  U.  S.
senate  in  1876,  was  president  of  the  West  Virginia
constitution  convention  in  1872,  and  in  1876  was
appointed  by  the  governor  to  fill  out  the  un-
expired term  of  Allen  T.  Caperton,  deceased,  in
the  U.  S.  senate,  serving  four  months.

PRICE,  Sterling,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince  Ed-
ward county,  Va.,  11  Sept.,  1809;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  29  Sept.,  1867.  He  was  a  student  at  Hamp-
den Sidney  college,  read  law,  moved  to  Chariton
county.  Mo.,  in  1831,  and  was  speaker  of  the  Mis-
souri house  of  representatives  in  1840-'4.  He  was
elected  to  congress  in  the  latter  year  as  a  Demo-
crat, but  resigned  in  1846,  and  raised  the  2d  Mis-
souri cavalry  regiment  for  the  Mexican  war,  l>e-
coming  its  colonel.  He  moved  his  regiment  with
that  of  Col.  Doniphan,  both  under  command  of
Gen.  Stephen  W.  Kearny,  from  Fort  Leaven-
worth to  Santa  Fe,  more  than  1,000  miles,  the
march  occupying  more  than  fifty  ^ays,  and  the
army  subsisting  mainly  on  the  country.  Col.  Price,


PRICE


PRIDE A UX


119


with  al>otit  2,000  men.  was  left  in  chnrjrfl  of  Now
Mexico,  (u»n.  Keanjy  niovinjr  with  tho  remainder
of  th«>  coiniuHnil  to  (.'alifoniia.  An  inxurroction
oct'urnHl  in  Santa  Ft'*,  t«)  which  (lov.  Hront  an<l
several  of  his  oflU-crs  fell  vi<-tinis  iliirin);  their  al>-
s<'nre  from  the  town.  ("ol.  Price  now  attacktMl  the
Mixiciiiis,  (•oini)lete<l  the  comjuest  of  the  province
ill  -<\(nil  lirillinnt  actions,  and  after  iironiof ion
t«i  liri;.'ii<lier-t.'enenil  of  volunteers,  20  July,  1H47,
marched  to  Chihuahua,  of  which  he  was  ma<h'
military  jrovernor.  He  defeated  the  .Mexicans
at  Santa  Cruz  de  Rosales,  Ki  March,  1848.  (ten.
Price  was  jjovernor  of  Missouri  from  1853  till
IH.*)?.  Iwnk  commissioner  of  the  state  fnim  IHTil
till  18(51,  and  presitlent  of  the  State  convention
on  4  Mari'h,  18<J1.  Ho  was  ap|)ointed  niajor-jjen-
«ral  of  the  Missouri  state  guard  on  18  May,  and

after  he  had  lKH>n
ioinetl  by  (Sen.  Ben
McCulloch  and  Gen.
Pearco  with  Confetl-
erate  troops  and  Ar-
kansas muitia,  they
defeate<l  Gen.  Na-
thaniel Lvon  at  Wil-
son's crook,  in  s<^)uth-
wostern  Missouri,  10
Aug.,  18(51.  Price
then  advance<l  north-
ward and  invested
Lexington,  on  Mis-
souri river.  12  Sept.,
18«1.  He  captured
the  place,  with  3,500
men,  on  21  Sept.,  but
fell  back  southward
before  Gen.  John  C.
Fremont,  and  went
into  winter-quarters  near  Springfield,  whence  he  was
■driven  bv  Gen.  Samuel  It.  Curtis,  12  PVb.,  18(52,  and
retreated  toward  Fort  Smith.  Ark.  Gen.  Earl  Van
Dorn  assumed  command  of  Price's  and  McCullo<'h's
armies,  att>u'ko<l  Curtis  at  Pea  Ridge.  7  March.  18()2,
and  wa«  defeated.  Van  Dorn  was  now  ordered  to
Tennessee.  Price  participated  in  the  engagements
around  Corinth,  retreated  under  Beauregard  to
Tuf>elo,  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Army
of  the  West  in  >larch,  1862,  and  then  t<.)  the  district
of  Tennessee.  He  moved  toward  Nashville,  and
met  and  fought  with  Gen.  William  S.  Rosecrans,  in
command  of  Grant's  right,  at  luka,  19  Sept.,  18(52,
but  was  ordered  to  report  to  Van  Dorn,  and  by  his
direction  almndoned  luka  and  joined  him  near
Biildwyn.  He  participate<l  in  Van  Dorn's  dis-
jistrous  attack  uj)on  Corinth  in  Octol)er,  18(V2,  and
in  the  operations  under  Gen.  John  C.  Pemlwrton
in  northern  Mississippi  during  the  winter  of
1862-'3.  He  was  then  ordered  to  the  Trans-Mis-
sissippi department,  took  part  in  the  unsuccessful
attack  \i\w\\  Helena,  21  July,  \S(Vi,  and  "was  as-
signtnl  tf»  the  command  of  the  district  of  Arkansas.
He  was  driven  from  Little  Itock  by  Gen.  Frederic
Steele,  but  successfully  resisted  Steele's  advance
towanl  Red  river  in  March,  1864,  and  forced  him
to  retreat.  He  ma<le  a  raid  into  Missouri  in  Sep-
teml>er,  18(54,  had  many  engagements  with  the
National  forces,  and  reached  Miss<iuri  river,  but
was  «lriven  out  of  the  state  and  into  southwest-
ern Arkansas.  After  the  surrender  of  the  Con-
federate armies  he  went  to  Mexico,  but  he  re-
tunird  to  Missouri  in  1805.

PKICK,  Theophiliis  Townsend,  physician,  b.
in  CaiH?  May  county,  N.  J.,  21  May.  1828.  He  re-
ceivetl  an  aca<lemical  education,  taught  school  for
a  time,  then  studied  medicine,  was  graduated  in


J^Ce^^y'^-vC^^^  «^


IRW  at  Pennsylvania  medical  c<illcg\\  and  set-
tle«l  in  practice  at  Tiickerton.  N.  J.  In  1H(W  he
.^er^•cH^  an  a  volunteer  surgeon  in  the  army.  Since
1879  he  has  lieen  acting  assistant  surgeon  in  the
L'.  S.  marine  hospital  seo'ice,  thefln<t  an<l  only  ap-
pointment of  the  kind  in  New  Jersey,  the  govern-
ment medical  S4«rvice  on  the  entire  New  .lersej
coast  l)eing  under  his  charge.  He  is  one  of  the  pro-
jectors of  the  Tuckerton  railroad.  an<l  since  1871
has  been  the  se<'retary.  He  luis  si-rvtvl  in  the  New
Jersey  legislature,  is  one  «if  the  trustees  of  the
New  .lorsey  reform  schof)]  for  Ijoys.  and  of  the
.South  Jersey  institute,  and  a  memlter  of  the  State
me«lical  and  historical  societies.  He  has  contributed
to  nie<lical  journals,  and  iKith  in  ^)rose  and  p«M»try
to  various  fu'ritKlicals.  Many  of  his  war  songs  have
iKK'ome  widely  known.  He  is  the  author  of  the
entire  historical  an<l  descriptive  part  of  the  "  His-
torical an<l  Biographical  Atlas  of  the  New  Jersey
Coast"  (Philadelphia.  1877).

PRICE.  ThoniBH  Lanson.  contractor,  b.  near
Danville,  Va.,  19  Jan..  1805);  d.  in  Jefferson  City,
Mo.,  16  July,  1870.  His  father  was  a  wealthy  to-
bacco-planter. In  1831  the  son  setthnl  in  Jefferson
Citv.  Mo.  He  first  engage<l  in  mercantile  jtursuits,
and  afterward  lM>ught  and  sold  real  estate.  In
18i^H  he  obtained  the  contract  for  carrying  the
mail  lM>tween  St.  Louis  and  Jefferson  City,  and  es-
tablished the  first  stage-line  connecting  those
places,  ritimately  he  gained  control  of  all  the
stage-routes  in  the  state,  and  l)ecame  lessee  of  the
State  penitentiary.  He  was  chosen  the  first  mayor
of  Jefferson  City  in  18;W,  and  was  n'-electe<l.  In
1847  he  was  appointed  brevet  major-general  of  the
6th  division  of  Missouri  militia,  and  in  1849  he
was  elected  lieutenant-governor  on  the  Democratic
ticket.  In  1856  Gen.  Price  headed  a  Benton  dele-
gation to  the  Democratic  national  convention  that
nominated  James  Buchanan,  but  was  not  admitted.
In  18(50  he  was  olec-ted  to  the  state  legislature,  and
on  21  Sept..  1861,  was  appointed  by  Gen.  John  C.
Fremont  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  The  ap-
pointment expired  by  limitation,  17  July,  1862.  lie
was  ele<'ted  to  congress  in  place  of  John  W.  Reid,
expelletl,  and  served  from  21  Jan.,  1862.  till  3  March,
18(>3.  In  18(>4  he  was  nominated  by  the  I'nion
men  for  governor,  although  there  was  no  hojx!  of
his  election.  About  this  time  his  health  liegan  to
fail,  and  his  only  syjasequent  apftearance  in  public
life  was  as  delegate  to  the  Democratic  national
convention  in  1868,  where  he  acted  as  vice-presi-
dent when  Horatio  Seymour  was  nominattnl.  Dur-
ing the  greater  part  of  his  career  Cien.  Price  was
connected  with  railroads,  lM)th  as  contractor  and
officer.  When  a  meml)er  of  the  legislature  he  was
largely  instrumental  in  inducing  the  state  to  lend
its  aid  to  the  construction  of  the  Iron  Mountain
and  Hannibal  and  St.  Joseph  roads.  He  was  also
i<lentified  with  the  construction  of  the  Missouri
Pacific  ami  the  Kansas  Pacific.  Of  the  former  he
was  one  of  the  first  and  largest  contractors.  lie-
sides  building  the  greater  part  of  the  Kansas  Pa-
cific, he  was  also  a  fund  commissioner  and  dirwtor
of  that  road,  and  unito<l  with  other  capitalists  in
extending  the  line  from  Denver  to  Chevcnne.

PRIDEAl'X,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Dev-
onshire.  England,  in  1718;  d.  near  Fort  Niagara,
19  July,  1759.  He  was  the  stvond  son  of  Sir
John  Prideaux,  l»art..  and  early  entere«l  the  army,
serving  in  the  battle  of  Dellingen  in  1743.  Hebe-
came  captain  in  the  3d  foot-guanls,  24  Feb.,  1745,
colonel  of  the  55th  foot.  28  Oct..  1758,  and  brigatlior-
general,  5May,  1759.  In  1759  he  was  intruste<l  by
William  Pitt  with  the  command  of  one  of  the  four
diyisioDs  of  the  army  that  was  to  conquer  Canada,


120


PRIEST


PRIESTLEY


the  others  bein^  given  to  Wolfe.  Amherst,  and
Stanwix.  lie  opened  his  campaiprn  by  a  move-
ment on  F'ort  Niagara,  which  was  then  one  of  the
most  formi(lal)k'  French  posts.  A  landing  was
etTccted  on  7  July,  notwithstanding  a  harassing
fire,  and  after  a  summons  to  surrender  had  been
refus»>d  by  Pouchot,  the  French  commander,  who
had  sent  secretly  for  re-enforcements,  Prideaux
opened  fire  with  his  artillery.  He  reju'lled  a  sortie
on  11  July,  and  on  the  lS)th  princnted  a  French
schooner  from  landing  re-en furcements  that  had
l)eensentby  Frontenac.  On  the  eveningof  the  same
day,  while  he  was  busy  in  the  trenches,  he  was  killed
by  the  bursting  of  a  coehorn,  owing  to  the  careless-
ness of  an  artillervman.  He  was  succeeded  in  the
command  by  Sir\VilIiam  Johnson.  As  the  elder
brother  had  lieen  killed  at  Carthagena  in  1741.
Prideaux  was  his  father's  heir,  an<l  his  son,  John
Wilmot,  succeeded  to  the  baronetcy  in  17(i(5.

PRIEST,  Joslah,  author,  b.  arj<.ut  1790;  d.  in
western  New  York  about  IMO.  lie  was  unedu-
cated, and  was  a  harness-maker  by  trade,  but  pub-
lished several  books,  including  "  Woiidei*s  of  Na-
ture" (Albany.  1820);  "View  of  the  Millennium"
(1828) ;  "  Stones  of  the  Revolution  "  (183(;) ;  "  Amer-
ican Anti(iuities"  (1888);  and  "Slavery  in  the
Light  of  History  and  Sc-ripture"  (1848).

PRIESTLEV,  Joseph,  scientist,  b.  in  Field-
head,  near  Leeds,  Yorkshire,  England,  24  March,
1738;  d.  in  Northumberland,  Pa.,  6  Feb.,  1804,
He  wjis  the  eldest  son  of  a  cloth-dresser,  and  his
mother  dying  when  the  boy  was  six  years  old,  he

was  adoj)ted  Ijy  his
aunt,  ^Irs.  Keigh-
ley.  The  youth  was
sent  to  a  free  gram-
mar-school, and  at
the  age  of  sixteen
had  made  consider-
able progress  in  the
ancient  languages.
He  had  determined
to  become  a  ciergy-
man.and  in  1752-'5
he  was  at  the  dis-
senting academy  at
Daventry,  in  North-
amptonshire, where
he  wrote  some  of
his  earliest  tracts.
On  attempting  to
enter  the  ministry
he  was  rejected  on
account  of  his  views  on  original  sin,  the  atone-
ment, and  eternal  damnation,  which  he  main-
tained openly.  In  17o.5  he  became  an  assistant  in
an  obscure  meeting-house  at  Noedham  market  in
Suffolk,  but  he  faihxl  to  become  nopular.  Three
years  later  he  went  to  Nantwich,  in  Cheshire,
where  he  taught  twelve  hours  a  day.  At  this  time
he  wrote  his  first  book,  "Rudiments  of  English
Grammar"  (London,  1761),  and  his  "Course  of
Lectures  on  the  Theory  of  Language  and  Univer-
sal Grammar"  (Warrington,  17(i2).  In  1701  he
removed  to  Warrington,  in  Lancashire,  where  the
dissenters  had  established  an  academy,  and  for  six
years  he  was  tutor  there  in  the  languages  and
belles-lettres.  He  preached  continually  during  his
residence  in  that  place,  and  was  ordained  there.
During  one  of  his  visits  to  London  he  met  Benja-
min Franklin,  and  through  his  assistance  under-
took the  prepamtion  of  his  "History  and  Present
State  of  Electricity,  with  Original  ^experiments"
(London,  1767).  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  and  was  elected


to  the  Royal  society  in  1766.  In  1767  he  removed
to  Ixjeds,  where  he  was  given  charge  of  the  Mill
Hill  chapel.  He  devoted  himself  closely  to  th&
study  of  theology,  and  began  his  investigations  on
gases,  also  publishing  a  fragmentary  work  on  the
I  "  History  and  Present  State  of  Discoveries  reiating-
to  Vision,  Light,  and  Colors"  (2  vols.,  London,
1772).  In  17(50  he  came  into  conflict  with  Sir  Will-
iam Blackstone,  author  of  the  "Commentaries,"
pointing  out  inaccurate  statements  of  historical
facts  in  his  work.  Blackstone  promised  to  cancel
the  offensive  paragraphs  in  the  future  editions  of
his  work,  and  the  controversy  cAme  to  an  amicable
conclusion.  From  1773  till  1780  he  wjis  librarian
or  literary  comj)anion  to  the  Earl  of  Shelburne,
with  whom  he  travelled  on  the  continent,  and
si)ent  some  time  in  Paris;  on  his  return  he  had
nmch  leisure  for  scientific  research,  and  was  active
in  prosecuting  his  experiments.  During  these
years  he  made  his  great  discoveries  in  chemistry,
and  renewed  his  investigations  on  gases.  Priestley
was  unacquainted  with  chemistry ;  he  had  no  appa-
ratus, and  knew  nothing  of  chemical  experiment-
ing, but  these  adverse  conditions  may  have  been
serviceable  as  he  entered  ii\)on  a  new  field  where
apparatus  had  to  Im?  invented,  and  the  arrange-
ments that  he  devised  for  the  manipulation  of
gases  are  unsurpassed  in  simplicity  and  have  been
used  ever  since.  The  first  of  these  discoveries  was
that  of  nitric  oxide  in  1772,  the  properties  of  which
he  ascertained  and  applied  to  the  analysis  of  air.
In  1774,  by  heating  the  red  oxide  of  mercury,  he
made  his  discovery  of  oxygen,  to  which  he  gave
the  name  of  dephlogiscated  air.  He  also  showed
its  power  of  supporting  combustion  better,  and
animal  life  longer,  than  the  same  volume  of  com-
mon air.  By  means  of  mercury  which  he  used
with  the  pneumatic  trough  to  collect  gases  that
are  soluble  in  water,  he  further  made  known  hy-
drochloric acid  and  ammonia  in  1774,  and  sulphur
dioxide  and  silicon  tetrafluoride  in  1775,  ana  in-
troduced easy  methods  for  their  preparation,  de-
scribing with  exactness  the  most  remarkable  prop-
erties of  each.  He  likewise  pointed  out  the  exist-
ence of  carburetted  hydrogen  gas.  Priestley  dis-
covered nitrous  oxide  in  1776,  and,  after  he  came
to  the  United  States,  carbon  monoxide  in  1779.
To  him  we  owe  the  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  an
acid  is  formed  when  electric  sparks  are  made  to
pass  for  some  time  through  a  given  bulk  of  com-
mon air,  which  afterward  led  to  Cavendish's  dis-
covery of  the  composition  of  nitric  acid.  These
facts  are  described  in  his  "  Experiments  and  Ob-
servation Relating  to  Natural  Philosophy,  with  a
Continuation  of  the  Observations  on  Air  (3  vols.,
London,  1779-'86).  Meanwhile  he  wrote  numerous
theological  works,  and  it  has  been  said  of  Priestley
that  "  he  was  fond  of  controversy,  yet  he  neWr
sought  it,  and  if  he  participated  in  it.  it  was  gen-
erally because  it  was  thrust  upon  him,  and  he
became  the  defendant  rather  than  the  assailant."
In  1780  he  took  up  his  residence  in  Birmingham,
where  he  had  charge  of  an  independent  congrega-
tion. His  collection  of^apparatus  had  increased,
and  his  income  was  now  so  good  that  he  could
prosecute  his  researches  with  freedom.  In  1790  he
enraged  the  people  by  his  "Familiar  Letters  to  the
Inhabitants  of  Birmingham"  (Birmingham,  1790),
and  these  were  soon  followed  by  "Letters  to  Rt.
Hon.  E.  Burke,  occasioned  by  his  Reflections  on
the  Revolution  in  France"  (1791).  He  now  be-
came the  recognized  champion  of  liberal  thought,
which  made  him  the  subject  of  severe  condemna-
tion at  home.  This  feeling  culminated  on  14  Jul^,
1791,  the  anniversary  of  the  French  revolution,  in


PRIESTLEY


PRIME


121


a  rint  in Rirmiufrhain.  duriiif;  which  his  mootiii);-
house  and  his  dwellin^f-housv  wi>n>  hunitMl.  and  his
littniry  and  appanitiis  wcrp  (ii>stri>V(>d.  and  many
manitscriitts,  the  fruits  of  yoars  t>(  industry,  tn'r-
ishwl  in  tlio  flanios. I'riesth'V  I'scafH'd  to  lionuon.
Whvn  thi'|M)|tuhiri*xcitom(>nt  Iwul  soiufwhatfcaM'il
in  Birinin;;;hHni  hi>  sou);ht  i*oni|M-nsation in  the
courts  for  the  destruction of his  pro|)erty,  and
presente«l  a  claim  for  JtS.UlW.  hut.  durinj;  a  trial  of
nine  years,  it  was  cut  down  to  .t'2.'>(»2. He  sailed
from London  on 7 April.  1794,  and  on  4  June
land(Hl  in  New  York,  where  he  was  received  by
delepitions  from scientific  s<K'ieties  and invitetl
to  give  a  course  of  lectun»s  on  ex|H>riniental  phi-
losophy, for  which  a  hundred  subscriptions  at  flO
each  were  s<)on  obtained. lUit he refused,  and
prooeedwl  at  once  to PhilH<h-lphia.  where  he  re-
ceivwl  a  complimentary  address  from  the  Ameri-
can  philosophical sm-iety. He was  otTered the
firofessorshiji  of  chemistry  in the  University  of
Vnnsylvania  with  a  ^(kkI  salary,  but  (lecUnwl  the
aj){K>intment.  preferrinij  to  choose  his  own  occupa-
tions in  retirenjcnt. Iiis  sons  had  previously  set-
tle<l  in  Xorthuml)erland,  Pa.,  whither  he  followeil.
making  his  home  in  the  midst  of  a  garden  over-
looking one  of  the  finest  views  of  the  Susquehanna.
A  laltoratorv  was  built  for  him.  which  was  finished
in  171>7.  an((  he  was  able  to  arrange  his  lK)oks  and
renew  his  ex|H»rinients  with  every  |K)ssible  facility.
Thomas  JefTerson  consulted  him  m  regard  to  the
founding  of  the  University  of  Virginia,  and  he  wjus
oflfered  the  presidency  of  the  University  of  North
Carolina. In  the  spring  of  17i)6  he  delivered  a
series  of  '•  Discourses  relating  to  the  Evidences  of
Revealetl Religion"  (Philadelphia, 1790). which
were  attended by  crowded  audiences,  including
many  memlwrs  of  congress  and  the  executive  of-
ficers of  the  government,  and  in  1797  he  delivere<l
a  second  series,  which  were  less  favonibly  received.
The  first  of  these,  when  published,  wasdtnlicated  to
John  Adams,  who  was  then  his  hearer  and  admirer,
but  later,  when  Adams  (q.  v.)  became  president,
Priestley  onj)osed  the  administration,  and  it  wjus
intimated  that  the  "  alien  law  "  was  directed  against
him. His  time  wa.s  chiefly  spent  in  literarv  work,
and he  wrote  the  continuation  of  his  '•General
History  of  the  Christian  Church  to  the  Fall  of
the  Western  Empire"  (4  vols..  Northuml>erland,
1803-'3),  which  he  dedicated  to  Thomas  Jefferson  :
also  "Answer  to  Mr.  Paine's  Ageof  Reason  "  (1795);
"Comivirison of  the  Institutions  of Moses with
those  of  the  Hindoos  and  other  Nations  "  (1799):
"Notes  on  all  the  Books  of  Scri^nure"  (180;});  and
"The  Doctrines  of  Heathen  Philosophy  compared
with  those  of  lievelation  "  (1804). There  are  many
memoirs  of  his  life,  of  which  the  most  im|>ortan"t
are  John  Corry's  "Life  of  J.  Priestley"  (Birming-
ham. 1805)  and  "  Memoirs  of  Dr.  Joseph  Priestley
to  the  Year  1795.  written  bv  Himself;  with  a  Con-
tinuation to  the  Time  of  fiis  Decease,  by  his  Son,
Joseph  Priestley"  (2  vols.,  London,  1806-'7). His
"Theological  and  Miscellaneous  Works"  (exclud-
ing the  scientific)  were  collected  by  John  T.  Rutt
and^  ^mblished  in  twenty-six volumes  (Hackney,
1817-32). His  old  congregation  in  Birmingham
erecte<l  a  monument  to  his  memory  in  their  place
of  worship  after  his  death,  and  a  marble  statue  was
placed  in  18<J0  in  the  corridor  of  the  museum  at
Oxfonl. The  centennial  of  the  discovery  of  oxygen
was  celebratcMl  on  1  Aug.,  1874,  by  the  unveiling
of  a  statue  to  his  memory  in  Birmingham,  an  ad-
dress in  Paris,  and  in  this  country  l)y  a  gjithering
of  chemists  at  his  grave  in  Northunilterland.  Pa.,
where  appropriate  exercises  were  lield,  including
addresses  by  T.  Sterry  Hunt,  Benjamin  Silliman,


and  other  scientists.  Dr.  H.  Carringtcm  Bolton,
who  «lelivere<l  an  address  on  Priestley  liefore  the
New  York  genc>alogical  and  biographical  socMety  in
April.  IHMH,  has  in  preparation  "  The  Scientific  Cor-
respondence of  the  Rev.  Joseph  Priet*tlev.''

PRIKTO.  Joaquin  ({fre-av  -to).  Chilian  soldier,
b.  in  Conce()cion,  20  Aug..  ifwO;  d.  in  Valitaraiso,
22  Nov..  IKVt.  In  August,  180.5.  he  enlistee!  in  the
militia  of  Concencion.  and  in  April,  IWHl,  he  ao-
companied  Gen.  Luis  de  la  Cruz  acro>s  the  Andes.
In  1811.  as  captain  of  dragcKins,  he  formed  jmrt  of
an  auxiliary  army  that  went  to  aid  the  jiatriotic
movement  of  Buenos  Ayres.  On  his  return  he
served  in  the  southern  camfiaign  of  Chili,  and  in
1814  was  governor  of  Talca.  After  the  defeat  of
Rancagua  he  went  to  the  Argentine  Rcftublic  ami
established  himself  in  Buenos  Ayres.  He  joinecl
the  Chilian-Argentine  army,  in  1817  was  oresent  at
the  battle  of  C'hacabuco.  and  afterwanl  was  ap-
pointed commander  of  Santiago  and  <lirector  of
the  arsenal.  He  equipped  the  army  and  took  part
in  the  battle  of  Maypu  as  commander  of  the  re-
serve. In  1821  he  was  sent  to  the  south,  which
had  revolted  under  Benavides,  and  defeated  the
latter  in  the  battle  of  Vegas  de  Stildias.  He  was
elected  deputy  to  congress  and  senator  in  1823,
took  an  active  part  in  the  civil  war  of  1821>-'30,
and  after  the  l)attle  of  Lircoy  he  was  ap[>ointed
provisional  president  of  the  republic.  Six  months
afterward,  18  Sept.,  1831,  he  was  elected  constitu-
tional president.  On  25  May,  1833,  the  new  con-
stitution of  the  country  was  promulgated.  He
was  re-elected  in  I8ii(i,  and,  after  retiring  in  1841,
became  councillor  of  state,  senator,  and  command-
er of  Valparaiso.

PRIME,  Ebenezer.  clergymen,  b.  in  Milfonl,
Conn.,  21  July.  1700:  d.  in  Huntington,  L,  I.,  25
Sept.,  1779.  lie  was  the  grandson  of  James,  who,
with  his  brother.  Mark  Prime,  came  from  England
to  escajHJ  religious  persecution  about  KhiH.  El)ene-
zer  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1718,  studicil  divinity,
and  the  following  year  was  called  to  Huntington,
L.  I.,  where  he  became  an  assistant  to  Rev.  Elipha-
let  Jones.  On  5  June.  1723,  he  was  ordained  pas-
tor of  the  same  church,  which  office  he  continued
to  hold  until  his  death.  A  register  of  the  sermons
that  he  preached,  with  texts,  dates,  and  places  of
delivery,  shows-that  he  prepared  more  than  3.000,
many  of  which  are  still  preserved.  Although  he
was  educated  as  a  Congregationalist,  in  1747  his
own  church  and  the  others  in  the  county  of  Suf-
folk formed  themselves  into  a  presbytery  and
adopted  the  Presbyterian  form  of  government,  Mr.
Prime  being  chosen  the  first  moderator.  In  the
war  of  the  Revolution  Mr.  Prime's  church  was
turned  into  a  military  de{K)t  by  the  British,  and  the
pulpit  and  pews  were  burnt  for  fuel.  The  parson-
age was  cx-cupied  by  troops :  the  pastor's  valuable
library  was  used  for  lighting  fires,  and  otherwise
mutilated.  Driven  from  home  in  his  seventy-
seventh  year,  an  obj«»ct  of  s|>ecial  hostility  on  ac-
count of  his  decided  patriotic  opinions,  he  retired
to  a  quiet  part  of  the  parish  and  preached  in  private
houses,  or  wherever  he  could  gather  his  peonle  to-
gether. Toward  the  close  of  the  war  Col.  Ik-nja-
min  Thompson,  afterward  Count  Ruinford.  was  or-
dered to  cx;cupy  the  village.  He  tore  <lown  the
church,  and  used  the  materiids  in  buil<iing  bar-
nu-ksand  b|cx;k-houses  in  the  graveyanl.  Ascer-
taining where  the  venerable  piustor  lay  buried,  he
directed  that  his  own  tent  should  be  pitched  at  the
head  of  the  grave,  that,  as  he  expres-ied  it,  he
might have  the satisfaction of  treading on  the

"d old  rebel  "every  time  he  entered  and  left  iU

Mr.  Prime  is  described  by  a  contemporary  as  "a


122


PRIME


PRIME


S


man  of  sterlinff  character,  of  powerful  intellect,
who  rMtssessed  tne  reputation  of  un  able  and  faith-
ful divine."  His  published  discourses  inclii<le
"  The  Pastor  at  Ijargo  Vindicated  "  and  "  The  Di-
vine Institution  of  Preaching  the  GosjkjI  Consid-
ered "  (New  York,  1758),  and  "The  Imp(»rtanee  of
the  Divine  Presence  with  the  Armiesof  God's  Peo-
ple in  their  Martial  Enterprises"  (1759).  He  also
published  a  sermon,  deliveretl  in  1754,  on  "  Ordi-
nation to  the  Gospel  Ministry,"  reparding  which  he
held  i)eculiar  views.— His  st)n,  Beujainiii  Young,

)hvsician,  b.  in  Huntington,  L.  1.,  20  Dec,  17;5;i;

i.  there,  31  Oct.,  171)1,  was  gnidiiated  at  Princeton
in  1751,  studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Jacob  Ogden,
and  began  to  practisi'  at  Easthampton,  L.  I.  In
1756-'7  he  was  tutor  at  Princeton.  His  accjuire-
ments  jus  a  linguist  were  luuisual.  Among  his  pa-
pers were  found,  after  his  death,  Latin  versifica-
tions of  one  of  the  Psalms  written  in  ail  the  dif-
ferent metres  of  the  odes  of  Horace.  He  was  also
ma.ster  of  wneral  modern  languages,  which  he
spoke  fluently.  In  .lune,  1702.  he  sailed  for  Eng-
land to  visit  medical  schools  abroad,  and  he  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Leyden  in  July,
17()4.  After  visiting  Moscow  he  returned  to  New
York  city  and  resumed  practice  there.  On  the
passage  of  the  stamp-act  he  wrote  "A  Song  for
the  Sons  of  Liberty  m  New  York."  At  the  open-
ing of  the  Revolutionary  war.  Dr.  Prime,  who  had
meantime  given  up  practice  in  New  York  and  re-
tired to  Huntington,  was  compelled  to  flee  to  Con-
nectioit,  but  at  the  end  of  the  war  he  returned
to  Huntington, and  remained  thereuntil  his  death.
Besides  his  songs  and  ballads,  which  circulated
widely  during  the  war,'  Dr.  Prime  published  "  The
Patriot  Muse,  or  Poems  on  some  of  the  Principal
Events  of  the  Late  War,  etc.,  by  an  American  Gen-
tleman, referring  to  the  French  War "  (London,
17(54),  and  "Columbia's  Glory,  or  British  Pride
Humbled,  a  Poem  on  the  American  Revolution"
(New  York,  1791).  In  addition  to  these,  there  was
published  in  New  York  city,  in  1840,  "  Muscipula:
Sive  Cambromyomachia.  The  Mouse-Trap  ;  or.  the
Battle  of  the  Welsh  and  the  Mice:  in  Latin  and  Eng-
lish. With  Other  Poems  in  different  Languages.
By  an  American."  The  princinal  Latin  poem  in
this  volume  is  probably  not  by  l)r.  Prime,  but  the
translation  of  the  "  Muscipula  "  is  undoubtedly  his
work. — Benjamin  Young's  son,  Nathaniel  Scud-
der.  clergvman.  b.  in  Huntington,  L.  I.,  21  April,
1785;  d.  in  Mamaroneck,  N.  Y.,  27  March,  185(5,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1804,  licensed  to
preach  by  the  j)resbytery  of  Long  Island,  10  Oct.,
1805,  and  ordained  in  1809.  After  preaching  at
Sag  Harbor,  Fresh  Pond,  and  Smithtown,  L.  I.,
he  was  called,  in  1813,  to  the  Presbyterian  church
at  Cambridge,  Washington  co.,  N.  Y..  where  he
remained  for  seventeen  years.  For  several  years
after  1821  he  was  also  principal  of  the  county
academy.  In  18^J1  he  established  a  seminary  for
young  women  in  Sing  Sing,  under  the  charge  of
his  daughter,  and  on  its  being  destroyed  by  fire  in
1835,  he  removed  it  to  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  where  he
remained  eight  years.  On  retiring  at  the  end  of
that  period,  he  did  not  again  accept  a  pastoral
charge.  Dr.  Prime  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  all
moral  reforms,  and  is  believed  to  have  preached
in  1811  one  of  the  first  temperance  sermons  that
was  ever  delivered.  He  was  an  enthusiastic  elec-
trician, and  was  instrumental  in  intrfjducing  Prof.
Joseph  Henry  to  public  notice.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.D.  from  Princeton  in  1848.  Besides
"  A  Collection  of  Hymns  "  (Sag  Harbor.  1809).  "  A
Familiar  Illustration  of  Christian  Baptism  "(Salem,
1818),  and  '*  A  History  of  Long  Island  "  (New  York,


1845),  Dr.  Prime  published  sermons  entitled  "The
Pernicious  Effects  of  Intemperance"  (Brooklyn,
1812);  "Divine  Truth  the  Established  Means  of
Sanctification  "  (Salem,  1817);  and  "The  Year  of
Jubilee,  but  not  to  Africans  "  (1825). — Another  son,
Samuel  Irenseus,  editor,  b.  in  I^illston,  N.  Y.,  4
Nov.,  1812;  d,  in  Manchester,  Vt.,  18  July,  1885,
was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1829,  taught  three
years  at  Cambridge  and  Sing  Sing,  N.  Y.,  and  en-
tered Princeton  tneological  seminary,  but  before
cotnpleting  his  first  year  he  was  attacked  by  a  se-
vere illness,  and
was  never  able  to
resume  his  stud-
ies. He  was  li-
censed to  preach
in  1833,  and  held

{>astorates  at
iailston  Spa  in
1833-'5,  and  at
Matteawan,  N.
Y.,  in  1837-40.
In  the  spring  of
the  latter  year  he
was  compelled  to
abandon  the  pul-

Eit,  owing  to  a
ronchial  affec-
tion, from  which
he  never  entirely

recovered.  Thereafter,  till  his  death,  he  was  editor
of  the  "  New  York  Observer,"  except  during  1849,
when  he  acted  as  secretary  of  the  American  Bible
society,  and  a  few  months  in  1850,  when  he  edited
"  The  Presbyterian."  In  1853  he  visited  P^urope,
Palestine,  and  Egypt,  for  his  health,  writing  a
series  of  letters  to  the  "Observer"  under  the  sig-
nature of  "  Irentpus."  He  went  abroad  again  in
18G(5-'7  and  in  1876-'7.  Dr.  Prime  was  closely
identified  with  the  Evangelical  alliance  of  Ameri-
ca, founded  in  1866,  attending  the  5th  general
conference  at  Amsterdam  in  1867,  and  inviting
the  European  alliances  to  hold  the  6th  conference
in  New  \  (irk  city,  which  invitation  was  accepted.
On  his  return  from  Europe  he  was  elected  a  cor-
responding secretary  of  the  American  alliance,
and  he  held  the  office  until  28  Jan.,  1884.  In  his
hands  the  "  Observer "  acquired  a  wide  reputa-
tion. His  "  Irena^us "  articles  appeared  in  it
weekly  until  the  end  of  his  life.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Hampden  Sidney  college,  Va.,
in  1854.  During  his  career  as  an  editor  he  found
time  to  write  more  than  forty  volumes,  besides
pamphlets,  addresses,  and  articles  for  various  peri-
odicals. In  1854,  while  his  first  book  of  travels  was
passing  through  the  press,  he  was  asked  by  its  pub-
lishers. Harper  Brothers,  to  contribute  to  their
magazine.  From  this  source  he  received  for  the
next  twelve  years  more  than  $1,000  annually,  and
he  was  thus  enabled  to  purchase  an  interest  in  the
"Observer"  in  1858.  Dr.  Prime  was  vice-president
and  director  of  the  American  tract  society  and  of
the  American  and  foreign  Christian  union,  presi-
dent of  the  New  York  Association  for  the  advance-
ment of  science  and  art,  president  and  trustee  of
Wells  college  for  women,  a  trustee  of  Williams
college,  and  member  of  a  large  number  of  other
religious,  benevolent,  and  literary  socfieties.  Among
his  publications  are  "The  Old  White  Meeting-
House"  and  "Life  in  New  York"  (New  YorK,
1845):  "Annals  of  the  English  Bible"  (1849);
"Thoughts  on  the  Death  of  Little  Children"
(1852) :  "Travels  in  Europe  and  the  East  "  (1855);
"The  Power  of  Prayer"  (1858);  "THfe  Bible  in  the
Levant "  and  "  American  Wit  and  Humor  "  (1859) ;


PRIME


PRIN'CK


138


"Ijettern  from  Switzerland"  (1860);  "Memoirs  of
Rev.  Nichoiiis  Murray.  I).  I).."  "  Kirwan  "  (18«2) ;
•'  Mfinoirs  of  Mrs.  Joiiiina  lJt'thun«'"  (IWW);  "  Kif-
tot'ii  Vi-urs  (if  I'rayer  "  and  "  Walking  with  (»t»<l  "
<lN7Ji;  "The  Alhambraand  the  Kremlin  "  (IHrJ);
••.S.iij,'s  of  the  Soul"  (1874);  "Life  of  S.  F.  H.
Morse,  LL.  D."  (1875);  "  irenauis  Letters"  (Ist
.series,  1H80;  2d  series,  1885);  and  "  Prayer  and  its
Answer"  (1882).  Of  the  "  Power  of  Praver  "  more
than  175.()(X)  were  sold— 100,000  in  this  country
and  Gi-eat  Britain,  while  two  e«litions  ap^telirefl  in
France,  and  one  in  the  TaMiil  lan^ua^e  in  India.
— Anothtr  son.  Edward  Dorr  (triiliii,  clerjjyman,
b.  in  Cambridge,  N.  Y.,  2  Nov.,  1814;  d.  in  New
York,  7  April.  1891,  was  graduated  at  L'nion  in
1832,  and  at  Princeton  thinjloifical  seminary,  and
was  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in  New  York
city.  In  April,  185Ji,  to  allow  his  brother,  Irena'us,
to  go  abroad  for  his  health,  he  took  his  place  as
editor  of  the  "Observer,"  with  which  he  had  cor-
resjMiiided  for  several  years  under  the  signature  of
"  husebius."  He  continued  his  connection  with
that  journal  until  his  brother's  death  in  1885,  act-
ing as  associate  editor,  but  siwiit  the  winter  of
1854-'5  in  Rome  as  chaplain  or  the  American  em-
bassy. On  the  death  of  his  brother,  he  became
editor  of  the  "  Observer,"  but  he  was  compelled  by
illness  to  resign  in  1886.  Dr.  Prime  received  the
degree  of  I>.  D.  from  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  in
1857.  liesides  contributing  anonymously  to  si'V-
eral  volumes,  he  published  "  Around  the  World :
Travel  Through  >lanv  Lands  and  Over  Many  Seas  "
(New  York,  1872);  "Forty  Years  in  the  turkish
Empire,  or  Memoirs  of  Rev.  William  Goodell,  D.  D."
(1876) ;  and  "  Notes,  Genealogical,  Biographical,  and
Bibliographical,  of  the  Prime  Family  '  (printed  pri-
vately. New  York,  1888). — Another  son,  William
C'owper,  journalist,  b.  in  Cambridge,  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,
182.").  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1843,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1846.  He  con-
tinued to  practise  in  the  city  of  New  York  until
1861,  when  he  Ijecame  an  owner  and  manager  of
the  New  York  "  Journal  of  Commerce,"  with
whi(;h  he  is  still  connected.  He  acte<l  as  its  editor-
in-chief  from  1861  till  1869.  Mr.  Prime  visited
Egypt  and  the  Holy  Land  in  1855- '6,  and  again  in
1869-'70.  In  his  leisure  hours  he  has  devoted
himself  to  the  study  of  the  art  of  Injok  illustration,
and  has  made  a  valuable  collection  of  the  wood-
cutsof  artists  of  the  15th  and  16th  centuries.  Fmm
its  establishment  he  has  taken  an  active  interest
in  the  New  York  metropolitan  museum  of  art,  and
since  1874  he  hjis  been  its  first  vice-president.  He
also  induced  the  trustees  of  Princeton  to  establish  a
systematic  course  of  instruction  in  art  history,  and
in  1884  he  was  chosen  as  the  occupant  of  that  chair.
The  college  had  previously,  in  1875.  conferred  ujion
him  the  degree  of  LL.  I).  Besides  a  series  of  let-
ters in  the  "Journal "  begun  in  1846  and  continued
to  the  present  time,  more  than  forty  years.  Dr.
Prime  has  published  "The  Owl-Creek"  Letters"
(New  York,  1848) :  "  The  t)ld  House  by  the  River"
(18.-)3);  "Later  Years"  (1854);  "Boat  Life  in
Egypt  an<l  Nubia"  and  "Tent  Life  in  the  Holy
Land"  (1857);  "Coins,  Medals,  and  Seals.  Ancient
and  .Mfxlern"  (1861);  the  hymn  "O  Mother.  Dear.
Jerusalem."  with  notes  (1865);  "  I  go  A-Fishing"
(1873):  "Holy  Cross"  (1877) ;  and  "Pottery  and
Porcelain  of  All  Times  and  Nations"  (1878).  As
literary  exwutor  of  Gen.  George  B.  .McClellau,  he
e<lited  "  McClellan's  Own  Story  "  (188<i),  and  wrote
a  biographical  sketch  for  that  volume.

PRIME.  Frederick,  geologist,  b.  in  Phila«lel-
nhia,  I'a..  1  March,  1846.  He  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1865,  and  after  a  year  at  the  School  of


mines,  studied  for  three  years  at  the  Royal  mining-
M-luM)!  in  Fn'ilH-rg.  Saxony.  On  his  n'tuni  in  IWJO
he  U'came  assistant  in  assaying  at  Columbia  school
of  mines,  and  also  assistant  on  the  geological  sur-
vey of  Ohio,  In  1870  he  wjus  elected  professfjr  of
mi'ning  and  metallurgy  at  l^fayeHe.  and  in  1874
he  Ijecame  assistant  geologist  on  the  geological
survey  of  Pennsylvania,  l*oth  of  which  places  he
fille<l  until  1879.  Meanwhile  he  has  lieen  profes-
sionally consulted  very  fretiuently  by  various  inm
and  coal  companies.  Of  laU;  years  he  ha-s  de-
voted himself  exclusively  to  pnift'ssional  practice,
and  became  in  1881  president  of  the  Allentown  ir<in
comjwny.  At  the  World's  fair  of  1876  he  was  judge
of  the  group  (m  mining  and  metallurgy,  filling  the
office  of  secretary  to  the  board.  In  1880  Lafay-
ette conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  Prof.
l*rime  has  been  active  in  the  management  of  the
American  institute  of  mining  engineers,  and  has
contributed  to  its  transactions.  He  has  also  tran.s-
lated  from  the  German  and  etlited  Von  Cotta's
"Treatise  on  Ore  Defiosits"  (New  Y'ork,  1870^.

PRIME,  KnfuH,  merchant,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1805 ;  d.  in  Huntington.  L.  I.,  15  Oct.,  1885.  He
was  a  son  of  Nr.thaniel  Prime,  a  descendant  of
Mark  Prime,  who  emigrated  from  England  about
1640.  and  joineti  the  colony  that  foundt'd  the  town
of  liowley,  Mass.  Nathaniel  was  the  head  of  the
firm  of  I'rime,  Ward,  and  King,  in  its  day  the  chief
banking-house  in  New  York  city.  liufus  receivtnl
a  classical  education,  and  on  its  completion  en-
gaged in  business.  On  his  father's  death  in  1843
he  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the  care  of  his  large
estate. Mr.  Prime  was  familiar  with  several  lan-

fuages, and  was  fond  of  literarv  pursuits. — Hisstm,
redericli  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Florence.  Italy,
24  Sept.,  1829,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  milit-ary
academy  in  1850.  and  employed  on  fortifications
in  New  York,  California,  and  the  south.  In  1861
he  was  taken  prisoner  at  I'ensacola,  Fla.,  while  he
was  on  his  way  to  Fort  Pickens.  Having  been  com-
missioned captain  of  engineers,  he  served  during  the
Manassas  campaign,  and  the  following  six  months
he  was  successively  chief  engineer  of  the  deiMirt-
mentsof  Kentucky,  the  Cumlterland,  and  the  Ohio.
After  being  wouniied  and  taken  prisoner  while  on
a  reconnoissance.  he  occupied  the  same  post  during
Gen.  Grant's  Mississippi  campaign  in  1862- '3.  He
was  brevetted  major  for  gallantry  at  the  Imttle  of
C'orinth,  and  took  part  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.
He  was  also  promotinl  major.  1  June.  1863,  bre-
vetted lieutenant-colonel  the  following  month  for
meritorious  services  before  Vicksburg.  and  colonel
and  brigadier-general.  13  March.  1865,  for  gallant
condu'jt  throughout  the  war.  The  commission  of
brevet  brigatlier-geiieral  was  decline<l.  On  5  Sept.,
1871,  Maj.  Prime  was  retired  through  disability
from  wounds  that  he  received  "  in  line  of  duty."

PRINCE,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  East  port.' Me.,
19  June,  1811.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1835.  assigntnl  to  the  4th  in-
fantry, and  served  in  the  Seminole  war  in  18:16-7.
He  became  1st  lieutenant.  7  July,  18;J8.  assisted  in
removing  the  Creek  Indians  to  the  west,  and  then
served  on  frontier  duty,  in  the  Florida  war  of
1841-2, and  in  the  war  with  Mexi<-o,  in  which  he
n'ceived  the  brevet  of  captain  for  services  at  Con-
treras  and  Chunibusco,  and  that  of  major  for  Mo-
lino  del  Rey,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  On
26  Sept.,  1847,  he  was  made  capiaiii.  and  on  23
May,  1855,  he  was  a|)|K>inttHl  major  and  served  on
the'pjiy  department  in  the  west,  participating  in
the  Utah  campaign  in  185H-'9.  In  the  civil  war  he
took  part  in  the  northern  Virginia  cam|)aign,  was
made  briga«lier-general  of  volunteers  on  28  April,


124


PRINCE


PRINCE


1862.  and  received  the  brevet  of  lieut«nant-oolonel
for  services  at  Cedar  Mountain,  9  Aiij;..  18()2.  where
he  was  captiinvl.  After  his  release  in  DecenilK-r
he  participated  in  the  North  Carolina  operations
from  11  Jan.  till  24  June,  18(KJ,  coininanded  the
district  of  Pamlico  from  1  May  till  24  June,  18(>3,
pursued  the  Confederate  army  in  its  retreat  from
Maryland,  served  in  the  Rapidan  campaign  from
Octolwr  till  I)eceml)er,  18GJJ,  pursued  Gen.  Nathan
B.  Forrest's  raiders  in  Tennessee  and  Alabama  in
18(54,  and  conunanded  on  the  coast  of  South  Caro-
lina from  January  till  May,  1H<>.5.  He  was  bre-
vetted  colonel  and  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  on
I'S  March,  1805.  He  served  on  courts-martial  in
Washington,  I).  C,  in  18ft>-'6,  and  was  mustered
out  of  volunteer  .service  on  30  April,  1806.  He
then  served  as  [mymasler  in  Boston  till  1800,  as
chief  paymaster  of  the  Department  of  the  Knst  till
1871.  and  as  paymaster  ni  New  York  city  until
1875.  He  was  assigned  to  the  Division  of  the  Pa-
cific on  28  June,  1875,  iKX-ame  lieutenant-colonel
on  3  March,  1877,  an»l  retired  on  31  Dec.  1879.

PRINCE,  Jean  Charles,  Canadian  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  St.  Cregoire,  Three  liivcrs,  Quebec,
13  Feb.,  1804 ;  d.  in  St.  Hyacinthe.  Qu«-i)ec,  5  May,
1800.  He  was  educated  at  Nicolet  college,  in  the
village  of  that  name,  and,  while  studying  the-
ology, taught  in  Nicolet  college  and  afterward
in  the  seminary  at  St.  Hyacinthe.  After  his  ordi-
nation as  priest  in  1820  he  was  director  of  the
Grand  senniuiire  of  St.  Jacques,  at  Montreal,  until
1830,  and  of  the  College  of  St.  Ilvacinthe  until
1840.  The  death  of  Monsignor  Lartigue,  first
bishop  of  Montreal,  having  nuide  a  change  in  the
bishopric  necessary,  he  was  called  by  Ignace  Bour-
get,  the  second  bishop,  to  assist  in  tlie  administra-
tion of  that  diocese.  Early  in  1841  the  chapter  of
St.  Jacfiues  was  established,  and  Abbe  Prince  was
installed  titulary  canon  of  the  cathedral  of  Mon-
treal on  21  Jan.  The  same  year  he  issued  the  first
number  of  '"Melanges  reiigieux."  a  periodical
which  at  first  only  published  tl\e  sermons  of  Mon-
signor de  Forbin  .Janson,  but  subsequently  com-
prised general  religious  intelligence.  It  was  issued
until  1852.  when  its  ollices  and  material  were
destroyeil  l)y  fire.  At  this  period  the  city  of
Kingston  was  without  any  religious  institution
connected  with  the  Roman  Catholic  church.
Bishop  Gaulin,  having  no  assistants  save  a  few
l>riests  who  were  overburdenetl  with  work,  asked
the  bishop  of  Montreal  to  send  him  several  Sisters
of  Charitv  and  a  priest  competent  to  take  charge  of
them.  M.  Prince  accordingly  went  to  Kingston,
established  the  Convent  of  the  Sisters  of  the  Congre-
gation for  the  education  of  young  girls,  and  pre-
pared the  way  for  the  organization  of  the  "Soeurs
de  I'Hotel-Dieu  "  for  the  care  of  the  sick  poor.  On
returning  to  Montreal  he  assisted  in  founding  Provi-
dence House,  and  became  its  first  director.  He  was
also  connected  with  the  Convent  of  the  Good  Pastor
and  other  institutions.  He  was  appointed  Viy  Greg-
ory XIV,  coadjutor  to  the  bishop  of  Montreal  and
bishop  of  Martyropolis,  5  July,  1844.  The  see  of
Montreal  was  at  that  time  very  large.  Many  new
enterprises  were  calling  for  assistance,  and  bishop
and  coadjutor  found  all  their  energies  taxed  to
the  utmost.  In  1851  Bishop  Prince  visited  Rome
on  an  ecclesiastical  mission,  and  while  he  was  there
Pius  IX.,  at  the  request  of  the  delegates  to  the
first  council  of  Quebec,  transferreti  him  to  the  see
of  St.  Hyacinthe,  8  June,  1852.  He  was  the  first
bishop  of  that  diocese.  The  old  college  that  he
had  purchaseti  and  transformed  into  a  cathedral
and  episcopal  palace  was  burned,  17  Mav,  1854,
but  he  undertook  the  immediate  construction  of  a


cathedral  chapel,  besides  laying  the  foundations  of
a  more  elaln^rate  ecclesiastical  edifice,  which  has
since  l)een  comnleted.  During  his  residence  at  St.
Hyacinthe,  Bishop  Prince  organized  twenty  par-
ishes, established  several  missions,  and  ordamed
thirtv-one  priests.

PftlNCE,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Ma.ss.,  11  July,  1751  ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  7  June,
1830.  He  was  the  son  of  a  mechanic,  and  wa.s  ap-
prenticed to  a  tinman,  but  prepared  himself  for
college,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1770,
after  which  he  studied  theology,  and  from  1779
till  1836  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Unitarian  church  in
Salem,  Mass.  He  was  a  friend  of  Count  Rumford,
joined  in  many  of  the  latter's  inventions  and  ex-
periments, and  constructed  an  improved  air-pump,
which  gave  him  a  wide  reputation.  Brown  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1795.  He  nublished
several  sermons.  A  "  Memoir  "  by  Rev.  Charles  W.
Upham,  who  liecame  his  associate  in  1824,  is  print-
ed in  the  Massa<-hu setts  historical  collections.

PRINCE,  Oliver  Hillhouse,  senator,  b.  in
Connecticut  about  1787;  d.  at  sea,  9  Oct.,  1837.
He  removed  to  Georgia  in  early  years,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1806,  and  began  to
practise  in  Macon,  of  which  he  was  a  settler,  and
one  of  the  five  commissioners  that  laid  out  the
town.  He  was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator  in  place  of
Thomas  W.  CobV),  serving  from  1  Dec,  1828,  till  3
March,  1829.  Mr.  Prince  was  the  author  of  many
humorous  sketches,  one  of  which,  giving  an  ac-
count of  a  Georgia  militia  muster,  was  translated
into  several  languages.  He  also  published  "  Di-
gest of  the  Laws  of  Georgia  to  December,  1820 "
(Milledgeville,  1822;  2d  etl.,  Athens,  1837).  He
perished  in  the  wreck  of  the  steamer  "  Home  "  on
the  coast  of  North  Carolina.

PRINCE,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sandwich,
Mass.,  15  May,  1687;  d.  in  feoston,  Mass.,  22  Oct.,
1758.  He  was  the  grandson  of  John  Prince,  of  Hull,
England,  who  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1033.
After  graduation  at
Harvard  in  1707,  he
visited  the  West  In-
dies and  the  island
of  Madeira,  went  to
England  in  1709,  and
preached  in  ('oombs,
Suflfolk,  and  else-
where. In  1717  he
returned  to  Boston,
and  on  1  Oct.,  1718,
was  ordained  col-
league of  his  class-
mate. Dr.  Josenh
Sewall,  pastor  of  tne
Old  South  church  in
Boston,  where  he
continued  until  his
death, and became

eminent  as  a  preacher,  linguist,  and  scholar.  He
began,  in  1703,  and  continued  through  his  life,  to
collect  manuscript  documents  relating  to  the  his-
tory of  New  England,  which  he  left  to  the  care  of
the  Old  South  church.  They  were  deposited  in  the
tower,  which  also  contained  a  valuable  library  of
the  writings  of  the  early  New  England  divines  that
had  been  gathered  by  Mr.  Prince,  These  were  part-
ly destroyed  by  the  British  in  1775-"0,  and  much
important  matter  relating  to  the  history  of  New
England  was  thus  lost.  The  remainder  of  the  man-
uscripts, with  his  books,  which  are  of  value,  form
part  of  the  Boston  piiblic  library,  and  of  these  a
catalogue  was  published  by  William  il.  Whitmore
(Boston,  1808),  and  a  later  one  with  his  portrait


f ('v  uyt  e  t


PRINCE


PRINGLE


126


(1870).  He  nublishcHl  twenty-nine  single  sermons
lietwcen  1717  and  1756;  "An  At-eountof  the  First
Auroni  llorealis"  (1717);  "Account  of  the  Kng-
lish  Ministers  at  Martha's  Vineyard,"  aofH'nded
to  KxiHTienc-e  Mayhew's  "  Indian  Converts  '  (1727) :
"A  S-nnon  on  the  Death  of  Cotton  M«ther"
(173M);  "Memoirs "of  Koeer  Clap,  of  Dorchester
(1731);  an  e«iitionof  John  ^lason's  "  History  of  the
Pequot  War,"  with  intrutluttion  and  notes  (1780);
"  A  Thanlvsjjivinp  Sermon  iK-cjisioiied  by  the  Caj)-
ture  of  liOiushurj;"  (174.")) ;  "  Karthcjiiakes  yf  New
Knp:laud."  with  an  ap|H»ndix  on  Franklin's  discov-
eries in  eh'c-tricity  (1755);  and  "The  New  Kngiand
Psalm- B(X)k,  Revised  and  Improve«l "  (1758).  Sev-
eral of  his  sermons  are  contained  in  the  publica-
tions of  the  Massacliusetts  historical  society,  and
six  of  his  nianuscrii)t  discourses  were  published
after  his  death  by  Dr.  John  Krskine  (Kdinbur^ih,
1785).  He  also  left  a  diary  and  other  manuscrii)ts.
Mr.  Prince  began  a  work  entitle<l  "The  Chrono-
logical History  of  Kngiand"  in  the  form  of  an-
nals, the  first  volume  of  which  was  published  in
1736,  and  two  numliers  of  the  second  in  1755.  It
is  publishetl  in  the  collections  of  the  Massachusetts
historical  society,  and  was  edited  by  Xathan  Hale,
who  published  it  in  book-form  (Boston,  1826).
Dr.  Charles  Chauncy  said  that  Mr.  Prince  was
"the  most  learned  scholar,  with  the  exception  of
Cotton  Mather,  in  New  England."  The  Prince
society,  a  printing  association,  was  established  in
Boston  in  1858. — His  brother.  Nathan,  scholar,
b.  in  Sjindwich,  Mass.,  30  Nov.,  1698;  d.  in  the
island  of  Ruatan.  Honduras,  25  July,  1748,  was
graduate<l  at  Harvard  in  1718,  where  lie  was  tutor
from  1723  till  1742,  and  of  which  he  became  a
fellow  in  1727.  Subsequently  he  took  orders  in  the
Church  of  England,  and  was  sent  as  a  missionary
to  the  Mosijuito  Indians  in  Central  America.  He
published  an  "  Essay  to  solve  the  DiflRculties  at-
tending the  Several  Accounts  given  of  the  Resur-
rection "  (Boston,  1734),  and  an  "Account  of  the
Constitution  and  Government  of  Harvard  Col-
lege from  1636  to  1742"  (1742).— Thomas's  son,
Tiioiuas,  editor,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  Feb.,
1722;  d.  there  30  Sept.,  1748,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1740.  He  edite<i  the  earliest  American
periodical,  which  was  entitled  "Christian  History,"
and  contained  accounts  of  the  revival  and  propa-

f Ration  of  religion  in  Great  Britain  and  America
or  1743  (2  vols.,  1744-'6).

PRINCE.  William,  horticulturist,  b.  in  Flush-
ing, L.  I.,  10  Nov.,  1766;  d.  there,  9  April,  1842.
In  1793  he  bought  eighty  acres  of  land  and  extend-
ed the  nurseries  of  his  father  in  Flushing.  He
brought  many  varieties  of  fruits  into  the  United
States,  sent  many  trees  and  plants  from  this  coun-
try to  Eurone,  and  systematized  the  nomenclature
of  the  best-Known  fruits,  such  as  the  Bartlettr  pear
and  the  Isabella  grape.  The  London  horticultural
societv  named  for  him  the  "William  Prince  "ap-
ple, lie  was  a  memter  of  the  horticultural  so-
cieties of  London  and  Paris,  of  the  Imperial  socie-
ty of  Georgofili  of  Florence,  and  of  the  principal
American  societies,  and  the  meeting  of  horticultu-
rists in  182:1,  at  which  De  Witt  Clinton  delivered
an  address,  was  held  at  his  residence.  He  pub-
lishetl "  A  Treatise  on  Horticulture,"  the  first  com-
pri'hensive  liook  that  was  written  in  the  United
States  uiKjn  this  subject  (New  York,  1828).— His
son,  William  Robert,  horticulturist,  b.  in  Flush-
ing, L.  I.,  6  Nov.,  1795;  d.  there.  28  March,  1869,
was  educated  at  Jamaica  academy,  L.  I.,  and  at
Boucherville.  Canada.  He  imjxjrteil  the  first  me-
rino sheep  into  this  country  in  1816,  continued
the  "  Linna'an  nureeries "  of  bis  father,  and  was


the  first  to  introduce  silk-culture  and  the  mortu
multicaulis  for  silk-worms  in  18517,  but  hwt  a  large
fortune  by  this  enlorprise,  owing  to  the  change  in
the  tariff,  which  destroyetl  this  industr>-  for  several
years.  In  1849  he  went  to  California,  was  a  found-
er of  Sacramento,  and  in  1851  travelled  through
Mexico.  He  intro<luced  the  culture  of  osiers  and
sorghum  in  1854-'5,  and  the  Chinese  yam  in  1854.
With  his  father,  he  wrote  a  "  History  of  the  Vine"
(New  York,  18:{0) ;  and,  in  addition  to  numerous
pamphlets  on  the  mullierry,  the  stniwl»erry  diosco-
rea.  medical  botany,  etc.,  he  publishetl  a  "  Pomo-
logical  Manual  "(2 "vols.,  1832):  "  Manual  of  Roses"
(184<));  and  about  two  hundred  descriptive  cata-
logues of  trees,  shrubs,  vines,  plants,  bulbs,  etc.
—William  Rolwrt's  son,  I^  Baron  Bradford,  au-
thor, b.  in  Flushing,  L.  I..  3  July,  1840,  is  (K's<-end-
ed  through  his  maternal  ancestors  from  William
Bradford,  of  the  "  Mayflower."  He  was  ethicated
in  Flushing,  and  was  gniduated  at  Columbia  law-
school  in  1866.  In  1871-'5  he  was  a  member  of
the  assembly  for  Queens  county,  and  in  1872  was
chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee  which  in-
vestigated the  corrupt  judiciary  of  New  York  city.
He  was  a  member  of  the  National  Republican  con-
ventions of  1868  and  1876.  In  1876-'7  he  was  a
memlier  of  the  state  senate.  From  1879 1  ill  1882  he
was  chief  justice  of  New  Mexico,  and  in  1880-'2  he
was  president  of  the  bureau  of  immigration  of  that
territory.  He  was  a  memljcr  of  the  Protestant  Ej)is-
copal  general  conventions  iK'tween  1877  and  1886,
and  since  1877  has  Ijcen  a  trustee  of  the  Long
Island  cathedral.  Since  1880  he  has  lx?en  chancel-
lor of  the  jurisdiction  of  New  Mexico  and  Arizo-
na. He  is  the  author  of  "Agricultural  History  of
Queens  County"  (New  York,  1861);  "E  Plurlbus
L  num,  or  American  Nationality"  (1868);  "A  Na-
tion, or  a  League " (Chicago.  1880);  "General  I^aws
of  New  Mexico"  (Albany.  1881);  "History  of  New
Mexico"  (New  York,  1883);  and  "The  American
Church  and  its  Name  "  (New  York.  1887).

PRIN(»,  Daniel,  British  naval  officer,  b.  in
England  in  1780;  d.  in  Port  Royal,  Jamaica,  29
Nov.,  1847.  He  entered  the  navy  at  an  early  age,
and  was  midshipman  on  the  Jamaica  station.  He
became  lieutenant  in  1807,  at  the  l>eginning  of
the  war  of  1812  was  in  command  of  the  Halifax
station,  and  was  subsequently  assigned  by  Sir
George  Prevost  to  the  charge  of  the  provincial
navy  on  the  lakes.  He  was  promoted  commander
in  1813,  and  while  in  charge  of  the  "  Linnet,"  a
brig  of  sixteen  guns  and  100  men.  in  the  s<|uad-
ron  of  Com.  George  Downie  on  Lake  Champlain,
participate*!  in  the  battle  of  Plattsburg  Bay.  Dur-
ing a  greater  part  of  the  fight  the  "Linnet"  en-
gaged the  "  Eagle,"  an  American  brig  of  twenty
guns  and  150  men,  and  forced  her  out  of  the  line,
but  was  subsequently  compelled  to  strike  her  own
colors.  He  was  promoted  j)ost-captain  in  1815
for  bravery  in  that  affair,  and  the  next  year  was
in  command  on  Lake  P>ie.  He  became  commo-
dore in  January.  1846.

PRIN(iLE. 'Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  in  Richfield,
N.  Y.,  9  Nov..  1807.  He  received  a  go<xl  etlucation
and  studied  law,  but  gave  up  practice  to  become
president  of  a  bank  at  Batavia.  N.  Y.  He  was
judge  of  Genesee  county  court,s  for  one  year,  served
two  terms  in  congress  in  185:i-'7,  having  been
elected  as  a  Whig,  and  in  1863  was  in  the  legisla-
ture. Subsequently  he  was  ap|>ointe<l  by  Presi-
dent Lincoln  a  judge  of  the  court  of  arbitration  at
Cape  Town  under  the  treaty  of  18<52  with  Great
Britain  for  the  suppression  of  the  slave-trade.

PRINdiLE,  John  Julins,  lawyer,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  22  July, 1753;  d. there, 17 Mardi,


126


PRINTZ


PROCTOR


1843.  His  father,  Robert  (1702-'76),  came  from
Sootlaiul  to  South  Carolina  about  1 730,  l>ec-ame  a
merchant  in  Charleston,  and  in  1760-'9  was  a  jus-
tice of  the  court  of  common  pleas.  The  s<m  was
graduated  at  the  College  of  Philadelithia  in  1771,
and  read  law  with  John  Kutledge  ancl  in  Kngland,
where  his  published  articles  in  defence  of  colonial
rights  attracte<l  attention.  At  the  beginning  of
the  American  Revolution  he  went  to  France,  and
in  1778  he  liec^me  secretary  to  Ralph  Izard,  U.  S.
commissioner  in  Tuscany.  Returning  home  by
way  of  Holland  and  the  West  Indies,  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1781,  and  attained  high  rank
in  his  profession.  In  1787-'9  he  wa.s  sj)eakerof  the
state  assembly,  and  in  the  latter  year  ne  served  for
a  short  time  as  U.  S.  district  attorney,  by  special
remiest  of  Gen.  Washington.  In  1800  Thomas
Jcilerson,  then  secretary  of  state,  appointed  him
to  rep<irt  on  any  infractions  of  the  treaty  with
(ireat  Britain  that  might  occur  in  his  state,  and
from  1792  till  1808  he  served  jis  attorney-general
of  South  Caroliiui.  In  1805  President  Jefferson
tendered  him  the  attorney -generalship  of  the
United  States,  but  family  reasons  induced  him  to
de<'line.  Mr.  Pringle  wius  for  four  years  president
of  the  trustees  of  the  College  of  Charleston.

PRINTZ,  Johaii,  colonial  governor,  b.  in
Bottneryd,  Sweden,  alx)ut  1000;  d.  in  1663.  He
was  the  third  governor  of  the  Swedish  colony  on
Delaware  river  that  hatl  been  projected  by  Gus-
tavus  Adolphus  and  established  by  his  daughter,
Christina,  in  1638.  (See  Minuit,  Peter.)  Print/
had  Ikcu  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  artillery  in  the
Swedish  army  in  Germany,  and  was  deprived  of
his  rank  for  surrendering  the  Saxon  town  of
Chemnitz,  but  was  afterward  restored  to  favor.
He  was  governor  from  1641  to  1654.  During  these
thirteen  years  he  maintained,  with  little  assistance
from  home,  the  supremacy  of  the  Swedish  crown  on
the  Delaware  against  the  Dutch,  against  the  New
Haven  emigrants  under  Lamberton,  and  against
the  followers  of  Sir  Edmund  Plowden,  the  so-called
lord  of  New  Albion.  He  established  forts  at  New
Castle,  at  Wilmington,  at  Tinicum  (a  short  dis-
tance above  the  present  town  of  Chester,  where  he
resided),  at  the  mouth  of  the  Schuylkill,  and  on
the  eastern  shore  of  the  Delaware.  He  thus  se-
cured a  monopoly  of  trade  with  the  Indians  that
inhabited  both  sides  of  the  bay  and  river  as  far
north  as  Trenton.  During  his  tenure  of  office
seven  expeditions,  containing  more  than  300  emi-
grants, sailed  from  Sweden.  They  were  excellent
farmers,  devoted  to  the  Lutheran  church,  and
extremely  just  in  their  dealings  with  the  Indians,
whom  they  prepared,  by  their  kind  treatment,  to
receive  William  Penn  and  his  followers  in  a  friend-
ly manner.  In  1654  Printz,  dissatisfied  with  the
condition  and  prospects  of  the  colony,  returned.
In  the  next  year  the  Dutch  captured  Fort  Chris-
tina, and  the  Swedish  domination  was  soon  at  an
end.  Little  is  known  of  Printz  after  his  return  to
Sweden,  but  it  is  recorded  that  he  was  made  a  gen-
eral and  l)ecame  governor  of  JonkOping  in  1658. —
His  daughter,  Ariiia^ot,  accompanied  her  father
to  this  countrv,  and  in  1644  married  Lieut.  John
Pap{>egoya,  who  was  in  temporary  charge  of  the
province  after  Printz's  departure  till  the  arrival  of
the  new  governor.  Pappegoya  returned  to  Sweden
in  1654,  but  his  wife  remained  in  the  province,
where  she  lived  secluded  in  the  mansion  built  by
her  father  on  Tinicum  island.  The  royal  govern-
ment made  large  grants  of  land  to  father  and
daughter,  but  none  of  their  descendants  became
inhabitants  of  the  colony.  See  "Songs  of  New
Sweden,"  by  Arthur  Peterson  (Philadelphia,  1887).


PRIOLEAIT,  Sainnel,  jurist,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  4  Sept.,  1784 ;  d.  in  Pendleton.  S.  C,  10  Aug.,
1840.  His  ancestors,  who  were  French  Huguenots,
emigrated  to  this  country  immediately  after  the
revcK-ation  of  the  e<lict  of  Nantes.  Samuel  was
educated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  but
was  not  graduated,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Charlest(m  in  1808,  and  established  a  reputation  as
a  lawyer.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  for
many  years,  chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee
for  several  terms,  and  was  active  in  1820  in  the
preparation  of  the  acts  to  "revise  and  amend  the
judiciary  system  of  the  state."  The  next  year  he
made  a  report  in  favor  of  the  constitutionality  of
internal  improvements  by  the  United  States.  He
became  intendant  of  Charleston  in  1824,  and  re-
corder in  1825,  and  held  office  until  1886.  He
aided  in  establishing  the  Medical  college  of  South
Carolina,  was  one  of  its  trustees,  and  was  an  or-
ganizer of  the  Charleston  literarv  club.

PRIVAT  D'ANGLEMOXT,  Alexandre,  West
Indian  author,  b.  in  St.  Rose,  Guadelou|)e,  in  1815;
d.  in  Paris,  France,  18  July,  1859.  He  was  a  mu-
latto, and,  after  receiving  his  early  education  in
Basse  Terre,  went  to  Paris  to  study  medicine,  but
abandoned  it  for  literature.  In  1846  he  published
a  volume  on  the  Prado  palace,  which  showed  wit,
elegance,  and  simplicity.  Soon  afterward  he  made
a  voyage  to  Guadeloupe,  and,  in  a  sojourn  of  three
days,  settled  all  his  interests  there,  and,  carrying
his  small  fortune  in  a  bag,  returned  to  Paris,  where
he  became  a  contributor  to  magazines.  It  was  his
custom  to  wander  at  night  through  the  streets,
studying  the  habits  of  the  poorest  classes,  and  he
discovered  some  extraordinary  trades,  such  as  those
of  killer  of  cats  and  dealer  in  the  tongues  of
rats  and  mice,  which  he  revealed  to  the  world  in
a  volume  that  caused  a  great  sensation,  "Paris
Anecdote"  (Paris,  1854).  After  his  death  from
consumption,  Alfred  Delvau  collected  his  articles
and  published  them  under  the  title  "Paris  in-
connu  "  (1861).

PROCTOR,  Edna  Dean,  poet,  b.  in  Henniker,
N.  II.,  10  Oct.,  1838.  She  received  her  early  edu-
cation in  Concord,  N.  II.,  and  subsequently  removed
to  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  where  she  has  since  resided.
She  has  travelled  extensively  abroad,  and  con-
tributed largely  to  magazine  literature.  She  has
edited  "  Extracts  from  Henry  Ward  Beecher's
Sermons"  (New  York,  1858),  and  has  published
"  Poems  "  (Boston,  1866)  and  "  A  Russian  Journey  "
(1872),  and  is  now  (1888)  compiling  a  genealogy  of
the  Storrs  family.  Her  best-known  poems  aTe
"  Heroes  "  and  "  Bv  the  Shenandoah."

PROCTOR,  Henry  A.,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Wales  in  1787;  d.  in  Liverpool,  England,  in  1859.
At  the  beginning  of  the  war  between  Great  Britain
and  the  United  States  he  came  to  Canada  as  colo-
nel of  the  42d  regiment.  He  was  despatched  by
Gen.  Sir  Isaac  Brock  to  Amherstburg  to  prevent
the  landing  of  Gen.  William  Hull,  whom  he  drove
back,  and  subsequently  gained  the  victory  of
Brownston,  which  exploits  contributed  much  to
the  fall  of  Detroit  am}  the  capitulation  of  Hull.
He  opened  the  campaign  of  1813  by  defeating  Gen.
James  Winchester  near  Frenchtown,  on  River
Raisin,  for  which  service  he  was  promoted  a  briga-
dier-general. He  was  repelled  from  Fort  Meigs  oy
Gen.  William  Henry  Harrison  (q.  v.)  in  May,  1813,
from  Fort  Stephenson  (Lower  Sandusky,  Ohio),  by
Maj.  Croghan  on  2  Aug.,  and  was  defeated  bv  Har-
rison at  the  battle  of  the  Thames,  5  Oct.,  1813.  He
was  tried  and  sentenced  to  be  suspended  from  rank
and  pay  for  sis  months.  He  was  reinstated,  and
rose  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-generaL


PROCTOR


PROCTOR


127


PROCTOR.  I.iiolon  Brock,  mithor,  b.  in  Hario-
viT.  N.  II.,  a  Marcli,  1H20.  Ht>  wils  j;ru(luBttHl  ut
Hamilton  ('oll(>>;u  in  \H44,  twlniitted  to  the  Imr  in
1847,  unci,  aflt-r  prm-tisinji  for  two  years  at  Port
Byn)n,  N.  Y.,  n'inov«Hl  to  Dansville.  Amid  his  nr<»-
fciuional  duties  he  oontiniieil  his  classic-Ml  stuuieis,
and  contribute*!  artieles  to  nia^'tizines.  In  1H0}>  he
bocume  a  retfular  contributftr  to  the  AlUiny  "  Law
Journal."  Alxiut  1H(K{  he  abandoned  his  profes-
sion and  devoted  liis  time  entirely  to  leeal  litera-
ture. In  1H84  he  removed  to  Albany,  N.  V.  His
works  ineludo  "  The  Hench  and  IJar  of  th6  State
of  New  York "(2  vols..  New  York,  1870);  "Lives
of  the  New  York  Stale  Chancellors"  (1875);  "The
Life  an<l  Times  of  Thomas  Addis  Knimet "  (1S7«) ;
"  Lawyer  and  Client,  or  the  Trials  and  Triumphs
of  the  liar"  (1H7S»);  "The  Ik'uch  and  Harof  Kitip*
C(mntv,  includinfj  the  Le^al  History  of  Brooklyn"
(188^i);  "The  Lepil  History  of  AUJany  and  Sohc-
necta<ly  Counties"  (1884);  "  Karly  History  of  the
Board  of  Regents  and  University  of  the  .State  of
New  York"  (1880);  a  revised  and  annotated  edi-
tion of  Jabez  I).  Hammond's  "  Political  History
of  the  State  of  New  York,"  continued  from  1844  to
the  close  of  the  legislative  session  of  1887  (1887) ;
and  addressees,  including  "  Aaron  Burr's  Political
Career  Defended"  (188,5),  and  "  Review  of  John  C.
Spt'tuer's  Lepil  and  Political  Career"  (188(5).

PROCTOR.  Redfield,  cabinet  officer,  b.  in
Proctorvillt',  V't.,  1  June,  1831.  The  town  was
founded  by  his  grandfather.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  18.51,  and  at  Albany  law^-
school  in  18.59.  For  two  years  he  nractised  law
in  Bost<m.  In  June,  1861,  he  entereu  the  army  as
lieutenant  in  the  3d  Vermont  volunteers ;  in  Octo-
ber ho  was  made  major  of  the  5th  Vermont  regi-
ment, and  in  1802  became  colonel  of  the  15th.
After  leaving  the  army  in  18(J3,  he  again  practised
law  in  Rutland,  Vt. ;  in  1807  and  ISfe  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature ;  in  1809  he  was  appointed
manager  of  the  Sutherland  Falls  marble  company.
In  1880  this  company  was  united  with  another,
under  the  title  of  the  Vermont  marble  company,
and  Mr.  Proctor  became  its  president.  In  the  in-
terval he  had  been  state  senator,  and  in  1870  became
lieutenant-governor;  and  in  1878  he  was  elected
governor.  In  1884  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  national
Republican  convention,  and  in  1888  he  was  chair-
man of  the  Vermont  delegation  to  the  Chicago
convention,  and  cast  the  votes  of  his  state  for  Gerv
Harrison  for  presiilent.  Later  the  legislature  of
Vermont,  by  unanimous  vote,  recommended  Gov.
Prix?tor  for  a  place  in  the  cabinet,  and  on  5  March,
1889.  the  president  appointe<l  him  secretary  of  war.

PROCTOR,  Richard  Anthony,  astronomer,  b.
in  Chelsea,  England,  23  March,  18ii7 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  12  Sept.,  1888.  He  entered  King's  col-
lege, London,  in  18.55.  and  a  year  later  went  to
Cambridge,  where  in  1800  he  received  his  bachelor's
degree.  A  fondness  for  mathematics  led  to  his
studying  astronomy,  on  which  subject  he  became
the  most  fertile  tHjpular  writer  of  his  time.  His
original  work  ineluuwl  numenms  rasearches  on  the
stellar  system,  the  law  of  distribution  of  stars,  their
motions,  the  relations  l)etween  the  stars  and  the
nebula*,  and  the  general  constitution  of  the  heav-
ens. In  1809  ho  a<lvance«I,on  theoretical  grounds,
a  thcorv  of  the  sf)lar  con)na  that  has  since  been
generally  jiccepted,  and  also  that  of  the  inner  com-

Clex  solar  atmosphere  that  was  afterward  advanced
y  Prof.  Charles  A.  Young.  He  was  active  in  the
transit-of- Venus  expe<litions  of  1874  and  1882,  and
became  involved  in  a  dispute  with  the  astronomer
royal  of  England  as  to  the  best  methfMls  of  observa-
tion. In  1873-'4  and  in  1875-'6  he  lectured  in  the


Erincipal  cities  of  the  Unitetl  .States,  and  in  1879
e  left  Kngland  for  Australasia,  and  liH-ture*!  in  all
of  the  larger  towns  of  Victoria.  New  South  Wales.
S<iuth  Australia,  Tasmania,  and  New  Z<'aland.  He
visiti*d  the  Unite«I  .States  again  in  1884,  and.  after
U'cturing  in  the  lemling  cities,  sett le<l  in  St.  Joseph.
Mo.  In  18(M»  he  was  eltH-te<l  a  fellow  of  the  Royal
astronomical  s<K-i('ty.  and  in  1873  he  was  appointed
an  honorary  fellow  of  King's  college,  Loiidtm.  He
was  honorary  secri'tary  of  the  Royal  astronomical
society  and  eilitor  of  its  j)r(K'eedings  in  18?2-'3.
Mr.  PnK'torestabli.she«l  "  Knowletlge"  as  a  weekly
journal  in  1881,  but  changed  it  to  a  monthly  in
188.5.  His  literary  work  l>egan  in  1863,  when  he
publishe<l  in  the"Conihill  Magazine"  an  article
on  "  Double  Stars."  Among  his  numerous  tiooks
are  "Saturn  and  its  System"  (Ixjndon,  18<W);
"(jrnomonic  Star  Atlas "(1806);  "  Half- Hours  with
the  Telescot)e  "  (1808) ;  "Half-Hours  with  Stars"
(1809);  "Other  Worlds  than  Ours  "(1870);  "Light
Science  for  Leisure  Hours"  (3  series,  1871,  1873,
and  188J3);  "Klementar)- Astronomy"(1871);  "  Bor-
der Land  of  Science  "  (1873);  "Transits  of  Venus
— Past,  Present. and  Future  "  and  "The  Kx|>anse
of  Heaven"  (1874);  and  "Myths  and  Marvels  of
Astronomy"  (1877).  He  editeil  "The  Knowledge
Library,"  consisting  of  a  series  of  works  made  up
of  pa|)ers  that  apiK'ared  in  his  journal,  among
which  were  several  of  his  own.  notablv  "  How  to
Play  Whist "  and  "  Home  Whist "  (188.5).  After  be-
coming an  American  citizen  he  published  "Chance
and  Luck  "  (New  York,  1887) ;  "  F'irst  Steps  in  Ge-
ometry "  (1887) ;  "  P^asy  Lesstms  in  Differential  Cal-
culus" (1887);  and  "Old  and  New  Astronomy,"
which  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  lieing  issued.

PROCTOR,  Thoma.H,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1739;  d.  in  Philmlelphia,  Pa,  16  March,  180<;.  He
emigrated  to  Philadelphia  with  his  father,  Francis
Proctor,  and  was  by  trade  a  carpenter.  On  27  Oct.,
1775,  he  applied  t<i  the  committee  of  safety  to  be
commissioned  captain  of  an  artillery  company  to
be  raised  for  garrisoning  Fort  island,  and  was  im-
mediately commissioneil  with  authority  to  raise
his  company.  In  August,  1770,  his  command  was
raised  to  a  battalion,  and  he  was  appointed  major.
The  regiment  was  under  Wayne  at  Brandywine,
and  engage<l  in  the  artillery  duel  with  Kiiyphausen
at  Chadd's  Ford.  Proctor's  horse  was  shot  under
him,  and  he  lost  his  guns  and  caissons  when  Sulli-
van was  routed.  One  of  his  guns,  un<ler  Lieut.  Bar-
ker, was  brought  up  to  batter  the  Chew  house  at
Germantown.  In  September,  1778,  his  regiment
became  a  part  of  the  Continental  army,  aiul  he  re-
ceived his  commission  as  colonel  of  artillery,  18
May,  1779,  and  inarched  to  Wyoming.  His  bat-
teries did  good  service  at  the  laattle  of  Newtown,
He  was  in  Wavne's  Bergen  Neck  exj>edition,  and
was  satirized  t»y  Andre  in  the  "  Cow  Chase."  He
resigned  in  1781  on  account  of  differences  with
Joseph  Reed,  president  of  the  Pennsylvania  coun-
cil, and  in  178:3  was  chosen  high  sheriff  of  Phila-
delphia, which  office  he  held  three  years.  In  1790
he  was  made  city  lieutenant,  in  1791  a  commis-
sioner to  treat  with  the  Miami  Indians.  In  1793
he  became  brigadier-general  of  the  Pennsylvania
troops,  and  marched  against  the  Whiskey  insur-
gents at  the  head  of  the  first  bripide.  After  this
he  U'came  major-general  of  the  Philadelphia
militia,  and  when  war  was  threatened  with  France
he  assure<l  Gov.  Miffiin  of  his  cordial  sup|K>rt  in
the  event  of  hostilities.  He  was  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  St.  Tammany  society  in  Phila«lelphia.  of
which  he  was  a  sjichem.  A  part  of  (^il.  Pnx-tor's
regiment  of  artillery  has  maintained  its  organiza-
tion to  the  present  time  as  the  2d  U.  S.  artillery.


128


PROUD


PROVOOST


PROrD,  Robert,  historian,  b.  in  Yorkshire,
Enjrlan.l.  10  May.  1728:  <1.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7
July.  IHl.'}.  He  emigrated  to  Pennsylvania  in  1759,
and  taught  Latin  and  Greek  in  a  Friends*  acjideiny
in  Philadelphia  until  the  Itevolution.  Charles
KriH'kden  Hn>wn  was  one  of  his  pupils.  He  was
firm  in  his  attachment  to  the  crown,  and  believed
that  the  Revolution  would  cause  the  decline  of
virtue  and  prosperity  in  this  country.  "  Dominie  "
Proud  was  a  famUiar  figure  for  rnany  years  in  his
adopted  city.  He  was  tall,  with  a  Roman  nose,
and  "  most  impending  brows."  and  in  his  curle<l  wig
and  cocked  hat  is  described  as  the  "  perfect  model  of
a  gentleman."  His  "  History  of  Pennsylvania,"
which  is  full  of  valuable  information,  although  de-
ficient in  well-sustained  narrative,  wjis  his  pecun-
iarv  ruin  (Philadelphia,  17v)7-'8).

PROUDFIT,  Alexander  Moiicrlef,  elerp-
man.  b.  in  Petpiea.  Pa.,  10  Nov.,  1770;  d.  in  Xew
Brunswick,  N.  J..  23  Nov.,  \H4'-i.  lie  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1792,  studied  theology  under
Dr.  John  H.  Livingston,  and  was  p!U>tor  of  the
Associate  Reformed  church  in  Salem.  N.  Y.,  from
1794  till  1WJ5.  He  lx»came  secretary  of  the  New
York  colonizjvtion  society  in  the  latter  vear.  and
held  office  till  his  resigiuition  in  1841.  \Villiams
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  I),  in  1812.  For  a  short
time  during  his  pastorate  he  was  professor  of  pas.-
toral  theology  in  the  Associate  Reformed  seminary
in  Newburg,  N.  Y.  He  published  numerous  ser-
mons and  mldresses,  including  "The  One  Thing
Needful  "  (New  York,  1804) ;  "  Ruin  and  Recovery
of  Man"  (180(5):  "Theological  Works"  (4  vols.,
1815);  and  a  work  on  the  "  Parables"  (1820).  See
a  memoir  of  him  by  l{ev.  John  Forsyth  (New  York,
1844). — His  son,  John  >VilIiams,  clcrgvman,  b.  in
Salem.  N.  Y.,  22  Sept.,  180:3;  d.  in  New  lirunswick,
N.  J.,  9  ^lurch.  1870,  was  graduated  at  Union  in
182;J  and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1824,
and  wa,s  pastor  of  the  Reformed  church  in  New-
buryport  in  1827-'33.  At  the  latter  date  he  became
professor  of  Latin  in  the  L^niversity  of  New  York,
and  in  1840-'G4  he  occupied  the  chair  of  Greek  in
Rutgers.  Union  college  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1841.  Dr.  Proudfit  wrote  much  for  eccle-
siastical literature,  and  edited  the  "New  Bruns-
wick Review."  He  published  several  sermons,  and
"  Man's  Twofold  Life"  (1862), and  edited  "  A  Com-
edv  of  Plautus,  with  English  Notes"  (1843).

tROLDFIT,  David  Law,  author,  b.  in  New-
burg, N.  Y.,  27  Oct.,  1842.  He  was  educated  in
the  common  schools,  and  at  fifteen  years  of  age
went  to  New  York  city  to  engage  in  business.  In
1862  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  1st  New  York
mounted  rifles.  In  tne  following  year  he  was  ap-
pointed a  2d  lieutenant  in  the  22d  U.  S.  colored
troops.  His  regiment  accompanied  (ien.  Butler  in
his  advance  up  James  river,  and  took  part  in  vari-
ous engagements,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  he
had  attained  the  rank  of  major.  Later  he  engaged
in  business,  and  a  few  yeiirs  ago  he  became  inter-
esttnl  in  pneumatic  tubes,  and  he  is  now  (1888)
president  of  the  Meteor  despatch  company  of  New
York.  His  poems  have  be«n  extensively  used  in
public  recitations.  He  has  published  in  book-form
"  Love  among  the  Gamins,"  poems  (New  York,  1877)
and  "  Mask  and  Domino"  (1888).

PROVANCHER,  Leon,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Becancour,  Quebec,  10  March,  1820.  He  wjis  grad-
uated at  the  Nicolet  seminary,  ordained  priest  in
1844  in  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  and  neld  sev-
eral p.istorat«s.  Owing  to  feeble  health  he  withdrew
from  the  ministry  in  1869  and  engaged  in  literary
work  and  the  stuiiy  of  natural  history,  and  has  de-
scribed more  than  two  hundred  new  species  of  in-


sects, particularly  the  Hymenoptera.  He  founded
"  Ijc  naturaliste  Cana<Uen  "  in  18(58,  and  received
the  degree  of  D.  Sc.  in  IHHO.  Dr.  Provancher  is  the
author  of  "  Traite  clementaire  de  lx)tanique  "(Que-
bec, 1858) ;  "  Flore  Canadienne  "  (1862);  "  Le  ver-
ger Canadien"  (1865);  "  De  Quebec?  k  Jenisalera  "
(1882);  "Petite  histoire  du  Canada"  (1887),  and
other  works  on  botany  and  natural  history.  He
now  (1888)  has  in  preparation  "  Les  hemipteres."

PROVENCHER,  Jean  Norbert,  Canadian
R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Nicolet,  Quebec,  12  Feb.,  1787;
d.  in  St.  Boniface.  Manitoba,  7  June,  1853.  He  was
ordained  in  1811,  and  in  1818.  at  the  suggestion  of
the  Earl  of  Selkirk,  was  sent  to  take  charge  of  the
Roman  Catholic  settlers  on  Red  river,  with  the
title  of  grand  vicar.  He  resided  at  La  Fourche
(now  St.  Boniface),  Manitoba.  The  Canadians,
who  formed  the  settlement,  had  married  Indian
women,  and  hjid  lost  almost  all  sense  of  religion,
but  he  was  well  received,  and  in  a  short  time  suc-
ceeded in  reviving  the  Roman  Catholic  faith.  He
also  labored  among  the  wild  Indians,  and  estab-
lished missions  in  the  interior.  In  1822  he  was
nominated  vicar  apostolic  of  the  northwest  and
auxiliary  to  the  bishop  of  Quebec,  and  he  was  con-
secrated under  the  title  of  bishop  of  Juliopolis  in
parfibus.  He  returned  from  Quebec  with  a  few
priests,  but  he  did  not  find  them  sufficient  for  the
needs  of  the  population  that  was  scattered  over  his
immense  vicariate.  He  afterward  obtained  the  aid
of  the  (Jblate  fathers,  whom  he  stationed  among
the  Indian  tribes,  and  established  schools  under
the  direction  of  the  Grey  Sisters,  The  results  of  his
administration  extended  to  the  Pacific  ocean,  and

Fctitions  came  in  1835  from  the  Canadians  and
ndians  of  Oregon,  asking  for  missionaries.  He
could  not  spare  any  from  his  vicariate,  but  he  an-
swered them  that  he  would  go  to  Europe  to  procure
aid.  He  obtained  there  considerable  sums  from
the  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the  faith,  and,
after  his  return  to  Canada,  was  able  to  send  two
missionaries  to  Columbia  river  in  1838.  In  1848
the  Red  river  was  erected  into  a  bishopric,  and
Bishop  Provencher  took  the  title  of  l)ishop  of  St.
Boniface.  He  founded  the  College  of  St.  Boniface
in  1818,  and  also  a  convent.

PROVOOST,  Samuel,  first  P.  E.  bishop  of  New
York,  b.  in  New  York  city,  24  Feb.,  1742;  d.
there,  6  Sept.,  1815.  The  Provoosts  were  of  Hugue-
not origin  and  settled  in  the  New  World  in  1638.
John,  fourth  in
descent  from  Da^
vid  Provoost,  the
first  settler  and
father  of  the  fu-
ture bishop,  was
a  wealthy  New
York  merchant,
and  for  many
years  one  of
the  governors  of
King's  college.
PI  is  wife.  Eve,  was
a  daughter  of
Hermann  Bleeck-
er.  Samuel,  their
eldest  son,  was
one  of  the  sev-
en graduates  of
King's  (now  Co-
lumbia) college  at

its  first  commencement  in  1758,  winning  the  honors,
although  the  youngest  but  one  of  his  class.  In  the
summer  of  1761  he  sailed  for  England,  and  in  the
same  year  entered  St.  Peter's  college,  Cambridge,


Q^UlU S^tn/trt^


\


PROVOOST

•enjoyinjj  wliilo  lhon>  iIm*  H(IvHnln(;p  of  a  tutor  in
the  (M'rsoii  of  Dr.  John  .k*hh,  a  nmn  of  pntfound
Uvirninf;  arul  h  zpuIous  ailvocato  of  civil  nnil  relijf-
ious  iilnTtv,  with  whom  ho  oorn^s[>on<le<l  till  the
ilcxtor's  death  in  17««,  In  March.  17(M5,  Mr.  I'ro-
V(H>»t.  haviri)?  j>rt>viously  tntMi  admitted  to  the  onler
of  dem-on  l)y  the  bishop  of  London,  was  ordaine«l
at  Kinj;'scha|H'l,Whitehali.hy  the  hishop  of  Chester.
In  June  of  the  sa>ne  year  he  marri«'d  Maria,  daugh-
ter of  Thomas  lioustield.a  rich  Irish  Imnker,  resid-
ing «>n  liis  estate  near  Cork,  and  sister  of  )iis  favor-
ite classmate,  afterward  a  memlK»r  of  parliament.
The  vouni;  clerfjvman,  with  his  accom|)lished  wife,
fiaiie*!  in  Septemlier  for  New  York,  an<l  in  Decem-
ber he  IxH'ame  an  assistant  minister  of  Trinity  par-
ish, which  t  lien  embraced  St.  Georjje's  and  St.  Paul's,
the  Rev.  Samuel  Auchmuty  rector,  the  Rev.  John
Ogilvie  and  the  l{t»v.  Charles  Inglis  assistant  min-
isters. During  the  summer  of  17(J0  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Provoost  visiteil  Mrs.  Ik)usfleld  and  her  son  in  Ire-
land, and  spent  several  months  in  England  and  on
the  continent.

Karlv  in  1774  Provoost  severed  his  connection
with  'frinity,  the  reason  a.ssigned  being  that  his
patriotic  views  of  the  then  approaching  contest
with  the  mother-country  were  not  in  accord  with
those  of  a  majority  of  the  parish,  and  removed  to  a
small  estate  in  Dutchess  (now  Columbia)  county,
where  he  occupied  him.self  with  literary  pursuits
and  in  the  cultivation  of  his  farm  and  garden.  He
was  an  ardent  disciple  of  the  Swedish  Linnapus.
and  he  possessed,  for  that  period,  a  large  and
valuable  library.  (See  book-plate  on  page  130.)
Provoost  was  perhaps  the  earliest  of  American
bibliophiles.  W  hile  far  away  from  "  the  clangor  of
resounding  arms,"  he  occa.sionally  filled  the  pulpits
of  churches  then  existing  at  Albany,  Catskill,  Hud-
son, and  Poughkeepsie.  He  was  proposed  as  a
delegate  to  the  Provincial  congress,  but  ueclined,  as
also  an  invitation  to  become  chaplain  of  the  con-
vention which  met  in  1777  and  framed  the  present
■constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  After  the
British  burned  E-sopus,  on  the  Hud.son,  he  ioined
his  friends  the  Livingstons,  and  other  neighlxjrs.
in  their  pursuit.  Mr.  Provoost  was  profiFered  the
rectorship  of  St.  Michael's  church,  Charleston,
S.  C.  in  1777,  and  five  years  later  that  of  King's
chai>el,  Boston,  where  his  patriotic  principles  and
pnictice  were  strong  recommendations ;  but  he  de-
clined both  calls.  When  the  colonics  had  gained
their  independence  and  New  York  was  evacuated
by  the  British,  he  was  unanimously  elected  rector
oi  Trinity  church,  13  Jan.,  1784,  immediately  re-
moved with  his  family  to  the  city,  and  entered
upon  the  duties  of  his  office.  Before  the  close  of
the  year  he  was  made  a  meml)er  of  the  Board  of  re-
gents of  the  university,  and  when  the  Continental
congress  removed  from  Trenton,  N.  J.,  to  New
YorK.  he  was,  in  Noveml)er.  1785,  chosen  as  their
chaplain.  In  the  summer  of  1786  he  was  elected  first
bishop  of  New  York,  and  three  weeks  later  received
from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  the  degree
of  I).  D.  In  NovemWr  of  the  same  year  he  sailed
for  England  in  company  with  Dr.  William  White,
where  they  were  consecrated  in  I^mbeth  palace.  4
Feb.,  1787,  by  the  archbishops  of  Canterbury  and
York,  and  the  bishops  of  Petersborough  and'  Bath
and  Wells.  The  centennial  anniversary  of  this
event  was  appropriately  celebratwl  in  'Laml)eth
pala4:'e.  London,  in  Chri.st  church,  Philadelphia,  and
in  the  Chicago  cathinlral.

On  his  return.  Bishop  Provoost  resumefl  his  du-
ties as  rector  of  Trinity,  the  two  [M^sitions  being
then  filled  bv  the  same  i)erson.  He  was  one  of  the
trustees  of  Columbia  college,  and  ander  the  present
TOL.  T. — 9


PROVOOST


129


constitution  was  ele<'te<l  chaplain  of  the  U.  S.
wnate.  After  his  inauguration  as  president,  Wash-
ington, with  many  other  distinguishe<l  men,  pro-
ciM'de<l  on  foot  to  St.  Paul's  church  (s<'e  illustra-
tion), where  Bishop  Provoost  rewl  prayers  suited,
to  the  occasion.  The  first  con.s<H:rat ion  in  which
he  took  |iart  was  that  of  the  Hev.  John  Thomas
Claggett,  for  the
difK-ese  of  Mary-
land, l>eiiig  the
earliest  of  that  or-
der of  the  minis-
try consecratnl  in
the  United  States.
It  occurre<l  at
Trinity  church,  17
Sept.,  1792.  dur-
ing a  session  of
the  general  con-
vention. As  the
B residing  bishop
•r.  Provoost  was
the  consecrator.
Bishops  White,
of  Pennsylvania.
Seabury.  of  Con-
necticut.and  Mad-
ison, of  Virginia,
ioining  in  the
historic  ceremony

and  uniting  the  succession  of  the  Anglican  and  Scot-
tish  episcopate.  Mrs.  Provoost  died,  18  Aug..  1799,
which,  with  other  domestic  bereavements  and  de-
clining health,  induced  the  bishop  to  r»>sign  the  rec-
torship of  Trinity,  28  Sept.  of  the  following  year,  and
his  bishopric,  3  Sept.,  1801.  His  resignation  was
not  accepted  by  the  liouse  of  bishops,  l»y  whom,  how-
ever, consent  was  given  to  the  consecration  as  as-
sistant bishop  of  Dr.  Benjamin  M(M)re.  Provoost
was  subject  to  apoplectic  attacks,  and  from  one  of
these  he  died  suddenly  at  his  residence  in  Green-
wich street.  His  funeral  at  Trinity  was  attended
by  the  leading  citizens  of  New  York,  and  his  re-
mains were  placed  in  the  family  vault  in  Trinity
church-yard.  In  person  Bishop  Prov(X)8t  was  above
medium  height.  His  countenance  wiuj  round  and
full  and  highly  intellectual,  as  may  be  seen  in  the
accompanying  vignette,  copied  from  the  original
by  Benjamin  West.  He  was  stately  and  dignified
in  manner,  presenting,  in  the  picturesque  dress  of
that  day,  an  imposing  appearance.  He  was  a  fine
clas.sical  scholar  and  the  master  of  several  modern
languages.  He  conversed  freely  witU  Steuben  and
Lafayette  in  their  own  tongues,  and  had  several
Italian  correspondents,  including  Count  Clau<lio
Kagone.  He  translated  Ta.sso's  "Jerusalem  De-
livered," but  it  was  never  piven  to  the  world,  nor
any  of  his  occasional  poems  m  English,  French,  and
German.  His  sermons  were  characterize<l  by  force
and  felicity  of  diction.  He  was  leanied  and
l)enevolent  and  inflexibly  conscientious,  fond  of
society  and  social  life.  L*nder  his  administration
as  rector  of  Trinity  for  seventeen  years,  the  churi'h
was  ii'built  on  the  same  site.  1)uring  his  epis-
copate of  fourteen  years  the  church  did  not  ad-
vance as  rapidly  as 'during  the  same  perifnl  under
some  of  his  successors.  It  must  not,  however.  l)e
forgotten  that  those  were  days  of  difficulties  and
<lei>ression  in  the  chun.*h.  and  that  the  {teople  of
Pennsylvania  threatene<l  to  thmw  their  bishop  into
the  Delaware  river  when  he  returned  from  Eng-
land in  17H7.  The  Episcopal  church  was  only  tm-
erated,  and  many  Protestants  fiercely  opjH)se<l  prel-
acy, having  but  recently  "est-ajied  from  kings
and  bishops." While  it  cannot  be  claimed  that


130


PRUD'IIOMME


PRUYN


Provoost  is  among  those  "  upon  the  adamant  of
whose  fame  the  river  of  Time  l»eats  without  injury."
or  that  lie  should  nmk  witli  those  eminent  found-
ers of  the  American  ehureh,  Si-abury  and  Wiiite,
or  with  the  ejttK'h-makers  llithart  an<l  W'hitting-
imm,  it  may  be  asserted
that  for  elejfant  scliolar-
ship  he  liad  no  peer
among  his  American
contemporaries.  He  was
so  inditferent  to  literary
reputation  that  not  even
u  sermon  of  iiis  apjK'ars
to  ha^  e  been  printed,  al-
though his  accomplish-
ments in  U'Ues-lettres
were  many  and  admira-
l)le,  as  may  be  inferred
from  Dr.  llobart's  re-
. . -  . marks  at  the  first  mect-

\iidt4n^'  «^^Uw<**^. '  iiig  of  tlie  diocesan  con-
vention after  the  bish-
op's deatli :  "  The  character  of  Bishop  Provoost  is
one  which  the  eidightened  Christian  will  estimate
at  no  ordinary  standard.  The  generous  sympa-
thies of  his  natizre  created  in  him  a  cordial  concern
in  whatever  affected  the  interests  of  his  fellow-
creatures.  Hence  his  beneficence  was  called  into
almost  daily  exercise,  a>ul  his  private  charities  were
often  beyond  what  was  justified  by  his  actual
means.  As  a  patriot  he  wjus  exceeded  by  none.
As  a  scholar  he  was  deeply  versed  in  classical  lore
and  in  the  records  of  ecclesiastical  history  and
church  polity.  To  a  very  a<'curate  knowledge  of  the
Hebrew  he  added  a  profound  acquaintance  with  the
Greek.  Latin.  French.  German,  Italian,  and  other
languages.  He  made  considerable  progress  also  in
the  natural  and  physical  sciences,  of  which  botany
was  his  favorite  branch."  See  "  The  Centennial
History  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  of  the
Diocese  of  New  York  "  (New  York,  1880),  and  an
address  on  "  Samuel  Provoost,  First  Bishop  of  New
York,"  bv  Gen.  Jas.  Grant  Wilson  (1887).

PRUD'HOMME,  John  Francis  Eugene,  en-
graver, b.  on  the  island  of  St.  Thomas,  W.  I.,  4
Oct.,  1800.  His  parents  were  French.  The  son
came  to  this  country  in  1807  with  his  family,  who
settled  in  New  York  in  the  spring  of  1809.  When
about  fourteen  years  old  he  turned  his  attention  to
engraving,  and  was  a  pupil  of  Thomas  Gimbrede,
his  brother-in-law,  but  the  latter  shortly  afterward
became  teacher  of  drawing  at  the  U.  S.  military
acjulemy,  which  left  Mr.  Prud'homme  to  pursue  his
own  course.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  essayed  en-
graving portraits,  and  produced  several  fine  plates
for  Longacre  and  Herring's  "  National  Portrait  Gal-
lery of  Distinguished  Americans."  He  also  engraved
some  plates  for  the  annuals  that  were  fashionable
at  that  time,  notably  "  Friar  Puck,"  after  John  G.
Chai)man ;  "  The  Velvet  Hat,"  after  Joseph  In-
skeep;  and  "  Oberon,"  after  a  miniature  by  Miss
Anne  E.  Hall.  In  1852  Mr.  Prud'homme  entered
a  bank-note  engraving  establishment  in  New  York,
and  from  1809  till  1885  he  was  employed  as  an  orna-
mental designer  and  engraver  at  the  bureau  of  en-
graving and  printing  in  Washington.  He  was  early
elected  memlwr  of  the  National  academy  of  de-
sign, became  academician  in  1840,  and  in  1834-'53
was  its  curator.  Mr.  Prud'honmie  is  a  ta'<teful  de-
signer, a  good  draughtsman,  and  excellent  en-
graver, in  the  very  fine  stipple  manner  introduced
by  Caroline  Watson  towanl  the  end  of  the  18th
century.  He  resides  in  Georgetown,  D.  ('.,  and
still  (1888)  pursues  his  profession.  He  is  the  old-
est living  American  engraver.


PRUYN,  John  Van  Schaick  Lansing,  lawyer,

b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  22  June,  1811  ;  d.  in  Clifton
Springs,  N.Y..  21  Nov.,  1877.  He  was  graduated
at  AlUmy  acatlemy  in  1820,  became  a  student  in
the  ottice'of  James  King,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1832.  At  once  he  took  high  rank  in  his
profession  as  one  of  the  attorneys  in  the  once-cele-
brated James  will  case.  In  1835  he  became  a  direc-
tor of  the  Mohawk  and  Hudson  railroad  and  its
counsel,  and  in  1853,  when  the  railroads  Ix'tween
Albany  and  Buffalo  were  united,  forming  the  nres-
ent  New  York  Central,  he  conducted  the  proceedings
and  drew  up  the  consolidation  agreement,  in  some
respects  the  most  important  business  instrument
that  was  ever  executed  in  the  state  of  New  York,
lie  was  associated  in  the  Hudson  river  bridge
case,  finally  arguing  it  alone,  was  sole  trustee  of
the  estate  of  Harmanns  Bleecker,  and  was  the
financial  officer  of  the  Sault  Ste.  Marie  canal,
which  he  carried  through  many  difficulties.  In
1801  he  was  elected  state  senator  as  a  Democrat,
having  accepted  the  nomination  on  condition  that
no  money  should  be  used  in  the  election.  At  the
close  of  his  term  he  gave  the  year's  salary  to  the
poor  of  Albany.  He  was  a  new  capitol  commis-
sioner from  1805  till  1870,  and  in  1809  laid  the  first
stone  of  the  new
building.  He
was  a  member  of
congress  in  1803-
'5  and  1807-9,
serving  upon  sev-
eral important
committees,  and
as  a  regent  of  the
Smithsonian  in-
stitution. At  the
first  election  of
General  Grant  to
the  presidency  he
was  one  of  the  tel-
lers of  the  house
of  representa-
tives and  sug-
gested such  legislation  as  would  have  remedied  the
existing  difficulties  in  counting  the  presidential
vote.  He  was  a  regent  of  the  University  of  the
state  of  New  York  for  thirty-three  years,  during
the  last  fifteen  of  which  he  was  chancellor.  The
establishment  of  the  university  convocation  and
the  regents'  examinations  were  largely  if  not
almost  wholly  due  to  his  efforts.  The  regents  are
trustees  of  the  State  museum  of  natural  history
and  the  State  library,  and  the  present  value  of
these  collections  is  largely  owing  to  Mr.  Pruyn's
personal  interest  and  supervision.  Mr.  Pruvn
was  also  president  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  St.
Stephen's  college,  Annandale,  of  the  State  board  of
charities,  of  the  State  survey,  and  of  the  AHwiny
institute.  He  was  also  a  member  of  various  his-
torical and  other  societies,  and  of  the  Association
for  the  codification  of  the  law  of  nations.  Mr.
Pruyn  received  the  degree  of  M.  A.  from  Rutgers
in  1835.  and  from  Unign  college  in  1845,  and  that
of  LL.  D.  in  1852.  from  the  University  of  Rochester,
— His  cousin.  Robert  Hewson,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  14  P'eb..  1815;  d.  in  Albanv,  N.  Y.,
20  Feb.,  1882,  was  graduated  at  Rutgers  "in  1833,
studied  law  with  Abraham  Van  Vechten,  and  in
18;J0  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  corporation
counsel  of  Albany,  a  member  of  the  city  govern-
ment, and  in  1855  became  adjutant-general  of  the
state.  He  was  a  Whig  in  politics,  and  served  in
the  assembly  in  1848-'50,  and  again  ^n  1854,  when
he  was  elected  speaker. It  is  said  that  no  appeal


^::r__.-'  0 1'\^\,.>/1C  j£ .  u^i-t^c^y^^i^


PRYOR


PUKRTA


131


w*s  rniulo  from  any  of  his  rulin>04  in  the  chair.  In
18(51  lie  wiw  H|>|M>iiitc'(l  by  Ptvsidcnt  Lincoln  U.  S.
minister  to  Ju|iun  as  successor  to  Townscntl  Harris.
As  there  were  then  no  telejfnijiiiic  facilities,  months
often  ela(>se«l  before  the  minister  could  rec-eive  his
instructions,  and  when  they  did  arrive  they  were  fre-

auently  inapplicable.circumstunceshavinfjchanffed.
lur  vessels  of  war  then  in  Japanese  waters  were
placed  at  the  disiMisHl  of  the  minister  with  instrue-
tions  prescrilx'd  by  the  U.  S.  jfovernment.  In  1803
Mr.  I'ruyn  took  the  ground  that  he  should  n^irard  the
tycoon  \o  be  the  real  ruler  of  Japan,  as  oUierwise
forei^cn  intercourse  could  never  l>e  j^uaranteed  un-
less treaties  were  rati(ii«d  by  the  mikado.  Two
naval  cx|>editions  were  undertaken  against  the
transfjressing  daimio  of  Chosu,  whose  vessels  had
firwl  on  the  American  merchant  steamer  "  Pem-
broke." In  the  first  the  U.S.  man-of-war  "  Wvo-
ming,"  Com.  McDougall,  sank  the  brig  '•  Laurick  "
and  blew  up  the  steamer  "  Lanccfield, '  at  the  same
time  running  the  gauntlet  of  shore  batteries  of
eighty  guns  in  the  Straits  of  Simonisaki.  In  the
second  exjMHlition  the  forces  of  Great  Britain,
France,  and  Holland  (the  daimio  having  previ-
ously firetl  upon  the  P  rench  and  English  vessels)
tot)k  part,  the  United  States  l)eing  rej>resente<l  by
the  cnartered  steamer"  Takiang,"  having  on  board
a  |>art  of  the  crew  and  guns  of  the  "  Jamestown."
which  had  U-en  left  at  \  okohama  for  the  defence
of  that  place.  The  allies  demolished  the  fortifica-
tions of  Chosu  and  captured  the  guns.  Although
it  was  (]uestioned,  this  proceeding  postponed  the
dethronement  of  the  tycoon  for  several  years,  and
enable<l  him  to  observe  his  treaty  stipulations  which
he  had  not  been  able  to  do,  owing  to  the  hostility
of  the  daimio  of  Chosu.  An  indemnity  was  paiti
by  Japan  and  intercourse  was  gmiranteetl.  Mr.
Pruyn  played  an  important  nart  in  securing  Amer-
ican rights  in  the  East.  Mr.  Pruyn's  last  public
post  was  that  of  presiding  officer  of  the  State  con-
stitutional convention  of  1872.  For  the  last  years
of  his  life  he  was  not  greatly  identified  with  public
afTairs,  but  was  deeply  interested  in  various  enter-
prises, and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  president
of  the  National  commercial  Iwink  of  Albany.  He
was  a  tnistt-e  of  Rutgers  college,  to  which  he  gave
f  10,()0().  and  was  president  of  the  l)oard  of  directors
of  the  Dudlev  ol)servatorv.  He  received  the  degree
of  M.  A.  from  Rutgers  in' 1836,  and  in  1805  that  of
LL.  I),  from  Williams.

PRYOR,  Roger  Atkinson,  lawyer,  b.  near
Petersburg,  Va..  19- July,  1828.  He  was  graduated
at  Hampden  Sidney  college  in  184"),  and  at  the
University  of  Virginia,  three  years  later,  stiidied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  \mr,  but  entered
journalism.  He  joined  the  staff  of  the  Wa.shing-
ton  "  Union,"  and  was  afterward  editor  of  the
Richmond  "  Enquirer."  He  was  sent  at  twenty-
seven  on  a  special  mission  to  Greece  by  President
Pierce.  In  1850  he  opposed  William  \j.  Yancey's
prf>position  to  reopen  tne  slave-trade.  He  was  an
ardent  advocate  of  state-rights,  and  establish«'d  a
daily  papwr,  the  "South,"  at  Richmond,  in  which
he  ivpresented  the  extreme  views  of  the  Virginia
Democracy.  His  aggressive  course  and  the  intense
utterance  of  his  convictions  led  to  several  duels.
He  was  electe<l  to  congress  in  18.'>9  to  fill  a  vacancy,
and  was  re-elected  in  1800,  but  did  not  take  his  seat.
While  in  that  IkhIv  he  made  various  fiery  speeches,
and  in  the  excite<l  condition  of  the  public  mind
preceding  the  civil  war  was  often  invo|ve<l  in  |>as-
sionate  <liscussions  with  his  northern  opiH)nents.
One  of  thi'se.  John  F.  Potter  (q.  r.).  replied  to  him
with  similar  acriinonv,  and  was  challengeil.  Mr.
Potter  named  bowie-knives  as  the  weapons,  and


the  Virginian's  seconds  refused  to  allow  their  prin-
cipal t«>  figlit  with  arms  which  they  pronounced
barl>arous.  This  challenge  created  an  uiirrtar
throughout  the  country,  and  was accomiHinie«I  with
severe  and  characteristic  com  men  t«  on  the  princi-
luils  from  the  northern  and  southern  press.  Mr.
Pryor  was  eager  for  war,  and  visite<l  Charleston  t<)
witness  the  firing  on  Sumter,  and  its  surrender.
He  was  sent  to  the  provisional  Confederate  con-
gress at  Richmond,  and  elected  to  the  first  regular
congress.  So<m  afterward  he  enter»'d  the  Confed-
erate army  as  a  colonel,  and  was  made  a  briga<lier-
general  after  the  Iwttle  of  Williamsburg.  He  re-
signed, 20  Aug.,  1808,  wa.s  taken  j)risoner  in  1864,
and  confined  for  some  time  in  Fttrt  I^fayette.
After  the  surrender  of  the  Confederate  armies,  he
ur^ed  on  the  south  the  adoption  of  a  [xilicy  of  ac-
quiescence and  loyalty  to  the  government.  He  went
to  New  York  in  1805,  sett Ie<l  there  as  a  lawyer,  and
is  still  practising.  He  has  taken  no  part  in  r)oli-
tics  since  the  war.  confining  himself  exclusively  to
his  profession.  He  is  the  author  of  many  si)eeche9
and  literary  addresses,  and  has  l)een  given  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  by  Hampden  Sidney  college.

PUENTE,  Jiian  Eligrio  (|)oo-ain  -toy),  Spanish
author,  b.  in  Aslurias  a>x>ut  1720;  d.  in  Mexico
al>out  1780.  Very  little  is  known  of  his  life,  ex-
cei)t  that  he  was  employetl  as  chief  clerk  in  the
office  of  the  secretarj*  of  the  viceroyalty  of  Mexico,
Melchor  de  Peramas,  and  probably  was' sent  by  him
on  several  missions  to  Florida.  His  manusc-ripts
were  found  in  the  library  of  the  secretary,  after  the
evacuation  of  Mexico  by  the  Spanianis,  and  include
"  Noticias  de  la  Provincia  de  la  Florida  y  el  Cayo
de  los  Mdrtires.  con  su  Piano  v  Mapa  "(date«l  1709),
the  accompanying  map  of  which  is  remarkably  cor-
rect for  that  time;  "  Informe  de  los  Pescados  (lue
se  crian  en  las  Costas  de  la  Florida  y  Cam|)ecne,
v  de  los  l^eneficios  que  pueden  resultar  de  tales
I'esquerias"  (1770);  ana  "Noticia  exacta  de  las
Familias,  que  por  la  entrega  de  la  Flori«la  &  la
Corona  Rritanica,  se  retiraron  A  la  Habana,  y  modo
con  que  fueron  recibidas"  (1770).

PlJERTA,  Cristobal  Martinez  (poo-air'-t«h),
Spanish  inissionarN',  b.  in  Andalusia  in  1580;  d.  in
Hondunis.  Central  America,  in .St>ptemlK'r,  1623.
He  was  a  soldier  in  his  youth,  came  in HKX)  to
America  with  Juan Monasterios,  and lande<l in
Tnijillo.  Honduras. He  starved  in  the  exfHnlition
to  Costa  Rica,  and  while  there  resolvetl  to  abandon
the  army  and undertake the  conversion of  the
Indians  of  the  province  of  Teguzgalpa. In  1«K)2
he  retired  to  Guatemala,  entenvl  the  F'ranciscan
order.  17  Oct.,  and  in  the  newly  founded  seminary
studied  theology  and  the  principal  ln<lian  dialects.
Afterward  he  was  professor  of  Latin  grammar  in
Chiapa.  and  master  of  novices  in  the  convent  of
Guatemala,  but  he  continued  in  his  desire  to  con-
vert the  natives,  and  after  many  difficulties  ob-
tained from  his  superiors  jiermission  to  undertake
the  task. With  another  friar  and  four  (iuanajuan
Indians  as  interpreters  he land»Hl  at  Ca|M'  (iracias
a  Dios,  penetrated  into  the  interior,  and  was  fairly
1  successful  with the Paye  ami  (fuazncalpa  triU%
where  he  founded  the  mission  of  Concepcion  near
\  Junia  river. He  afterward  receive<l  a  vessel  with
auxiliaries  and  another  priest,  and  un<lertook  the
I  conversion  of  the  Guava  and  Jicaijue  tril)es.  where
!  he  founded  seven  other  missions. While  camping
t  on  Guam|)o  river,  he  was  invited  by  the  ferocious
,  .\lbatuino  tribe  to  preach  to  them,  and,  notwith-
'■  standing  the  opposition  of  his  Jica(]ue  converts,  he
;  enten'd  their  country  and  was  inunlertHl  by  them
i  towani  the  end  of  ScptemU^r,  1023. His  btxly  was
I  recovered  later  by  Juan  de  Miranda,  the  governor  of


132


PUEYRREDON


PUGH


Tftijillo,  and  buried  in  the  chspel  of  San  Antonio
in  the  Francist-an  convent  of  Guatemala.  He  wrote
"C'artJis  al  Proviut-ial  de  Guatemala  K^bre  la  VjX-
jwlicit'm  li  Tcjjuzfjalpa  "  and  '•  Satisfaccion  d  las
nizuiies  ali'pulas  contra  la  ex[H>dicion  &  Te>fuz-
galpa,  etc.,"  which  are  preserved  in  manuscript  in
the  Franciscan  convent  of  (iuatcmala.

PIKYRREDON,  Juan  Martin  de(poo-air'-ray-
don),  Argentine  statesman,  b.  in  liuenos  Ayres
alH)Ut  1775 ;  d.  there  about  1840.  lie  received  his
education  in  Spain,  but  returned  in  the  first  years
of  the  19th  century.  When  the  English  general.
Sir  William  Heresford,  occupied  Buenos  Ayres,  27
June,  1806,  Pueyrredon  refused  to  recognize  the
English  authorities,  and,  leaving  the  city,  liegan  to
organize  resistance.  On  31  .luly,  with  a  force  of
armed  jw^usants,  he  attacked  the  English  outworks,
and  was  driven  back,  but  his  troops  surrounded
the  city,  which  capitulated  on  11  Aug.  In  the
second  invasion  of  the  English  he  took  a  principal

Cart  in  the  heroic  defence  of  the  citv,  which  ended
v  the  capitulation  of  Gen.  Whitelocke,  7  July,  1807.
rie  was  active  in  the  movement  for  independence
in  1810,  and,  after  the  resignation  of  the  director,
Alvarez,  was  elected  by  the  congress  of  Tucuman,
of  which  he  was  a  member,  supreme  director  of  the
Argentine  Republic,  3  May,  181(5.  Together  with
San  Martin  and  Hcigrano  he  favored  in  that  con-
gress the  election  of  a  monarch,  fearing  that  a  re-
publican form  of  government  would  continue  the
anarchy  that  existed  at  that  time.  During  his  ad-
ministration he  did  his  utmost  to  assist  San  Martin,
governor  of  Cuyo,  in  the  preparation  of  his  expedi-
tion for  the  liberation  of  Chili,  and.  after  the  latter's
departure,  17  Jan.,  1817,  forwarded  re-enforceraents
and  resources  to  him.  In  the  same  year  he  obtained
the  transfer  of  the  congress  to  Buenos  Ayres,  inorder
to  have  it  more  under  his  influence.  On  13  May
that  body  began  its  sessions  there,  and  in  1818  it
decreed  the  new  constitution,  which  caused  general
discontent  and  several  revolts.  Pueyrredon  sent
forces  from  Buenos  Ayres  against  the  rel^ellious
provinces,  and  ordered  the  army  of  the  north
against  them,  but  the  insurgents  were  victorious,
and  Pueyrredon  was  forced  to  resign,  10  June,  1819,
taking  refuge  in  Montevideo.  After  a  few  years
he  returned,  but  he  did  not  again  take  part  in  pub-
lic life,  ending  his  days  in  retirement  on  his  estate,
Bosque  IIernios<i,  near  Buenos  Ayr&s.

PUFFER,  Reuben,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sudburjr,
Mass.,  7  Jan..  1756;  d.  in  Berlin,  Mass.,  9  April,
1829.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1778,
taught  in  East  Sudbury  (now  Wayland),  Mass.,
studied  theology,  and  became  in  178i  pastor  of  the
Congregational  church  in  Bolton  (now  Berlin),
which  charge  he  held  till  bis  death.  Harvard  gave
him  the  degree  of  I).  D.  in  1810.  He  published  an
election  sermon  (1802) ;  "  Dudleian  Lecture  at  Har-
vard "  (1808) ;  an  Address  (4  Julv,  1810) ;  "  Conven-
tion Sermon"  (1811);  and  " Two' Sermons "  (1826).

PUOH,  Eliza  Lofton  (pew),  author,  b.  in  Bay-
ou Lafourche,  La.,  in  1841.  Her  father,  Col.
George  Phillips,  served  in  the  legislature,  and
her  mother  was  a  daughter  of  Judge  John  Rhea.
After  graduation  at  a  seminary  in  New  Orleans  in
1858,  she  married  William  W.  Pugh,  a  planter  of
Assumption  parish.  La.  She  has  written  under
the  pen-name  of  "  Arria,"  and  is  the  author  of  two
novels,  "  Not  a  Hero  "  (New  Vork,  1867),  and  "  In
a  Crucible"  (Philadelphia,  1871).

PUGH,  Ellia,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in  the  parish
of  Dolgellau,  Meirioethshire,  North  Wales,  in  Au-
gust, 1()56:  d.  in  Gwynedd,  Pa.,  3  Dec,  1718.  His
father  died  before  his  birth,  and  his  mother  soon  af-
terward. In  his  eighteenth  year  he  was  converted,


under  the  preaching  of  John  ap  John,  a  Quaker,
and  in  1680  he  was  approved  as  a  minister.  In
1(587  he  and  his  family,  with  many  of  his  acquaint-
ance, settled  near  the  township  of  Gwynedd,  in
Philadelphia  (now  Montgomery)  county.  Pa.,
where  he  found  hundreds  of  his  countrymen,  whose
worship  was  performed  in  Welsh.  He  was  able  to
support  his  family  as  a  fanner,  but  his  heart  was
engaged  in  the  ministry  and  he  was  always  warmly
welcomed  in  the  various  meetings  of  his  society  in
Philadelphia,  Chester,  and  Bucks  counties.  In
1706  a  religious  "concern  "  led  him  back  to  Wales,
where  he  remained  until  1708,  when  he  returned  to
his  family  and  resumed  his  ministerial  labors.  He
wrote,  for  the  most  part  in  his  last  sickness,  a  book
entitled  "  Anerch  i'r  Cymru  " — that  is,  "  A  saluta-
tion to  the  Britains,  to  call  them  from  the  many
things  to  the  one  thing  needful,  for  the  saving  of
their  souls."  This  book  was  afterward  printed  by
Andrew  Bradford  (Philadelphia,  1721),  and  is  the
first  Welsh  book  that  is  known  to  have  been
printed  in  this  country.  So  popular  and  well  re-
ceived wa.s  this  dying  testimony  that  in  1727  an
f^nglish  edition  was  published,  the  translation  hav-
ing lieen  made  by  Rowland  Ellis  (1727).

PUGH,  Evan,  chemist,  b.  in  East  Nottingham,
Pa.,  29  Feb.,  1828 ;  d.  in  Bellefonte,  Pa.,  29  April,
1864.  He  was  early  apprenticed  to  the  black-
smith's trade,  but  at  the  age  of  nineteen  bought
out  the  residue  of  his  time  and  studied  at  the
Whitestown,  N.  Y.,  seminary,  meanwhile  supporting
himself  by  manual  labor.  Falling  heir  to  a  smaU
property  in  his  native  town,  including  a  school,  he
taught  there  successfully  for  several  years.  In
1853  he  disposed  of  these  interests  and  went  abroad,
where  for  four  years  he  studied  natural  science
and  mathematics  in  the  universities  of  Leipsic,
GOttingen,  Heidelberg,  and  Paris,  receiving  in
1856  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  at  the  University  of
GOttingen.  After  this  he  devoted  attention  to
agricultural  chemistry,  and  made  in  England  a
series  of  valuable  determinations  of  nitrogen,  show-
ing that  plants  do  not  assimilate  free  nitrogen.  In
1859  he  returned  to  the  United  States  and  accepted
the  presidency  of  Pennsylvania  agricultural  col-
lege. He  at  once  organized  a  new  scheme  of  in-
struction, planned  and  superintended  the  erection
of  the  college  buildings,  secured  endowments,  and,
besides  taking  the  general  guidance  of  the  institu-
tion, had  special  charge  of  the  practical  investiga-
tions of  the  students  in  chemistry,  scientific  agri-
culture, mineralogy,  and  geology.  This  office  he
held  until  his  death.  Dr.  Pugh  was  a  fellow  of  the
London  chemical  society,  a  member  of  scientific
societies  in  the  United  States,  and  contributed  to
scientific  literature.

PUGH,  George  Ellis,  senator,  b.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  28  Nov.,  1822 ;  d.  there,  19  July,  1876.  After
his  graduation  at  Miami  university  in  1840  he
practised  law  until  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican
war,  in  which  he  took  part  as  captain  in  the  4th
Ohio  regiment,  and  also  as  aide  to  Gen.  Joseph
Lane.  In  1848-'9  he  sers'ed  in  the  legislature,  and
he  was  city  solicitor  gf  Cincinnati  in  1850,  and
attomev-general  of  Ohio  in  1851.  He  was  elected
to  the  C  S.  senate  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  3
Dec.,  1855,  till  3  March,  1861,  and  was  a  member  of
the  committees  on  public  lands,  and  the  judiciary.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  con-
vention in  Charleston.  S.  C,  in  1860,  and  matle  a
speech  in  reply  to  William  L.  Yancey.  One  of  his
ablest  efforts  was  his  appeal  in  behalf  of  Clement
L.  Vallandigham  (q.  v.)  in  1863,  in  the  habeas  cor-
pus proceeding  involving  the  quest^n  as  to  the
power  and  duty  of  the  judge  to  relieve  Mr.  Vallan-


PUOH


PULASKI


133


dif^ham  from  miliUiry  confinement.  He  was  de-
feat nl  ti.s  the  Di'mocratic  oanditiute  for  lieutenant-
j:..v«'riit»r  in  1808,  ami  for  i,'oiij;rfs.s  in  l^t04.  In
1H7;{  lii>  was  olwttHl  to  tho  State  constitutional  t-on-
vi-iitioii.  I>ul  (ItK-lincd  to  ^«<'rvt•.

I'lMfH,  Jumps  l^awrence,  senator,  b.  in  Burke
count V,  Ua,,  12  Iki-.,  1820.  In  early  years  he  re-
moveil  with  his  family  to  Alal>ania,  where  he  re-
ceived a  colleiriate  education,  studied  law,  and  was
adniitteil  to  tiie  liar.  He  U'tan  to  practise  in  Eu-
faula,  Ala.,  wius  a  presidential  ele<-tor  in  1848  and
IHTM,  and  was  then  electeil  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat. serviuK  from  5  Dec,  IWO,  till  21  Jan.,  18«1,
when  he  retired,  on  the  secession  of  his  state.  He
was  a  deleffato  fnjm  Alal>aina  to  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives in  the  1st  and  2d  t'onfederate  con-
gresses, serving  from  22  Feb.,  18(J2,  till  the  sur-
render in  1805.  He  also  served  as  a  private  in  the
ConftHlerate  armv,  and  after  the  war  again  prac-
tised law.  Mr.  r*ugh  was  president  of  the  Demo-
cratic state  c<»nvention  of  1874,  a  member  of  the
Constitutional  convention  of  1875,  and  a  presiden-
tial elector  again  in  187G.  He  was  elected  a  U.  S.
senator  from  Alabama  for  the  term  ending  in  1885,
to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  death  oi  George
S.  Houston,  and  was  re-elected  for  the  term  ending
3  March.  IHIM.

PI  LASKI,  Kaziniierz  (or  Casiniir),  Polish
8<jl«lier,  b.  in  Podolia,  4  March,  1748;  d.  near
Savannah,  Ga.,  11  Oct.,  1779.  He  was  the  eldest
son  of  Joseph  Pulaski,  founder  of  the  confedera-
tion of  Barr.  He
received  a  thorough
education  and  served
in  the  guard  of  Duke
Charles,  of  Cour-
land.  In  1767  he
returned  to  Poland
and  joined  his  father
as  one  of  the  eight
original  associates  of
the  confederation  of
Barr,  29  Feb.,  1768.
He  continued  to  car-
ry on  a  partisan  war-
fare after  the  arrest
and  death  of  his  fa-
ther. He  raised  a
revolt  in  Lithuania
in  1769,  and,  al-
though he  was  driven
into  the  fortified
monastery  of  Czen-
stochova,  he  finally  compelled  the  liesieging  Rus-
sian army  to  withdraw.  He  hel()ed  to  drive  the
Russians  across  the  Vistula,  but  oppost^l  the  plans
of  the  French  commis!«ioner,  Francois  Dumouriez.
and  refusetl  to  join  the  main  army,  thus  causing
the  loss  of  the  Iwittle  of  Landskron  in  1770.  He
was  then  electe<l  commander-in-chief,  but  was  de-
feate<l,  and  returned  to  Czenstochova.  He  has
been  accused  of  planning  the  abduction  of  King
Stanislas  Poniatowski  from  Warsaw,  but  modern
historians  have  cleare<l  him  of  all  participation  in
it.  The  plot  hml  for  its  ri'sult  the  intervention  of
Pnissia  and  Austria, and  led  ultimately  to  the  par-
tition of  Poland  in  1773.  Pulaski's  estates  were
confiscated,  he  was  outlawed,  and  a  price  was  set
on  his  hea<l.  He  escaped  to  Turkey,  but,  failing
to  obtain  succor  fn.m  the  sultan,  went  to  Paris
towanl  the  close  of  1775.  He  had  there  several  in-
terviews with  Benjamin  Franklin,  and,  becoming
interested  in  the  American  struggle  for  independ-
ence, came  to  this  country  in  March,  1777.  lie
procee<led  immediately  to  Philadelphia,  and  was


attached  to  the  staff  of  WaMhington.  The  first
action  in  which  he  t«M)k  {lart  was  at  the  Brandy  wine.
When  the  Continental  tnM>i>s  Ix'gan  to  vield.  he
made  a  n-connoissance  with  the  general's  body-
guard, and  n'i)orte«l  that
t  he  enemy  were  endeav-
oring to  cut  off  the  line
of  retreat.  He  was  au-
thorized to  collect  as
many  of  the  scattered
troops  as  came  in  his
way.  and  employ  them
according  to  ins  discre-
tion, which  he  did  in  a
manner  so  prompt  as  to
effect  important  aid  in
the  retreat  of  the  army.
Four  days  later,  on  rec-
ommendation of  Wash-
ington, he  was  conmus-
sioned  brigadier-general,
and  placed  in  charge  of
the  cavalry.  He  saved
the  armv  from  a  sur-
prise at  tV'arren  tavern,
near  Philadelphia,  took
part  in  the  battle  of  Ger-
mantown,  and  in  the  winter  of  1777-'8  engaged
in  the  operations  of  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne,  con-
tributing to  the  defeat  of  a  British  division  at
Haddonficld,  N.  J.  The  cavalry  oflleers  could  not
be  reconciled  to  the  orders  of  a  foreigner  who  could
scarcely  speak  English  and  whose  idc^Ls  of  disci-
pline and  tactics  differed  widely  frf»m  those  to
which  they  had  been  accustomed,  and  these  circum-
stances induced  Pulaski  to  resign  his  command  in
March.  1778,  and  return  to  Valley  Forge,  where
he  was  assigned  to  siwcial  dutv.  At  his  suggestion,
which  was  adopted  by  Washington,  congress
authorized  the  formation  of  a  corps  of  lancers  and
light  infantry,  in  which  even  deserters  and  prison-
ers of  war  might  enlist.  This  corps,  which  liecame
famous  under  the  name  of  Pulaski's  legion,  was
recruiteil  mainly  in  Baltimore.  In  September
it  numbered  about  350  men,  divided  into  three
companies  of  cavalry  and  three  of  infantry.  The
poet  Ijongfellow  has  commemorated  in  verse  this
episode  of  Pulaski's  life.  In  the  autumn  he  was
ordered  to  Little  Egg  Harbor  with  his  legion,  a
company  of  artillery,  and  a  party  of  militia.  A
German  deserter  named  Gustav  Juliet,  who  held  a
sul)ordinate  command  in  the  legion  and  who  enter-
tained a  grudge  against  Col.  de  Bosen.  the  leader
of  the  infantry,  betrayed  their  whei-eal)outs  to  the
British,  who  made  a  night  attack  u|M)n  De  Bosen's
camp.  Pulaski  heard  the  tumult  and,  ass<Mnbling
his  cavalrv,  repelled  the  enemy,  but  the  legion
suffered  a  loss  of  forty  men.  During  the  following
winter  he  was  stationed  at  Mini.sink,  N.  J.  He
was  dissatisfied  with  his  petty  command,  and  in-
tended to  leave  the  service  and  retuni  to  Europe,
but  was  dissuaded  by  Gen.  Washington.  He  was
ortlered  to  South  Carolina,  and  entered  Charleston
on  8  May.  1779.  The  city  wa.s  investe<l  on  the  11th
by  900  British  from  the  army  of  (Jen.  Prevost.
Pulaski  ma<le  a  furious  assault  upon  them,  but  was
ref»elle<l.  The  governor  and  the  city  council  were
incline<l  to  surrender,  but  Pulaski  held  the  city  till
the  arrival  of  support  on  13  May.  Prevost  re-
treated in  the  night  of  the  same  day  across  Ashley
river,  and  Pulaski,  hovering  upon  the  enemy  s
flanks,  harassi'd  them  till  they  evacuateil  .South
Carolina.  Although  he  had  frequent  attacks  of
malarial  fever,  he  remained  in  active  service,  and
toward  the  beginning  of  September  received  orders


134


PULITZER


PULSIFER


to  join  Oen.  John  Mcintosh  at  Au/rnsta,  and  to
move  with  him  towanl  Savannah  in  atlvnnoeof  the
army  of  Cicn.  Beniamin  Linoohi.  B«'fore  the
eneiiiy  was  aware  of  his  presence  he  captured  an
out[)ost,  ami,  after  several  skirmishes,  established
permanent  communications  with  the  PVench  fleet
at  lioaufort.  He  n'ndered  great  services  during
the  siege  of  Savannah,  and  in  the  assault  of  9  Oct.
commanded  the  whole  cavalry,  lioth  French  and
American.  Toward  the  close  of  the  action  he  re-
ceived a  shot  in  the  upj)er  part  of  his  right  thigh,
and  was  taken  to  the  U.  S.  brig  "  Wasp."  lie  dietVas
the  vessel  was  leaving  the  river,  llis  body  was
buried  at  sea,  but  his  funeral  ceremony  took  i)ljice
afterward  in  Charleston.  Congress  voted  a  monu-
ment to  his  memory,  which  has  never  l)cen  erected,
but  one  was  raistnl  by  the  citizens  of  Savannah,  of
which  Lafayette  laid  the  corner-stone  during  his
visit  to  the' United  States  in  1824.  It  was  com-
pleted on  tt  Jan..  1855.  and  is  represented  in  the
accomnanving  illustration.

PULITZER,  Joseph  (pul-it-zer),  journalist,  b.
in  Huda-IVsth.  Hungary.  10  April,  1847.  He  wa.s
educated  in  his  native  city  ancl  came  to  this  coun-
try in  early  youth.  So<in  after  arriving  in  New
York  he  went  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  quickly  ac-
quired a  knowledge  of  p]nglish.  became  interested
in  politics,  and  was  elected  to  the  Missouri  legisla-
ture in  18(>!).  and  to  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention in  1874.  He  entered  journalism  at  twenty
as  a  rei>orter  on  the  St.  Louis  "  Westliche  Post,"
a  Germtiii  Republican  newspaper,  then  under  the
editorial  control  of  Carl  Schurz.  He  subsequently
became  its  managing  editor,  and  obtained  a  pro-
prietary interest.  In  1878  he  founded  the  "  Post-
Dispatch  "  in  that  city  by  buying  the  "  Dispatch  '"
and  uniting  it  with  the  "  Evening  Post,"  and  he
still  retains  control  of  the  journal.  In  1872  he  was
a  delegate  to  the  Cincinnati  convention  whicli
nominated  Horace  (Jreeley  for  the  presidency,  and
in  188()  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Democratic  National
convention,  and  a  member  of  its  platform  commit-
tee from  Missouri.  In  1883  he  purchased  the  New
York  ••  World."  which,  after  twenty-tiiree  years
of  existence  under  various  managers,  had  achieved
no  permanent  success,  and  he  has  greatly  increased
its  circulation He  is  at  present  its  editor  and  sole

F)roprietor.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1884,
>ut  resigned  a  few  months  after  taking  his  seat,
on  account  of  the  pressure  of  journalistic  duties.

PULLMAN,  (Jeorg'e  Mortimer,  inventor,  b.
in  Chautauqua  county,  N.  Y.,  3  March.  1831.  At
fourteen  he  entered  the  employment  of  a  country
merchant,  and  at  seventeen  joined  an  elder  brother
in  the  caV)inet-making  business  in  Albion,  N.  Y.
At  twenty-two  he  successfully  undertook  a  con-
tract for  moving  warehouses  and  other  buildings,
along  the  line  of  the  Erie  canal,  then  being  widtiued
by  the  state.  In  185J)  he  removed  to  Chicago  and
engaged  extensively  in  the  then  novel  task  of  rais-
ing entire  blocks  of  brick  and  stone  buildings.  In
1858  his  attention  was  first  directed  to  the  discom-
fort of  long-distance  railway  travelling,  and  he  de-
termined, if  jxjssible,  to  offer  the  public  something
tetter.  In  1859  he  remo<lelled  two  old  day-coaches
of  the  Chicago  and  Alton  roatl  into  sleeping-cars,
which  at  once  found  favor  and  established  a  de-
mand for  improved  travelling  accommodation.
In  1863  he  l)egan  the  construction  at  Chicago  of  a
sleeping-car  ujMjn  the  now  well-known  mwlel,  which
was  destined  to  associate  his  name  inseparably  witli
progress  in  railway  equipment.  It  was  named  the
"  Pi<jneer,"  and  cost  al>out  $18,000.  From  this  small
beginning  he  continued  to  develop  his  ideas  for
comfort  and  safety  in  railway  travel,  till  Pullman


cars  are  now  known  all  over  the  world.  The  Pull-
man palace-car  com|>any,  of  which  he  is  president,
was  organized  in  1867,  and  it  now  operates  over
1,400  cars  on  more  than  100,000  miles  of  railway.
In  1887  he  designed  and  establishe<l  the  system  of
"  vestibuled  trains,"  which  virtually  makes  of  an
entire  train  a  sin-
gle car.  They
were  first  put
in  service  upon
the  Pennsylvania
trunk  lines,  and
are  now  to  be
found  on  many
other  railroads.
In  1880,  in  obedi-
ence to  the  im-
perative demand
of  the  Pullman
company  for  in-
creased shop-facil-
ities, and  to  ^ive
effect  to  an  idea
he  had  long  cher-
ished of  improv-
ing the  social
surroundings  of
the  workmen,  he
founded  near  Chi-
cago the  industrial  town  of  Pullman,  which  now
contains  over  11,000  inhabitants,  5,000  of  whom
are  employed  in  the  company's  shops.  Archi-
tecturally the  town  is  picturesque,  with  broad
streets,  handsome  public  buildings,  and  attrac-
tive houses,  supplied  with  every  modern  conveni-
ence, for  the  employes.  According  to  mortality
statistics,  it  is  one  of  the  most  healthful  places
in  the  world.  Mr.  Pullman  has  been  identified
with  various  public  enterprises,  among  them  the
Metropolitan  elevated  railway  system  of  New  York,
which  was  constructed  and  opened  to  the  public
by  a  corporation  of  which  he  was  president. — His
brother.  Jaiiies  Minton,  clerg}-man,  b.  in  Port-
laud,  Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  21  Au":.,  1836,  was
graduated  at  St.  Lawrence  divinity-school,  Canton,
N.  Y.,  in  1860.  He  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Univer-
salist  church,  Troy,  N.  Y..  from  1861  till  1868,
when  he  was  called  to  the  6th  Universalist  church.
New  York  city,  where  he  remained  until  1885.  He
organized  and  was  first  president  of  the  Young
men's  Universalist  association  of  New  York  city
in  1869,  was  secretary  of  the  Universalist  general
convention  in  1868-"77,  and  chairman  of  the  pub-
lication board  of  the  New  York  state  convention
in  1869-'74.  From  1870  till  1885  he  was  a  trustee
of  St.  Lawrence  university,  which  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  I).  I),  in  1879.  Since  1885  he  has  been  pas-
tor of  the  1st  Universalist  church  in  Lynn,  Mass..
and  he  is  president  of  the  associated  charities  of
that  city. His  standpoint  is  the  ethical  as  op-

fosed  to  the  magical  interpretation  of  Christianity,
le  edited  the  "Christian  Leader"  several  years,
and  has  published  reviews  and  lectures,

PULSIFER,  David,  antiquary,  b.  in  Ipswich,
Mass.,  22  Sept.,  1802.  He  studied  in  the  district
schools  until  he  was  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  then
went  to  Salem  to  learn  bookbinding,  where,  in
handling  old  records,  his  taste  for  antiquarian  re-
search was  first  developed.  Subsequently  he  served
as  clerk  in  county  courts,  and  transcrilied  several
ancient  books  of  reconls.  In  1853  the  governor
of  Massachusetts  called  the  attention  of  the  ex-
ecutive council  to  the  perishing  condition  of  the
early  records  and  recommended  that* the  two  old-
est volumes  of  the  general  court  records  should


PULTB


PUMPEMiY


135


bo  priii(«Hl  fit  the  ox|)onH<>  of  the  stnto. E[»hrnlm  I
M.  Wrijfht  and  NatliHuioI  H.  Sliurtli>IT wero iip-
i)()inti'«l  to  tiikc  clmrpre  of  thu  print iiii;,  an<l  Dnvul  I
riilsifiT.  who  WHit  iU'knowle<l>;e<l  to  Im'  osiH>cinllv  [
skilful  in  d»'<'ii»herinK  the  chirofcnipliy  of  tlie  ITtli  |
century,  was  c-harffcHl  with  th«'  t-opyinj;. lie  ha<l  ]
previously  i-onied  the  first  volume  for  the  Amcri-
niu  anti<|uarian  siK'iety. Of  his  work,  Sanuiel  F.
Haven,  in  his  intnKluetion  to  the  printe<l  re<-or<ls
in  the"  An-haNtlopia,"  says:  "  He  unites  the  quali-
ties of  an  eX|K'rt  in  ehiroifraphy  with  a  )it'<»uine  an-  j
ti(|uarian  tasto  and  much  familiarity  with  ancient  j
records." Mr.  Pulsifer  has  e<lite<l  the  "  Records  of  i
the  Colony  of New  Plymouth  in  New  Kiifjland  "
(vo\».  ix.  to  xii.,  lioston.  lHol>-'01);  "The  Simple
Cobhlerof  Apjrawam  in  .Xmerica"  (1H4^}) ;  "  A  Poeti-
cal Kpistle  tt»(itH)r);e  Washinjfton,  P's4|.,  Command-
er-in-Chief of  the  Armicvs  of  the  Unite<l  States  of
America, by liev.  Charles  H.  Wharton, D. I).,"
which was  "first published anonvmously  in An-
napolis in  1779  (1881);  and  "The  Christiiin's  A.  B.
C. '  an  onginal  manuscript,  written  in  the  18th
century  by  an  unknown  author  (1883). He  is  the
author  of  "  Inscriptions  from  the  Burying-(irounds
in  Salem,  Mass."  (Ik)ston,  1837);  "Guide  to  Boston
and  Vicinity"  (18(5(1);  and  an  "Account of  the
Battle  of Bimker Hill,  with  General  John Bur-
govne's  Account"  (1872).

i*riiTE,  Joseph  Hippolyt,  physician,  b.  in
Meschwle,  Westphalia,  Germany,  6  Oct.,  1811;  d.
in  Cincinnati,  Oliio,  24  Feb.,  1884,  He  was  e<Iu-
cate«I  in  the  fjymnasium  of  Siist  and  received  his
roe4licnl  degree  at  the  University  of  Hamburg.  He
followed  his  brother,  Dr.  Hermann  Pulte,  to  this
country  in  18;J4,  and  practised  in  Cherrytown.  Pa.,
but  U'came  a  convert  to  homoeopathy,  and  took  an
active  interest  in  forming  the  homoeopathic  acade-
my in  AUeiitown,  Pa.,  which  was  closed  in  1840,
He  then  removed  to  ('incinnati,  Ohio.  In  1844  he
founded,  with  others,  the  American  institute  of
homu'otMithy  in  New  York  city,  and  in  1872  he
established  in  Cincinnati  the  medical  college  that
bears  his  name,  where  he  was  profes.sor  of  the  sci-
ence of  clinical  medicine.  In  1852  he  was  made
profeasor  of  the  same  bninch  at  the  Homa-opathic
college  of  Cleveland,  an«l  he  serve<l  as  professor  of
obstetrics  in  1853-'5.  He  contributed  to  various
homaH)|>athic  journals,  was  an  editor  of  the
"Amencan  Magazine  of  Homa*opathy  and  Hy-
dropathv"in  1852-'4,  and  of  the  "Quarterlv  Ho-
ma'o[uitiiic  Magazine"  in  1854;  edited  Teste's
"  I)iM'as«'s  of  Children."  translated  by  Kmma  II.
Cote  (2d  ed.,  Cincinnati,  1857):  and  was  the  author
of  "Organcm  der  Weltgeschichte"  (Cincinnati,
1846:  English  e<l.,  1859);  "The  Homa?op»ithic  lh>-
mestic  Phvsiciap"  (1850);  "A  Replv  to  Dr.  Met-
calf"  (1851);  "The  Science  of  Medicine"  (Cleve-
land, 1852) ;  "  The  Woman's  Medical  Guide  "  (Cin-
cinnati, 1853):  and  "Civilization  and  its  Heroes:
an  Oration"  (1H.").5).

PrMACAHl'A,  Mat^o  (^)oo-mah-cah-wah),
Peruvian  insurgent,  b.  in  Chmchero  alxiut  17(K);
d.  in  Sicuani,  17  March,  1815.  He  was  cacique  of
his  native  trilje,  but  served  with  the  royalists  and
aided  in  suppressing  the  revolution  of  1780,  headed
by  Jose  (iabriel  Condorcancpii.  For  his  services
he  w-as  aiiiK>inted  colonel  of  militia,  and  soon  after-
ward heobtaineil  the  same  rank  in  the  army.  At
thelH'ginning  of  the  struggle  for  indejx'udence  he
servotl  the  royalists,  and  was  api»ointed  by  the
viceroy  .\l>ascal  to  maintain  order  in  the  province
of  Cuzc<  •.  With  3,5(K)  men  and  the  forces  of  anot  h-
er  caci<iue,  Manuel  Chotiuehuanca,  he  j)acifie<l  the
whole  territory,  and  Abascal  recommended  him  to
the  king,  whoapiwinted  him  brig^ier  in  1811. In


1812,  during  an  nl>s«>nco  of  Gen.  Ooyeneche,  the
viceroy  apiMtinted  Pumacahua  tem|»or8ry  govenior
of  upf)er  Peru  an<I  presi«lent  f»f  the  rovalaudien*
cia.  A  suilden  change  now  to«ik  i)lact»  in  his  opin-
ions, and  when  the  revolution  in  Cuzco  under  Jr»se
an«l  Vicente  Angulo  iM'gan.  3  Aug..  1814,  Pumwn-
hiia  took  |Mirt  in  it.  and  was  apjiointed  a  memiNT
of  the  governing  junta.  On  U  5»ov.,  in  commaml
of  a  division,  he  attacked  and  defeate<l  the  forces
that  defende*!  the  province  of  Arequipa.  and  took
|M)ss«'ssion  of  the  city.  But  on  the  30th  of  the
sjime  month  he  left  that  place  an«l  went  to  Cuzoo,
and  meanwhile  (ten.  Ramirez  occnpiwi  the  city.
.\fter  two  months'  sojourn,  fx-ciinied  in  organizing
his  forces  and  casting  cannon,  Pumacahua,  at  the
approach  of  Ramirez.  t«M)k  un  a  strongly  fortified
iM>sition  near  Uma<hiri.  whicn  was  stormed  on  11
March,  1HI.5.  Pumacahua  was  totally  defr-ated,
and  sfxm  afterward  hanged  bv  order  of  Ramirez.

Pl'MPKLLY,  Mary  Hollonhack  YieWta
(]nim-\H'\'-\\).  ]HH't,  b.  in  Athens.  Pa..  6  May,
1803;  d.  in  Paris.  France,  4  De<'.,  1879.  She  wrote
religious  historical  poems,  including  "  B<'lshaz-
zar's  Feast,"  "  Pilate's  Wife's  Dream,"  "  HenHl's
Feast,"  and  "  An  Ode  to  Shakespeare."  Some  of
these  were  collected  and  iniblislied  in  a  volume
(New  York,  1852). — Her  s<^)n.  Raphael,  geologist,
b.  in  Owego,  N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1887,  was  educated  at
the  polytechnic  school  in  Hanover,  and  at  the
Roval  mining  school  in  Freilx-rg,  Saxony,  after
which  he  travelled  extensively  through  the  mining
districts  of  Euror)e  for  the  purpose  of  studying
geology  and  metallurgy  by  direct  observation.  In
18(50  he  was  engaged  in  mining  operations  in  Ari-
zona, and  during  18(]l-'3  he  was  emi)loved  bv  the
goveniment  of  Japan  to  explore  the  island  of  Yesso.
after  which  he  was  engaged  by  the  Chinese  authori-
ties to  examine  the  coal-fields  of  nort  hen  China,  and
returned  to  the  Unitetl  States  in  186(1.  after  cross-
ing Mongolia,  central  Asia.  and>  Sil>eria.  thus  com-
pleting a  geological  journey  around  the  world  in
the  north  temperate  zone.  During  1806-'75  he
was  professor  of  mining  at  the  School  of  min-
ing and  practical  geology  at  Harvard,  and  in
1870-'l  he  conducted  the  gefilogical  survey  of  the
copjH-r  region  of  Michigan,  for  which  he  prepared
"  Copj)er- Bearing  Rocks,"  lieing  part  ii.  of  vol-
ume I.  of  the  "Geological  Survey  of  Michigan"
(New  York,  1873).  He  was  called  ujhui  in  1871  to
conduct  the  geological  survey  of  Missouri,  and  for
three  years  devoted  his  energies  to  that  task,  pre-
paring "  A  Preliminary  Rejwrt  on  the  Iron  Ores
and  Coal  Fields,"  with  an  atlas  for  the  rej^ort  of
the  "Geological  Survey  of  Missouri"  (New  York,
1873).  When  the  U.  S.  geological  survey  was  es-
tablished in  1879.  Prof.  Pumpelly  organized  the
division  of  economic  gefdogy.  and  asa  sjK'cial  agent
of  the  10th  census  he  planned  and  directed  the  in-
vestigations on  the  mining  industries,  exclusive  of
the  precious  metals,  and  prepared  volume  xv.  of
the  "  Census  Rejvorts"  on  "  The  Mining  Industries
of  the  United  States  '"  (Washington,  188(i).  During
1879-'80  he  conducted  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  an  elaU)-
rate  investigation  for  the  i»fati<iiial  Ixianl  of
health  as  to  the  abilitv  of  various  soils  to  filter
sjwres  from  liquids  an<(  from  air.  In  1881  he  or-
ganizal  the  Northern transc<mtinental  survey,  with
reference  to  collecting  information  conceniing  the
to(K>graphical  and  economic  features  of  Dakota,
Montana,  and  Washingt<m  territories,  and  had
charge  of  the  work  until  its  cessation  in  1884.  also
editing  the  rejiorts  of  the  survey.  He  then  re-en-
tereil  the  national  survey  as  geologist  of  thearchip-
an  division  of  geology,  on  which  service  he  is  now
(18^)  engagea. Prof.  Pumpelly  is  a  member  of


136


PUNCHARD


PURMAN


various  sc'ientiflc  societies,  and  in  1872  was  elected
to  membership  in  the  National  academy  of  sci-
ences, lie  has  contributed  papers  to  the  literature
of  his  profession,  many  of  which  have  appeared
in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science  "  or  in  the
transactions  of  learned  societies.  His  books  in-
clude "  (Jeolopical  Researches  in  China,  Monjjolia,
and  Japan  duriiijj  the  Years  18G2-'5,"  issued  by  the
Smithsotiinn  institution  (Washington,  18(iU).  and
"Across  America  and  Asia"  (New  York,  ISGU).

Pl'NCHARD,  Oeorge,  e<litor,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass..  7  June,  1806;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2  April,
1880.  His  father,  John  (1763-1857),  served  in  the
Revolutionary  army  and  was  probabljr  the  last  sur-
vivor of  the  regiments  that  were  stationed  at  West
Point  at  the  time  of  Arnold's  treasf)n.  The  son
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1826,  and  at  An-
dover  theological  seminary  in  1829.  From  1830
till  1844  he  was  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church
in  Plymouth,  N.  H.  Mr.  Punehurd  was  associate
editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "Boston  Traveler,"
of  which  he  was  also  a  founder,  from  1845  till
1857,  and  again  from  1867  till  1871.  He  was  sec-
retary of  the  New  p]ngland  branch  of  the  Ameri-
can tract  society,  and  the  author  of  a  "View  of
Congregationalism  "  (Andover,  1850),  and  a  "  His-
tory of  Congregationalism  from  A.  D.  250  to  1616  "
(1841  :  2d  ed.,  d  vols.,  New  York,  186.V7).

PURCELL,  John  Baptist,  R.  C.  archbishop,
b.  in  Mallow,  County  Cork,  Ireland,  26  Feb.,  1800;
d.  in  Brown  county,  Ohio,  4  July,  1883.  He  emi-
grated to  the  United  States  in  1818,  and  entered
Ashbury  college,  Baltimore,  where  he  taught.  In
1820  he  was  admitted  to  Mount  St.  Mary's,  Em-
mettsburg,  and,  after  receiving  minor  orders,  fin-
ished his  theological  course  in  the  Sulpitian  col-
lege, Paris.  He  was  ordained  a  priest  in  the  cathe-
dral of  Notre  Dame  in  1826.  and  in  1827  was  ajj-
f)ointed  professor  of  philosophy  in  St.  Mary's  col-
ege,  becoming  president  in  1828.  The  progress
that  this  institution  made  during  his  presidency
attracted  the  notice  of  the  American  hierarchy,
and  he  was  nominated  bishop  of  Cincinnati.  lie
was  consecrated  on  13  Oct.,  1833.  At  the  time  of
his  appointment  there  was  only  one  small  frame
Roman  Catholic  church  in  the  city,  and  not  more
than  16  in  the  diocese,  while  the  church  property
was  valued  at  about  |12,000.  He  founded  acade-
mies and  schools,  organized  German  congrega-
tions, and  built  a  convent  for  the  Ursulines.  The
number  of  Roman  Catholics  had  increased  from
6,000  to  70,000  in  1846,  with  70  churches  and  73
priests.  In  1847  the  diocese  of  Cleveland  was
formed  out  of  that  of  Cincinnati,  and  placed  under
the  jurisdiction  of  another  prelate  at  his  request.
He  was  made  an  archbishop  in  1850,  with  four
suffragan  bishops  attached  to  his  see,  and  being
in  Rome  in  1851,  he  received  the  pallium  from  the
pope's  own  hands.  He  at  once  set  about  found-
mg  what  was  to  be  one  of  the  chief  theological
seminaries  of  the  country.  Mount  St.  Mary's  of  the
West.  He  presided  over  his  first  provincial  coun-
cil in  1855,  and  held  a  second  in  1858.  It  was
impossible  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  new  congre-
gations with  the  resources  at  hand,  and  this  led
to  the  financial  embarrassments  that  shadowed
the  closing  years  of  the  archbishop's  life.  In  1868
the  creation  of  new  sees  had  limited  his  diocese
to  that  part  of  Ohio  south  of  latitude  40°  41',  but
this  stiU  contained  nearly  140,000  Roman  Catho-
lics. In  1869  he  attended  the  Vatican  council,
was  active  in  its  del il)erat ions,  and,  although  he
opposed  the  declaration  of  the  infallibility  of  the
pope,  he  at  once  subscril)ed  to  the  doctrine  on  its
aennition. His  golden  jubilee  was  celebrated  in


1876  with  great  splendor.  A  crisis  in  his  financial
affairs  came  in  1879.  Several  years  before  this  he
had  permitted  his  brother,  Edward  Purcell,  who
was  vicar-general  of  the  diocese,  to  receive  deposits
of  money.  Neither  of  them  knew  anything  of  the
nrinciples  on  which  business  should  he  conducted.
When  the  crash  came.  Edward  Purcell  died  of  a
broken  heart.  It  was  discovered  that  the  indebted-
ness reached  nearly  $4,000,000.  The  folly  of  the
financial  operations  that  led  to  it  was  widely  com-
mented on,  but  no  one  thought  of  charging  the  arch-
bishop with  dishonesty  or  evil  intent.  The  sal-
ary of  a  bishop  known  as  the  "  cathedraticum  "^
amounts  to  $4,000  or  $5,000  a  year,  but  he  was-
twenty-five  years  a  bishop  lief  ore  he  could  be  pre-
vailed on  to  accept  any  part  of  the  sum.  He  was.
given  $800  one  morning,  and  by  evening  he  had
parted  with  the  whole.  His  priests  gave  him  $3,400'
at  his  golden  jubilee;  the  next  day  he  divided  it
among  charitable  institutions.  He  offered  his  resig-
nation in  1880,  but  it  was  felt  that  its  acceptance
would  imply  some  reproach.  He  was  given  a  co-
adjutor instead,  and  retired  to  a  house  in  Brown
county.  At  his  death  the  number  of  Roman  Catho-
lics in  the  diotrese  that  he  originally  held  was  more
than  half  a  million,  the  priests  numWred  480,  and
the  churches  500.  Archbishop  Purcell  in  18S7  held
a  seven  days'  discussion  with  Alexander  Campbell,
and  in  1870  publicly  defended  Christianity  against
an  infidel  orator.  Both  discussions  were  printed
and  widely  circulated ;  the  latter  as  "  The  Roman
Clergy  and  Free  Thought"  (1870).  His  other  pub-
lications were  "Lectures  and  Pastoral  Letters,"
"  Diocesan  Statutes,  Acts,  and  Decrees  of  Three
Provincial  Councils  held  in  Cincinnati,"  and  a  se-
ries of  school-books  for  use  in  Roman  Catholic
schools  in  his  diocese.

PURCHAS,  Samuel,  English  clergyman,  b.  in
Thaxted,  Essex,  England,  in  1577 ;  d.  in  London
in  1628.  He  was  educated  at  St.  John's  college,
Cambridge,  and  in  1604  became  vicar  of  Eastwood,.
Essex.  Removing  to  London,  he  compiled  from
more  than  1,300  authorities  a  work  entitled  "  Pur-
chas,  his  Pilgrimage;  or,  Relations  of  the  World
and  the  Religions  observed  in  all  Ages  and  Place*
discovered  from  the  Creation  unto  this  Present "'
(4  parts,  folio,  London,  1613;  4th  cd.,  1626),  and
"  Ilakluvt's  Posthumus :  or,  Purchas,  his  Pil-
grimes,''  for  which  he  used  Hakluyt's  manuscript
collections,  and  which  preserves  the  original  narra-
tives of  the  early  English  navigators  and  explorers
of  the  western  world  (5  vols.,  folio,  1625-'6).  He
also  published  "  The  King's  Tower  and  Triumphal
Arch  of  London"  (1623)  and  " Microcosmus,  or
the  Historic  of  Man,"  which  is  sometimes  called
Purchas's  "  Funeral  Sermon  "  (1627).

PURDON,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1784 ;  d.  there,  3  Oct.,  1835.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1802,  and  was  atlmitted  to  the
bar  in  1806,  served  in  the  legislature,  and  was  ac-
tive in  public  affairs.  He  published  an  "Abridg-
ment of  the  Laws  of  Pennsylvania  from  1700"
(Philadelphia.  1811).  Frederick  C.  Brightly  etlited
the  8th  and  9th  editions  (1858  and  1862),  with  an-
nual supplements  to  1869!,

PURMAN,  William  J.,  jurist,  b.  in  Centre
county,  Pa.,  11  April,  1840.  He  received  a  liberal
education,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  but  entered  the  National  army  as  a  private,
serving  on  special  duty  in  the  war  department  and
in  Florida.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Constitu-
tional convention  of  Florida  in  1868,  and  also  of
the  state  senate,  judge  of  Jackson  county  court  in
1868-'9,  and  U.  b.  assessor  of  internal /e venue  for
Florida  in  1870. In  1872  he  was  chairman  of  the


PURPLE


PUSEY


137


Ri^publican  state  executive  C()inmitt««,  and  was
eliHTtiHl  to  con^rrcss  a»  a  Uopublican,  »crving  from
1  l)e<-..  IHTa.  till  his  rt-si^Mmtion  on  10  Kfl).,  1875.
lie  was  afruin  elwted,  st-rvinff  from  H  Dec,  1875,
till  3  Mnn-h,  1877,  and  re-ele<'te<l,  but  his  seat  was
8UCc-esHfully  contested  by  UoJR'rt  II.  M.  Davidson.
Pl'RPLE,  Norman  HiKricinH,  jurist,  b.  in  Exe-
ter, N.  Y..  •-»»  Mnnh,  1K(W;  d.  in  Chicujjo,  111..  0
Auff.,  1H«;{.  After  atteixiiii^  the  district  sch(K)ls,
he  studiinl  law,  wa.s  tulniitted  to  the  l>ar  in  Tiof^
countv,  I'a.,  in  IKM),  and  in  1837  R'moved  to  I'eoria,
III. fn  184t)-*2  he  was  state's  attorney  for  the  Wth

t'udicial  circuit  of  Illinois,  and  from  1845  till  1848
le  was  asvMX'iate  iudi^e  of  the  supreme  cotirt.  He
was  once  a  candidate  for  V.  S.  senator,  and  in  1860
was  a  delcfjate  to  the  Democratic  national  conven-
tion in  Charleston,  S.  ('.  He  published  ".Stntutes
of  Illinois  relatinjf  to  Real  Estate"  (yuincy,  1849)
and  "  A  Compilation  of  the  Statutes  of  Illinois  of
a  (ien(>ral  Nature  in  Force,  Jan.  1,  1850"  (2  vols.,
Chicajro.  18.*>C).  These  works  were  adopted  by  the
geneml  assembly.

PURPLE,  Samuel  Smith,  physician,  b.  in  Leb-
anon, Mmlison  co.,  N.  Y..  24  June,  1822.  He  re-
ceived a  common-sch<K)l  education  and  was  gradu-
ated at  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1844.  In  184G-'8  he
was  physician  to  the  New  York  city  disi)ensary,
and  he  was  ward  physician  in  the  board  of  health
during  the  cholera  epidemic  of  1849.  He  was  vice-
president  of  the  New  York  academv  of  medicine  in
1872-'5,  its  president  from  1876  til'l  1880,  and  was
made  second  vice-president  of  the  New  York  gene-
alogical and  biogranhical  society  in  1888.  His
publications  are  "  The  Corpus  Luteum "  (1846) ;
"  Menstruation  "  (New  York,  1846) ;  "  Contributions
to  the  Practice  of  Midwifery  "  (1853);  "  Observa-
tions on  the  Remedial  Properties  of  SimabaCedron"
(1K54);  "Observations  on  Wounds  of  the  Heart"
(1855) ;  "  Genealogical  Memorials  of  William  Brad-
ford, First  Printer  of  New  York  "  (1873) ;  "  In  Me-
moriam:  Edwin  R.  Purple"  (1881);  and  "Memoir
of  the  Life  and  Writings  of  Hon.  Teunis  G.  Bergen  "
(1881).— His  brother,  Edwin  Ruthven,  lawyer,  b.
in  Sherburne,  N.  Y.,  30  June,  1831 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  20  Jan.,  1879,  was  educated  at  Earl  ville  acade-
my. In  1850  he  emigrated  to  California,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1855,  and  served  as
county  supervisor  and  justice  of  the  fifth  township
in  Calaveras  county.  In  the  autumn  of  1862  he
discovered,  in  connection  with  John  White  and  five
others,  the  first  gold  in  Montana,  on  Willard's
creek,  a  tributary  of  Beaver  Hernl  river.  He  con-
tributed to  the  "  New  York  Genealogical  and  Bio-
graphical Reconl,"  and  published  "  Genealogical
Notes  on  the  Golden  Family  in  America  "  (New
York,  1873) ;  "  Biographical  and  Genealogical  Notes
of  the  Provoost  Family  in  New  York"  (1875);
"  Genealogical  Notes  relating  to  Lieut.-Gov.  Jacob
Leisler  and  his  Family  Connections  in  New  York  "

il877);  "Contributions  to  the  History  of  the  Kip
•"amily  of  New  York  and  New  Jersey  "  (1877) ;  and
"Contributions  to  the  History  of  Ancient  Families
of  New  Netherland  and  New  York."  which  were
coUectefl  and  published  by  his  brother,  with  a  me-
moir (New  York,  1881).

PrRSH,  Frederick,  botanist,  b.  in  Tobolsk,
Siberia,  in  1774;  d,  in  Montreal,  Canada,  11  June,
1820.  He  was  educated  at  Dresden,  came  to  this
country  in  1799.  and  spent  twelve  years  in  botani-
cal explorations  in  the  I'nitwl  States.  He  visited
England  in  1811,  and  published  "  Flora  America*
Septentrionalis,  or  a  Systematic  Arrangement  and
Description  of  the  Plants  of  North  America"  (2
voU^  ovo,  London,  1814). He  then  returned,  and


died  while  he  was  coIle<;ting  materials  for  a  flora
of  Canada.  His  manuscript  journal  still  exists.
L'ntil  su|)crse<Ie<l  by  Torrey  and  (iray's  "  Flom  of
North  America,"  Pursh's  wctrk  was  the  nujst  im-
[xirtant  <ni  the  l)<>tany  of  North  America.

Pl'RVIANCE.  Hiigli  Yuiin^,  naval  ofllcer,  b.
in  Baltimon\  Md.,  22  March,  1799:  d.  there.  21
Oct.,  188^1  He  was  wlucated  at  St.  Mary's  college
in  his  native  city,  and  in  1818  was  ap[Niinied  a  mid-
shipman in  the  U.  S.  navy.  He  served  for  two
years  on  the  East  India  station,  in  1821  -'4  on  the
Pacific,  and  in  1824-'7  in  the  Mediterranean.  In
the  last  year  he  wa.s  commissioned  a  lieutenant,  and
he  served  on  the  West  India  squadron  in  1828-'30,
and  the  Brazil  squadron  in  1837-'8.  command-
ing the  brig  "Dolphin."  Ho  relieved  an  American
schooner  from  the  F'rench  blockade  of  the  river
Plate,  and  rec-eived  a  complimentar)'  recfignition
from  the  U.  S.  government  for  his  services  on  the
occasion.  In  1846  he  commanded  the  frigate  "  Con-
stitution," of  the  blockading  squadron  in  the  Mexi-
can war.  On  7  March,  1849.  he  was  commissioned
commander,  and  assigned  to  the  sloop-of-war  "  Ma-
rion," on  the  coast  of  Africa,  where  he  remained
in  1852-'5.  He  received  his  commission  as  raptain,
28  Jan.,  1856,  commanded  the  frigate  "St.  Ijiiw-
renee,"  of  the  Charleston  bhxikatling  squadron,  in
1801,  and  captured  the  privateer  "  Petrel "  oflF  that
port,  the  first  prize  of  the  civil  war.  He  took  jmrt
m  the  fight  with  the  "Merrimac"  and  in  the  at-
tack on  Sewall's  point,  Hampton  Roads.  He  was
retired,  21  Dec,  1861,  commissioned  commodore,  16
July,  1862,  and  in  1863-'5  was  light-house  inspector.

PURVIS,  Robert,  benefactor,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  4  Aug..  1810.  His  father,  William  Purvis,
was  a  native  of  Northumlxsrland.  England,  and
his  mother  was  a  free-lx)rn  woman  of  Charleston,
of  Moorish  descent.  Robert  was  brought  to  the
north  in  1819.  His  father,  though  residing  in  a
slave  state,  was  never  a  slave-houler.  but  was  an
Abolitionist  in  principle.  Before  Rol)ert  attained
the  age  of  manhood  he  formed  the  acquaintance
of  Benjamin  Lundy.  and  in  conjunction  with  him
was  an  early  laborer  in  the  anti-slavery  cause.  Mr.
Purvis  was  a  memljcr  of  the  Philadelphia  conven-
tion of  1833  which  formed  the  American  anti-
slavery  society,  was  its  vice-president  for  many
years,  and  signed  its  declaration  of  sentiments.  He
was  also  an  active  member  of  the  Pennsylvania
society,  and  its  president  for  many  years.  His
house  was  a  well-known  station  on  the  "  Under-
ground railroad,"  and  his  horses,  carriages,  and  his
personal  attendance  were  always  at  the  service  of
fugitive  slaves.  His  son,  Charles  Burlkigh,  is
surgi>on-in-chief  of  the  Freedmen's  hospital  at
Washington,  D.  C,  and  a  professor  in  the  medical
department  of  Howard  university.

PUSEY,  Caleb,  colonist,  b.  in  Berkshire,  Eng-
land, al)out  1650;  d.  in  Chester  county,  Pa.,  25
Feb.,  1727.  He  was  educated  as  a  Baptist,  but
subsequently  became  a  Quaker,  and  was  of  Penn's
company  that  came  to  Pennsylvania  in  1682.  lie-
fore  leaving  England  he  united  with  Penn  and
a  few  others  in  formin^^  a  "joint  concern"  for
the  "  setting  up  "  of  mills  in  the  new  province,
of  which  concern  Pusey  was  chosen  the  mana-
ger. He  caused  the  framework  to  be  prepar»>d  and
shipped  in  the  "  Welcome,"  and  in  1683  en'cted
on  Chester  creek,  near  what  is  now  Upland.  Pa.,
the  famous  mills  known  as  the  "Chester  Mills."
which  were  the  first  in  the  province  under  Penn's
goveniment.  Penn  himself  attended  at  the  laying
of  the  corner-stone.  Pusey  nuinaged  the  mills  for
many  years,  and  came  finally  to  own  them,  con-
ducting an  extensive  milling  business  until  hU


138


PUSHMATAHAW


PUTNAM


death.  He  held  a  high  place  in  civil  affairs,  was
eiipaged  in  liiyinp  out  roads  and  neeotiatinjf  with
the  Indians,  and  for  two  years  wius  sheriff  of  Ches-
ter eounty.  Kor  many  years  he  wjis  a  jusliee  of
the  iH>aee  and  of  the  county  courts,  and  an  associ-
ate justice  of  the  supreme  court,  serving  also  for
ten  years  ()r  more  in  the  assembly,  and  for  more
tiian  a  quarter  of  a  century  in  the  supreme  or  pro-
vincial council.  His  name  constantly  appears  in
the  minutes  of  the  Society  of  Friends  among  those
who  were  most  active  in  settling  dilTiculties  and  in
promoting  deeds  of  iKmevolence.  He  frecjuently
appeared  in  the  mmistry.  and  jus  a  controversialist
and  a  writer  was  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  noted
of  his  sect  in  his  day.  His  reply  to  Daniel  Leeds
was  lilterally  subscribed  for  by  the  meetings,  and
widely  circulated.  He  was  an  intimate  friend  of
George  Keith,  but.  when  the  latter  attacked  the
Quaker  doctrines,  Pusey  was  active  among  those
who  pronounced  against  him.  From  I*usey.  Smith,
the  early  hist<irian,  obtained  much  of  the  material
from  which  he  made  up  his  manuscript  history,
which  formed  the  basis  of  l{()l>ert  Proud's  *•  His-
tory of  Pennsylvania.''  In  Hi})7  Pusey  wjvs  chosen
by  "the  Quakers  to  l)e  one  of  the  committee  to  ex-
amine all  iMwks  that  the  society  proposed  to  pub-
lish, wiiich  post  he  held  till  his  deatii.  Among  his
published  writings  are  "A  Serious  and  Seasonable
Warning  unto  all  People  occasioned  by  two  most
Dangerous  Epistles  to  a  late  Hook  of  John  Fall-
doe's,"  addressed  to  the  people  called  Anthony
Palmer's  Church  (London,  KiT;'));  "A  Modest  Ac-
count from  Pennsylvania  of  the  Principal  Differ-
ences in  Point  of  Doctrine  between  (Jeorge  Keith
and  those  of  the  People  called  Quakers"  (KJHtJ);
'•Satan's  Harbinger  encountered  ;  His  False  News
of  a  Strumpet  detected,"  etc.,  a  reply  to  Daniel
Leeds's  "News  of  a  Strumpet"  (Philadelphia,
1700);  "Daniel  Leeds  justly  rebuked  for  abus-
ing William  Penn,  and  his  Folly  and  Fals-Hoods
contained  in  his  Two  Printed  Challenges  to  Caleb
Pusey  made  Manifest"  (1702);  "George  Keith
once  more  brought  to  the  Test,  and  i)roved  a  Pre-
varicator "  (1708);  "Proteus  Ecclesiasticus,  or
George  Keith  varied  in  Fundamentals"  (1703);
"  The  Bond)  searched  and  found  stuff'd  with  False
Ingredients,  being  a  Just  Confutation  of  an  Abus-
ive Printed  Half-Sheet,  call'd  a  Bomb,  originally
published  against  the  Quakers,  by  Francis  Bugg
(1705);  "Some  Remarks  upon  a  Late  Pamphlet
signed  part  by  John  Talbot  and  part  by  Daniel
Leeds,  called  the  Great  Mystery  of  Fox-Craft "
(1705);  and  "Some  Brief  Ol)scrvations  made  on
Daniel  Leeds,  his  Book,  entitidcd  '  The  Second  Part
of  the  Mystery  of  Fox-Craft ' "  (1706).  For  a  fuller
account  of  the  titles  of  these  works  see  "  Issues  of
the  Pennsylvania  Press,  1685-1784,"  by  Charles  R.
Hildeburn  (1885).  The  imprint  of  Pusey's  works,
excepting  the  first  two  and  the  last,  bear  the  name
of  Revnier  Jansen.

PUSHMATAHAW,  Choctaw  chief,  b.  in  what
is  now  Mississippi,  in  1765;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
24  Dec,  1824.  He  had  distinguished  himself  on
the  war-path  before  he  was  twenty  years  old.  He
joined  an  expedition  against  the  Osages  west  of  the
jlississippi,  and  was  laughed  at  by  the  older  mem-
bers of  the  party  because  of  his  youth  and  a  propen-
.sity  for  talking.  The  Osages  were  defeated  in  a
desjM'rate  conflict  that  lasted  an  entire  day.  The
lM)y  disappeared  early  in  the  fight,  and  when  he  re-
turned at  midnight  he  was  jeered  at  and  openly  ac-
cusetl  of  cowardice.  "Let  those  laugh,"  was  his
reply,  "who  can  show  more  scalps  than  I  can";
whereupon  he  took  five  from  his  pouch  and  threw
them  on  the  ground. They  were  the  result  of  an


onslaught  he  had  made  single-hande<l  on  the  ene~
mv's  rear.  'I'his  feat  gained  for  him  the  title  of
"iThe  Kagle."  After  spending  several  years  in
Mexico,  he  went  alone  in  the  night  to  a  I'orauqua
village,  killed  seven  men  with  his  own  hand,  set
fire  to  several  tents,  and  made  good  his  retreat  un-
injured. During  the  next  two  years  he  made  three
additional  expeditions  into  the  Torauqua  country,
and  added  eight  fresh  scalps  to  his  war  costume.
For  fifteen  years  nothing  is  known  of  his  history,
but  in  1810  he  was  living  on  Tombigljee  river,  and
enjoyed  the  reputation  of  lieing  an  expert  at  In-
dian ball-playing.  He  also  boasted  that  his  name
was  Pushmatahaw,  which  means  "  The-warrior's-
seat-is-finished."  During  the  war  of  1812  he
promptly  took  sides  with  the  United  States.  The
council  that  decided  the  course  of  the  Choctaws
histed  ten  days.  All  the  warriors  counselled  neu-
trality, excepting  John  Pitchlynn,  the  interpreter,
and  t*ushmatahaw.  Until  the  last  day  he  kept
silence,  but  then,  rising,  said :  "  The  Creeks  were
once  our  friends.  They  have  joined  the  English,
and  we  must  now  follow  different  trails.  When
our  fathers  took  the  hand  of  Washington,  they
told  him  the  Choctaws  would  always  Imj  the  friends
of  his  nation,  and  Pushmatahaw  cannot  be  false  to
their  promises.  I  am  now  ready  to  fight  against
both  the  English  and  the  Creeks.  ...  I  and  my
warriors  are  going  to  Tuscaloosa,  and  when  you
hear  from  us  again  the  Creek  fort  will  be  in  ashes."
This  prophecy  was  duly  fulfilled.  The  Creeks  and
Seminoles  allied  themselves  with  the  British,  and
Pushmatahaw  made  war  on  both  tribes  with  such
energy  and  success  that  the  whites  called  him
"  The  Indian  General."  In  1824  he  went  to  Wash-
ington in  order,  according  to  his  own  phraseology,
to  brighten  the  chain  of  peace  between  the  Ameri-
cans and  the  Choctaws.  He  was  treated  with  great
consideration  by  President  Monroe  and  John  C.
Calhoun,  secretary  of  war,  and  a  record  of  his  com-
munications is  to  be  found  in  the  state  archives.
After  a  visit  to  Gen.  Lafayette  he  was  taken  seri-
ously ill.  Finding  that  he  was  near  his  end,  he  ex-
pressed the  wish  that  he  might  he  buried  with
military  honors  and  that  "big  guns"  might  be
fired  over  his  grave.  These  requests  were  complied
with,  and  a  procession  more  than  a  mile  in  length
followed  him  to  his  resting-place  in  the  Congres-
sional cemetery.  Andrew  Jackson  frequently  ex-
pressed the  opinion  that  Pushmatahaw  was  "  the
freatest  and  the  bravest  Indian  he  had  ever
nown " ;  while  John  Randolph,  of  Roanoke,  in
Sronouncing  a  eulogy  on  him  in  the  U.  S.  senate,
eclared  that  he  was  "  wise  in  counsel,  eloquent  in
an  extraordinary  degi-ee  and  on  all  occasions,  and
under  all  circumstances  the  white  man's  friend."

PUTNAM,  Frederick  Ward,  anthropologist,
b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  16  April,  1839.  He  received  an
election  to  the  Essex  institute  in  1855,  and  in  1856
he  entered  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  as  a  special
student  under  Louis  Agassiz,  who  soon  made  him
assistant  in  charge  of  the  collection  of  fishes  at  the
Harvard  museum  of  comparative  zoology,  where
he  remained  until  1864.  Returning  to  Salem  in
the  latter  year,  he  was' given  charge  of  the  museum
of  the  Essex  institute,  and  in 1867  he  was  a|>-

fointed  superintendent  of  the  museum  of  the  East
ndia  marine  society.  These  two  collections  were
incornorate<i  as  the  Peabody  academy  of  sciences,
and  Prof.  Putnam  wjis  made  its  director,  which
post  he  held  until  1876.  He  was  called  to  the
charge  of  the  collections  of  the  Peabody  museum
of  American  archaeology  and  ethnology  of  Har-
vard on  the  death  of  Jeffries  Wyman  in  Septem-
ber, 1874,  and  in  1886,  in  accordaifte  with  the  ob-


PUTNAM


PUTNAM


139


ject  of  Oeorpp  PouImmIv's  trust,  ho  w»s  appointwl
nrrjfo.KSMir  of  Ann'ricmi  un-hnK>|o>ry  »n<l  <«tlinolnjfy
In  Unrvanl.  M<>niiwhilo.  in  1H74.  h«  wjim  an  in-
ntnjrlor  lit  tlu>  S«'h(M)l  of  ntitunil  history  on  Peni-
ketR'  i>iaii«l.  hixI  diirin);  the  wMio  year  ho  wa«  ap-
iNiintHl  an  n>«.Histunt  on  the  p:oolojji<'al  survey  of
Kentucky.  In  1H75  the  engineer  depart ment  of
the  V.  'f>.  army  ap|)oint<?<l  liini  to  examine  and
rejKirt on the arehjiHilojjieal eolleetions of the

g>olo^'ieal  and  jreojjniplueal  survey  under  Lieut,
eorpe  Si.  Wheeler,  and  in  1H70-''H  he  was  also
assistant  in  charge  of  the  collection  of  flslics  in
the  .>lusouin  of  comparative  zoology  at  Harvanl.
Prof.  Putnam  has  held  the  ofllco  of  state  comniis-
tiioner  of  Massiu-husetts  on  iidand  fisheries,  and
in  1887  l)eciime  commissioner  of  flsh  and  eame.
His  earliest  jiaptir  was  a  "  Catalojfue  of  the  iMrds
of  Kssex  C't)unty,  Massachusetts,"  which  he  fol-
lowwi  with  various  res«^arches  in  zoology,  l)«it  since
1805  his  work  has  been  principally  in  American  ar-
chaH)loKj',  or  anthro|X)logv,  and  his  accjuaintance
with  this  subject  is  proijably  unexcelled  in  the
United  States.  His  papers  on  this  science  exceetl
200,  and  embrace  descriptions  of  many  mounds,
burial-places,  and  shell-heaps  and  of  the  objects
fouml  in  them.  Prof.  Putnam  is  a  meml)er  of
manv  historical  and  scientific  soi-ieties  here  and
in  I^urojx'.  and  wjis  elected  to  memlwrshii)  in  1880
in  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  He  is  also
widely  known  by  his  office  of  pt»rmanent  secretary
of  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science,  which  he  ha.s  held  since  1873.  At  that
time  the  memlwrship  of  the  aasociation  was  barely
500,  and  it  now  exceeds  2,000,  a  result  which  is  at-
tributed largely  to  his  executive  ability.  Prof.
Putnam  has  also  l)een  vice-president  of  the  Essex
institute  since  1871,  and  was  elected  president  of
the  Boston  society  of  natural  history  in  1887.  He
was  associated  with  Alpheus  Hyatt,  Edward  S.
Morse,  and  Alpheus  S.  Packard  in  the  founding  of
the  "American  Naturalist"  in  1867.  and  was  one
of  its  e<litors  until  1875.  He  has  also  edited  many
•  volumes  of  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Essex  Insti-
tute'," the  "  Annual  Ileports  of  the  Trustees  of  the
PealKHly  Academy  of  Science,"  and  the  "  Proceed-
ings of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advance-
ment of  Science  "  since  1873,  and  the  "Annual  He-
ports  of  the  Peatx)dv  Museum  of  Archaeology  and
Ethnology  "  since  1§74.  He  has  also  publishetl  his
rejK)rt  to' the  engineer  department  as  volume  vii.
of  the  "  I{ejM>rt  upon  Geographical  and  (xeological
Explorations  and  Surveys  West  of  the  100th  Me-
ri<luiii  "  (Washington,  1879).

Pl'TNAM,  Haldiniand  Snmner.  soldier,  b.  in
Cornish,  N.  H.,  15  Oct.,  1835:  d.  near  Fort  Wag-
ner, S.  C,  18  July,  18(>J.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1857,  and  entered  the
army  in  July  as  brevet  5d  lieutenant  of  to|>ographi-
cal  engineers.  From  that  time  till  a  few  months
previous  to  the  civil  war  he  was  engaged  in  explo-
rations and  surveys  in  the  west,  when  the  war
began  he  was  summoned  to  Washington  and  in-
trusted with  important  despatches  for  Fort  Pickens.
He  accomplished  his  mission,  but,  while  returning
to  the  north,  was  seized  by  the  Confederates  at
Montgomery,  Ala.,  and  imprisoneti  for  sevend
days.  On  his  n-lease  he  was  placed  on  Gen.  Irvin
McDowell's  staff,  partici|)ated  in  the  battle  of  Bull
Run,  and  gained  the  brevet  of  major  for  gallantry.
In  OctolHT  he  went  to  his  native  state  and  organ-
ize<l  the  7tli  New  Hampshire  regiment,  of  which
he  Ijecame  colonel  in  l)eceml)er,  18(51.  It  was  sta-
tioned during  the  first  year  of  its  si'nMce  at  F'ort
Jefferson,  on  Tortugas  island,  and  afterwanl  at  St.
' Augustine,  Fla.,  and  in  South  Carolina. In  1863


^''^c/^H^^;^


Col.  Putnam  comman«le«l  a  brigade  in  the  Stono
inlet  ex|)e<lition.  and  in  the  capture  <»f  Morris
island.  In  the  assault  on  Fort  Wagner,  18  July.
1863.  wliere  he  led  the  second  storming  cr)lunin,  he
was  kille<l  on  the  parap<>t  of  the  work  while  rally-
ing his  men.  Ho  was  made  bre\et  colonel.  U.  8.
army,  18  July,  18<W.  Vnr  about  four  months  pre-
ceding his  death  he  was  acting  brigadier- general.
Pl'TNAM,  Israel,  soldier,  b.  in  that  partof  the
town  of  Sidem,  Mass..  which  has  since  In'on  set  off
as  tlie  town  of  Danvers.  7  Jan.,  1718;  d.  in  Bnnik-
Ivn,  Conn.,  19  May,  1790.  His  great-gnindfather,
John  Putnam,  with  his  wife,  PriM-illa.  came  from
England  in  1(534,  and  settle<l  in  Salem.  Thev
brought  with  them  three  sons.  Thonuis.  Nathanael,
and  John.  All  three  acquire<l  large  estates,  and
were  men  of  much
consideration.  In
1681,  of  the  total
tax  levied  in  Sa-
lem village,  raised
fmm  ninetj-four
tax-payers,  for  the
support  of  the  lo-
cal church,  the
three Putnams

raid  one  seventh,
n  1666  Thomas
Putnam  married,
for  hissecond  wife,
the  widow  of  Na-
thanael Veren.  a
wealthy  merchant
and  ship-owner.
By  this  marriage
heacquired  wealth
in  Jamaica  and  Barbadoes.  Joseph,  the  son  of
this  marriage,  was  born  in  1670,  and  at  the  age
of  twenty  married  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Israel
Porter,  in  the  witchcraft  frenzy  of  1692,  Joseph's
sister  was  one  of  the  accused,  and  only  saved  her-
self by  fleeing  to  the  wilderness  and  hiding  till  the
search  was  given  up.  The  Putnam  family  has
always  been  prominent  in  the  history  of  Salem  and
its  neighlx)rnood.  Of  the  74  reconling  clerks  of
the  parish  of  Danvers.  24  have  l)een  Putnams;  and
this  family  has  furnished  15  of  the  2S  deacons,  12
of  the 26  treasurers,  and  7  of  the  18  superintendents
of  the  Sabbath-school.  In  1867,  of  the  800  voters
in  Danvers.  50  were  Putnams.

Israel  Putnam,  son  of  Joseph  and  Elizabeth,  was
the  tenth  of  eleven  children.  At  the  age  of  twenty
he  married  Hannah,  daughter  of  Josi-ph  Po|)e,  of
Salem  village.  In  1739  Israel  and  his  brother-in-
law,  John  Pope,  bought  of  (iov.  Belcher  514  acres
in  Mortlake  manor,  in  what  is  now  Windham
county.  Conn.  By  1741  Israel  had  lK)ught  out  his
brother-in-law  and  become  owner  of  the  whole
tnw't.  The  Mortlake  manor  formed  part  of  the
township  of  Pomfret.  but  as  early  as  1734  it  was
formed  into  a  distinct  parish,  known  as  Mortlake
parish.  In  1754  its  name  was  change«l  to  Brooklyn
parish,  and  in  1786  it  was  set  off  as  a  s«'parate  town-
ship under  the  name  of  Brooklyn.  The  old  Putnam
farm  is  on  the  top  of  the  high  hill  between  the
villages  of  Pomfret  and  Brooklyn.  For  many  years
Israel  Putnam  devoted  himself  to  the  cultivation
of  this  farm,  and  it  was  considered  one  of  the  finest
in  New  England.  He  gave  especial  attention  to
sheep-raising  and  to  fruits,  especially  winter  apples.
In  1733  the  town  siistaiiMHl  four  public  scIkhiIs:  in
1739  there  was  a  public  circulating  library:  and  in
the  class  of  1759.  at  Yale  college,  ten  of  the  gnul-
uates  were  from  Pomfret.  These  symptoms  of
high  civilization  were  found  in  a  community  not


140


PUTNAM


PUTNAM


yet  entirely  freed  from  the  assaults  of  wild  beasts.
By  1735  all  the  wolves  of  the  neighborhood  seem
to  have  l)een  slain  save  one  old  female  that  for
some  scasfnis  more  went  on  ravapinj;  the  farm-yards.
Her  lair  was  not  far  from  Putnam's  farm,  and  one
night  she  slew  sixty  or  seventy  of  his  fine  sheep.
Perhaps  no  incident  in  Putnam's  career  is  so  often

auoteti  a.s  his  share  in  the  wolf-hunt,  ending  in  his
escending  into  the  dark,  narrow  cave,  shooting
his  enemy  at  short  range,  and  dragging  her  forth
in  triumph.  It  was  the  one  picturesfjue  event  in
his  life  previous  to  1755,  when  Connecticut  was
called  upon  for  1.000  men  to  defend  the  northern
approacnes  to  New  York  against  the  anticipated
French  invjision.  This  force  was  commanded  by
Maj.-Gen.  Phinejis  Lyman,  and  one  of  its  companies
was  assigned  to  Putnam,  with  the  mnk  of  captain.
Putnam  was  t)resent  at  the  battle  of  Lake  George,
in  which  William  Johnson  won  his  baronetcy  by
defeating  Dieskau.  lie  l)ecame  one  of  the  loa<ling
memlK'rs  of  the  famous  bund  of  Hangers  that  did
so  much  to  annoy  and  embarniss  the  enemy  during
the  next  two  years.  In  1757  he  was  promoted
major.  Among  the  incidents  illustrating  his  per-
sonal bravery,  those  most  often  quoted  are — first,
his  rescue  of  a  party  of  soldiers  from  the  Indians
by  steering  them  in  a  bateau  down  the  dangerous
rapids  of  tTie  Hudson  near  Fort  Miller ;  and,  second-
ly, his  saving  Fort  Edward  from  destruction  by
fire,  at  the  imminent  risk  of  losing  his  life  in  the
flames.  In  a  still  more  terrible  way  he  was  brought
into  peril  from  fire.  In  August,  1758,  he  was  taken
prisoner  in  a  sharp  skirmish  near  Wood  creek,  and
after  some  prelimniary  tortures,  his  savage  captors
decided  to  burn  him  alive.  He  had  been  stripped
and  bound  to  the  tree,  and  the  flames  were  searing
his  flesh,  when  a  French  officer,  Capt.  Molang,  came
rushing  through  the  crowd,  scattered  the  firebrands,
cuffed  and  upbraided  the  Indians,  and  released
their  victim.  Putnam  was  carried  to  Montreal,
and  presently  freed  by  exchange.  In  1759  he  was
promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  and  put  in  command
of  a  regiment.  In  1760  he  accompanied  Gen.  Am-
herst in  his  march  from  Oswego  to  Montreal.  In
descending  the  St.  Lawrence  it  became  desirable  to
dislodge  the  French  garrison  from  Fort  Oswe-
gatchie  ;  but  the  approach  to  this  place  was  guarded
by  two  schooners,  the  larger  of  which  mounted
twelve  guns,  and  was  capable  of  making  serious
havoc  among  the  English  boats.  "  I  wish  there
were  some  way  of  taking  that  infernal  schooner,"
said  Amherst.  "All  right,"  said  Putnam;  "just
give  me  some  wedges  and  a  mallet,  and  half-a-dozen
men  of  my  own  choosing,  and  I'll  soon  take  her  for
vou."  The  British  general  smiled  incredulously,
but  presently  authorized  the  adventurous  Yankee
to  proceed.  In  the  night  Putnam's  little  party,  in
a  light  boat  with  muffled  oars,  rowed  under  the
schooner's  stern  and  drove  the  wedges  between  the
rudder  and  the  stern-post  so  firmly  »is  to  render  the
helm  unmanageable.  Then  going  around  under
the  bow,  they  cut  the  vessel's  cable,  and  theti  rowed
softly  away.  Before  morning  the  helpless  schooner
had  drifted  ashore,  where  she  struck  her  colors ;  the
other  French  vessel  then  surrendered,  thus  uncov-
ering the  fort,  which  Amherst  soon  captured.  In
1762  Col.  Putnam  accompanied  Gen.  Lyman  in  the
expedition  to  the  West  Indies,  which,  after  frightful
sufferings,  ended  in  the  capture  of  Havana.  In  1764
he  commanded  the  Connecticut  regiment  in  Brad-
street's  little  army,  sent  to  relieve  Detroit,  which
Pontiac  was  besieging.  At  the  end  of  the  year  he
returned  home,  after  nearly  ten  years  of  rough  cam-
paigning, with  the  full  rank  of  colonel.  In  1765  his
wife  died,  leaving  the  youngest  of  their  ten  children


an  infant  about  a  year  old.  In  1767  Col.  Putnam
married  Delxirah,  widow  of  John  Gardiner,  with
whom  he  lived  happily  until  her  death  in  1777.
There  were  no  children  by  this  second  marriage.
Col.  Putnam  united  with  the  church  in  Brooklyn,
19  May,  1765.  For  the  next  ten  years  his  life  was
uneventful.  During  this  period  lie  used  his  house
as  an  inn,  swinging  before  the  door  a  sign-Vward
on  which  were  depicted  the  features  of  Gen.  Wolfe.
This  sign  is  now  m  the  possession  of  the  Connecti-
cut historical  society  at  Hartford.  In  the  winter
of  1772-'3  heacc(mipanied  Gen.  Lyman  in  a  voyage
to  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  and  up  that  river
to  Natchez,  where  the  British  government  had
granted  some  territory  to  the  Connecticut  troops
who  had  survived  the  dreadful  West  India  cam-
paign. In  the  course  of  this  voyage  they  visited
Jamaica  and  Pensacola.  After  1765  Col.  Putnam
was  conspicuous  among  the  "  .Sons  of  Liberty  "  in
Connecticut.  In  August,  1774.  before  Gen.  Gage
had  quite  shut  up  the  approaches  to  Boston,  and
while  provisions  iromall  the  colonies  were  pouring
into  tnat  town,  Putnam  rode  over  the  Neck  with
130  sheep  as  a  gift  from  the  parish  of  Brooklyn.
During  his  stay  in  Boston  he  was  the  guest  of  Dr.
Warren.  On  20  April  following,  early  in  the  after-
noon, a  despatch  irom  the  committee  of  safety  at
Watertown  reached  Pomfretwith  news  of  the  fight
at  Concord.  The  news  found  Putnam  ploughing  a
field.  Leaving  his  plough  in  the  furrow,  and  with-
out waiting  to  don  his  uniform,  he  mounted  a
horse,  and  at  sunrise  of  the  21st  galloped  into
Cambridge.  Later  in  the  same  day  he  was  at  Con-
cord, whence  he  sent  a  despatch  to  Poraf  ret,  with
directions  about  the  bringing  up  of  the  militia.  He
was  soon  summoned  to  Hartford,  to  consult  with
the  legislature  of  Connecticut,  and,  after  a  week,
returned  to  ("ambridge.  with  the  chief  command  of
the  forces  of  that  colony,  and  the  rank  of  brigadier.
There  has  been  a  great  deal  of  controversy  as  to
who  commanded  the  American  troops  at  Bunker
Hill,  and  there  is  apparently  no  reason  why  the
controversy  should  not  be  kept  up,  as  long  as  the
question  is  at  bottom  one  of  rivalry  between  Con-
necticut and  Massachusetts.  The  difficulty  in  set-
tling it  points  to  the  true  conclusion,  that  the  work
of  that  battle  was  largely  the  work  of  distinct
bodies  of  men  hardly  organized  as  vet  into  an
array.  •  It  is  even  open  to  question  how  far  the
troops  of  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Rhode
Island,  and  Connecticut,  then  engaged  in  besieg-
ing Boston,  are  to  be  regarded  as  four  armies  or.a8
one  army.  From  the  nature  of  the  situation,
rather  tlian  by  any  right  of  seniority.  Gen.  Ward,
of  Ma-ssachusetts,  exercised  practically  the  com-
mand over  the  whole.  On  the  day  of  Bunker  Hill,
it  would  seem  that  the  actual  command  was  exer-
cised by  Prescott  at  the  redoubt  and  by  Stark  at
the  rail-fence.  Warren  was  the  ranking  officer  on
the  field ;  but  as  he  expressly  declined  the  com-
mand, it  left  Putnam  tne  ranking  officer,  and  in
that  capacity  he  withdrew  men  with  intrenching
tools  from  Prescott's  party,  undertook  to  throw  up
earthworks  on  the  crest  of  Bunker  Hill  in  the  rear,
and  toward  the  close  of  the  day  conducted  the  re-
treat and  directed  the  fortifying  of  Prospect  Hill.
Putnam  was,  therefore,  no  doubt  the  rauKing  offi-
cer at  Bunker  Hill,  though  it  does  not  appear  that
the  work  of  Prescott  and  Stark  was  in  any  wise
done  under  his  direct i<m.  The  question  would  be
more  important  had  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill  been
characterized  by  any  grand  tactics.  As  no  special
generalship  was  involved,  and  the  significance  of
the  battle  lay  in  its  moral  effects,  th*  question  has
little  interest  except  for  local  patriots.


PUTNAM


PUTNAM


141


Tli«' work  nf  nrffAiiixiiif;  a  Continental  army  i)e-
gan  in  Jinn*.  ITTS,  wlu-n  confrn'ss  assuuK'd  control
of  till'  tnH>|M  nl>oiit  Itoston,  and,  aftor  u|>|>ointinf;
Watthinirton  to  tlit>  chief  command.  a|>|>oint(Hl
Wanl.  Lee,  Schuyler,  and  Putnam  lu*  the  four
major-penerals.  In  his  newcajwicity  (Jen.  Putnam
commniide<l  the  centre  of  the  army  at  Cambridge,
while  Ward  commandinl  the  ri;rht  wiiijj  at  H<>x-
bury.  and  Ltv  the  left  winj;  stretching  to  the  .Mys-
tic river.  After  the  ca|>ture  of  Hoston,  (Jen.
Washin>jt<m  sent  Putnam  to  New  York,  where  he
took  command.  5  April,  1776.  On  25  Aufj.,  wf
Gen.  Greene,  who  commanded  the  works  on  Bniok-
Ivn  heiKht-H,  had  been  seized  with  a  fever,  Gen.
Putnam  was  placed  in  command  there.  For  the
disastrous  defeat  of  the  Americans,  two  days  after-


ward, he  can  in  no  wise  be  held  responsible.  He
was  blamed  at  the  time  for  not  posting  on  the
Jamaica  road  a  force  sufficient  to  check  Corn-
wallis's  flanking  march:  but,  as  Chief-Justice  Mar-
shall long  ago  ])ointed  out,  this  criticism  was  sim-
ply silly,  since  the  flanking  force  on  the  Jamaica
road  outnumbered  the  whole  American  army.  In-
deed there  is  no  need  of  blaming  any  one  in  order
to  account  for  the  defeat  of  5,(X)0  half-trained  sol-
diers by  20.000  veterans.  The  wonder  is,  not  that
the  Americans  were  defeated  on  Long  Island,  but
that  they  should  have  given  Gen.  Howe  a  good  day's
work  in  defeating  them,  thus  leading  the  British
general  to  pause,  and  giving  Wjushington  time  to
plan  the  withdrawal  of  the  army  from  its  exposeti
situation.  As  Putnam  deserves  no  blame  for  the
defeat,  so  he  deserves  no  special  credit  for  this  obsti-
nate resistance,  which  was  chiefly  the  work  of  Stir-
ling and  Smallwood,  and  the  Maryland  "  macaro-
nis," in  their  heroic  defence  of  the  Gowanus  road.
After  the  armv  had  crossed  to  New  York,  Putnam
commanded  the  rear  division,  which  held  the  city
until  the  landing  of  the  British  at  Kip's  bav  obliged
it  to  fall  back  upon  Bloomingdale.  In  the  action
at  Harlem  heights,  part  of  Putnam's  force,  under
Col.  Knowlton,  was  especially  distinguished.  The
futile  device  of  barring  the  ascent  of  the  Hudson
river,  l)etween  Forts  Washington  and  Lee,  by  che-
i<aujr  (le  frise,  is  generally  as<Tibed  to  Putnam.  In
the  affair  at  Chatterton  hill,  Putnam  marched  to
the  assistance  of  Gen.  McDougall.  but  arrived  too
late.  In  the  disastrous  iK'riod  that  followed  the
capture  of  Fort  Washington  and  the  treachery  of
Charles  Lee,  Putnam  was  put  in  command  of  Phila-
delphia. After  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  upon  New
Brunswick,  4  Jan.,  1777,  he  brought  forward  the
American  right  wing  to  Princeton,  where  he  re-
nmine<l  in  command  till  the  middle  of  May.  He
was  then  intniste<l  with  the  defence  of  the  high-
lands of  the  Hudson  river  with  headcjuarters  at
Peekskill.  His  command  there  was  marked  by  a
characteristic  incident.  Kdround  Palmer,  lieuten-
ant in  a  loyalist  regiment,  was  caught  lurking  in
the  American  camp,  and  was  condemned  to  death


as  a  spy.  There  seeme«l  to  1m»  a  tacit  assumption,
on  the  part  of  the  British,  that,  while  American
spies  were  punishable  with  death,  this  did  not  hold
true  of  British  spies:  that  American  commanders,
as  not  representing  anv  acknowl«'dg«'d  H4)vereignty,
could  not  |K»s8ess  any  legal  authority  for  inflicting
the  death-iK>nalty.  This  assumption  jn'rvades  sf»me
British  opinions  upon  the  cas*-  of  Andre.  In  reli-
ance ufK)n  some  such  assumotion,  .Sir  Henrj'  Clin-
ton s<!nt  up  from  New  York  a  flag  of  truce,  and
threatencnl  Putnam  with  signal  vengeance,  should
he  dare  to  injure  the  {wrson  of  the  king's  Mege
subject,  E<imund  Palmer.  The  old  general's  reply
was  brief  and  to  the  point :  "  Heiulquarters.  7  Aug..
1777. — Edmund  Palmer,  an  officer  in  the  enemy's
service,  was  taken  as  a  spy  lurking  within  our  lines ;
he  ha8l)een  tried  as  a  spy,  condemned  as  a  spy,  and
shall  lie  executed  as  a  spv,  and  the  flag  is  ordered
to  depart  immediately. — Tsrael  Putnam. — P.  S.  He
has  accordingly  l)een  executetl."  In  October,  Clin-
ton came  up  the  river,  to  the  relief  of  hard-pressed
Burgoyne,  and,  landing  at  Tarrytown.  capt^ired  the
forts  in  the  highlands.  They  were  immediately  re-
covered, however,  after  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne.
At  the  end  of  the  year,  Putnam  was  superse<le"d  at
Peekskill  by  McDougal,  and  went  to  Connecticut  to
hasten  the  work  of  recruiting  the  armv  for  the
next  campaign.  During  the  years  1778-'9,  he  was
engaged  in  the  western  part  of  Connecticut,  with
headquarters  usually  at  Danbury.  co-operating  with
the  force  in  the  highlands.  At  this  time  he  made
his  famous  escape  from  Gen.  Tryon's  troops  by
riding  down  the  stone  steps  at  Horseneck,  in  the
township  of  Greenwich.  There  is  some  disagree-
ment between  the  different  accounts  as  to  the  date
of  this  incident,  and  the  sfeorv  is  perhaps  to  be
taken  with  some  allowances.  When  the  army  went
into  winter-quarters  at  Morristown,  in  December,
1779,  Putnam  made  a  short  visit  to  his  family  at
Pomfret.  He  set  out  on  his  return  to  camp,  but,
before  reaching  Hartford,  had  a  stroke  of  paralvsis.
His  remaining  years  were  spent  at  home.  His  birth-
place is  shown  in  the  accompanying  engraving.

Gen.  Putnam's  biographv  has  been  written  by
Col.  David  Humnhreys  (lioston,  1818);  by  Oliver
Peal)ody,  in  .Sparts's  "  American  Biography  "  ;  by
William  Cutter  (New  York,  184G) :  and  by  Increase
N.  Tarbox  (Boston,  1876).  The  most  complete
bibliography  of  the  question  as  to  the  command  at
Bunker  Hill  is  to  be  found  in  Winsor's  "  Narrative
and  Critical  History  of  America  "  (Boston.  1888),
vol.  vi.,  p.  190.  An  equestrian  statue  of  Gen.  Put-
nam was  unveiled  in  Brooklyn,  Conn..  14  June,
1888. — His  cousin,  Riifiis,  soldier,  b.  in  Sutton,
Mass.,  9  April,  1738;  d.  in  Marietta,  0.,  1  May,
1824,  after  completing  his  apprenticeship  as  a  mill-
wright servetl  through  the  campaigns  of  1757-'60
against  the  French.  He  then  married  and  settled
in  New  Braintree,  pursuing  his  original  vocation
and  that  of  farming.  At  the  same  time  he  studied
mathematics,  in  which  he  attained  proficiency,  par-
ticularly in  its  application  to  navigation  and  sur-
veying. In  January,  1773,  he  sailed  to  east  Florida
with  a  committee  to  explore  lands  that  were  sup-
posed to  have  l)een  granted  there  by  iMrliament  to
the  provincial  officers  and  soldiers  that  ha«l  fought
in  tne  French  war.  On  arriving  at  Pensa<'ola,  he
discoveretl  that  no  such  grant  had  l>een  ma<le.  and
was  appointed  by  the  governor  deputy  surveyor  of
the  province.  On  his  return  to  Massachusetts
he  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  in  David  Brewer's
regiment,  one  of  the  first  that  was  raised  after  the
battle  of  Ijexington.  The  ability  that  he  displayed
as  an  engineer  in  throwing  up  defences  in  Kox-
bury,  Mass.,  secured  for  him  the  favorable  consid-


142


PUTNAM


PUTNAM


eration  of  Gen.  Washinffton  and  Qen.  Charles  Lee.
and  the  former  wrote  to  congress  that  the  mill-
wright wius  a  more  eomixstent  officer  than  any  of
the  Kreiich  gentlemen  to  whom  it  had  given  ap-
pointments in  that  line.  On  20  Mart^h,  1770,  he
arrived  in  New  York,  and,  as  chief  engineer,  super-
intended all  the  defences  in  that  part  of  the
country  during  the  ensuing  cam|)aign.  In  August
he  was  ap()ointed  chief  engineer  with  the  rank  of
colonel,  but  (luring  the  autumn,  from  some  <lissjit-
isfaction  with  congress  in  regard  to  his  cor[)s,  he
left  it  to  take  command  of  the  5th  Massjichusetts
regiment.  In  the  following  spring  he  wius  attjiched
to  the  northern  army,  and  served  with  great  credit
at  the  battle  of  Stillwater  at  the  head  of  the  4th  and
5th  regiments  of  Nixon's  brigade.  In  1778,  with
his  cousin,  Gen.  Israel  Putnam,  he  superintended
the  construction  of  the  fortifications  at  West
Point.  After  the  surprise  of  Stony  Point  he  was
appointed  to  the  command  of  a  regiment  in  Gen.
Anthony  Wayne's  brigade,  in  which  he  served  till
the  end  of  the  camjiaign.  From  February  till
July,  1782,  he  was  empToved  as  one  of  the  com-
missioners to  adjust  the  claims  of  citizens  of  New
York  for  losses  occasioned  by  the  allied  armies,
and  on  7  Jan.,  178i{,  he  was  promoted  to  be  a  briga-
dier-general. He  was  several  years  a  member  of
the  legislature,  and  acted  as  aide  to  Gen.  Benjamin
Lincoln  in  quelling  Shays's  rel)ellion  in  1787.  As
superintendent  of  the  Ohio  company,  on  7  April,
17HH,  he  founded  Marietta,  Ohio,  the  first  permanent
settlement  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  Northwest  ter-
ritory. In  1789  he  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  territory,  and  on  4  May,  1792,
he  was  appointed  brigadier-general  under  Gen.
Wayne  to  act  against  the  Indians.  From  May,
1792,  till  February,  1793,  he  was  U.  S.  commission-
er to  treat  with  the  latter,  and  concluded  an  im-
portant treaty  with  eight  tribes  at  Port  Vincent
(now  Vincennes),  27  Sept.,  1792.  He  arrived  at
Phila<lelphia,  13  Feb.,  1793,  to  make  a  report  of
his  proceedings,  and  then  resigned  his  commission.
He  was  made  surveyor-general  of  the  United  States
in  October  of  that  year,  and  held  this  office  till  Sep-
tember, 1803.  In  1803  he  was  a  member  of  the
Ohio  constitutional  convention.  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  was  the  last  general  officer  of  the
Revolutionary  army  excepting  Lafayette.  Gen.
Putnam  was  deeply  interested  in  Sabbath-schools
and  missions,  and  with  others,  in  1812,  formed  the
first  Bible  society  west  of  the  Alleghanies.  Gen.
Putnam's  manuscript  diary  is  in  the  Astor  library,
New  York  city. — Israel's  nephew,  (iideon,  founder
of  Saratoga  Springs,  b.  in  Sutton,  Mass.,  in  1704;
d.  in  Saratoga  Springs,  1  Dec,  1812,  set  out  for
the  west  in  1789,  seeking  a  suitable  place  for  busi-
ness, and  finally  settled  at  what  has  since  been
known  as  Saratoga  Springs.  He  married  Doanda
Risley,  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  their  first  child
was  the  first  white  child  born  in  Saratoga.  In
1802  he  built  and  conducted  the  first  hotel  of
consenuence,  which  he  called  Putnam's  Tavern,
but  wnich  his  neighbors  called  "  Putnam's  Folly."
Putnam's  tavern  of  that  day  is  now  the  Grand
Union  hotel.  Mr.  Putnam  proceeded  to  amuse
and  amaze  his  fellow-pioneers  by  purchasing  the
land  on  which  the  village  of  Saratoga  Springs
now  stands,  and  on  which  are  some  of  the  most
famous  ami  lucrative  mineral  springs  in  the  world,
several  of  which  he  excavated  and  tubed.  In
laying  out  the  village  he  so  broadened  and  ar-
ranged the  streets  as  to  leave  the  springs  in  the
middle  of  the  public  thoroughfares,  and  absolutely
free  to  all.  A  public  park  was  also  included  in
his  plans,  which  were  suddenly  cut  short  by  his  ac-


cidental death.  He  died  of  a  fall  while  a.ssiRting
in  the  erection  of  Congn-ss  Hall  hotel,  of  which  he
was  the  project<ir.  and  he  was  the  first  to  be  buried
in  the  cemetery  that  he  presented  to  the  village. —
Israel's  great-grandson.  Albigence  Waldo,  au-
thor, b.  in  Marietta,  Ohio,  11  March,  1799;  d.  in
Nashville,  Tenn.,  20  Jan.,  1809,  studied  law,  prac-
tised in  Mississippi,  and  in  1830  settled  in  Nashville,
'I'enn.,  and  was  president  of  the  Teimessee  histor-
ical society,  to  whose  publications  he  was  a  con-
tributor. In  addition  to  articles  in  {>eriodical8,  he
wrote  a  "History  of  Middle  Tennessee"  (Nash-
ville, 1859) :  "  Life  and  Times  of  Gen.  James  Rob-
ertson "  (1859) ;  and  a  "  Life  of  Gen.  John  Sevier,"
in  Wheeler's  "  History  of  North  Carolina." — Israel's
nephew,  Henry,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston  in  1778;  d.
in  Brunswick,  Me.,  in  1822.  He  studied  law  in
Boston,  and  became  distinguished  as  a  iurist. — His
wife.  Kathcrine  Hunt,  b.  in  Framingham,  Ma.ss.,
1  March,  1792;  d.  in  New  York  city,  8  Jan.,  1809,
was  a  daughter  of  Gen.  Palmer  of  the  army  of  the
Revolution,  married  Henry  Putnam  in  1814,  and
passed  most  of  her  married  life  in  Boston.  She
was  noted  for  her  benevolence,  and  wrote  "  Scrip-
ture Text-Book"  (New  York,  1837);  and  "The
Old  Testament  Unveiled  ;  or.  The  Gospel  by  Moses
in  the  Book  of  Genesis"  (1854). — Israel's  grand-
nephew.  Heorge  Palmer,  publisher,  b.  in  Bruns-
wick, Me.,  7  Feb.,  1814 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  20
Dec,  1873,  entered  the  book-store  of  Daniel  and
Jonathan  Leavitt,  New  York,  in  1828,  in  1840
became  a  partner  in  the  house  of  Wiley  and  Put-
nam, and  in  1841  went  to  London  and  established
a  branch.  In  1848  he  returned  to  New  York,  dis-
solved the  partnership  with  Mr.  Wiley  and  engaged
in  business  alone.  lie  early  interested  himself  in
the  production  of  fine  illustrated  books,  and  in
1852,  with  the  assistance  of  George  William  Curtis
and  others,  established  "  Putnam's  Magazine."  In
1801  Mr.  Putnam  planned  and  organized  the  Loyal
publication  society.  In  1803  he  retired  from  ac-
tive business  to  become  U.  S.  collector  of  internal
revenue,  which  post  he  held  till  1800,  when,  in  con-
junction with  his  sons,  he  founded  the  publishing
house  of  G.  P.  Putnam  and  Sons  (now  G.  P.  Put-
nam's Sons).  Mr.  Putnam  was  for  many  years
secretary  of  the  Publishers'  association.  As  early
as  1837  he  issued  "  A  Plea  for  International  Copy-
right," the  first  argument  in  behalf  of  that  reform
that  had  been  printed  in  this  country.  He  was  a
founder  of  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art,  of
which  in  1872  he  was  honorary  superintendent.
He  had  been  appointed  chairman  of  the  commit-
tee on  art  in  connection  with  the  Vienna  uni-
versal exposition.  He  wrote  "  Chronology ;  or.  An
Introduction  and  Index  to  Universal  History,
Biography,  and  Useful  Knowledge"  (New  York,
1833) ;  "  The  Tourist  in  Europe :  A  Concise  Guide,
with  Memoranda  of  a  Tour  in  1830"  (1^38);
"  American  Book  Circular,  with  Notes  and  Statis-
tics "  (1843) ;  "  American  Facts :  Notes  and  Statis-
tics relative  to  the  Government  of  the  United
States  "  (1845) ;  "  A  Pocket  Memorandum-Book  in
France,  Italy,  and  Germany  in  1847"  (1848);  and
"  Ten  Years  of  the  WoVld's  Progress :  Supplement,
1850-'ei,  with  Corrections  and  Additions^'  (1801).
— George  Palmer's  son,  Georg'e  Haven,  publisher,
b.  in  London,  England,  2  April,  1844,  studied  at
Columbia  in  1800  and  at  Gottingen  in  1801-'2,  but
was  not  graduated,  as  ho  left  college  to  enter  the
Unite<l  States  military  service  during  the  civil  war,
in  which  he  rose  to  the  rank  of  Ijrevet  major.  He
was  ajipointed  deputy  collector  of  ijiternal  revenue
in  1800.  and  in  this  year  engaged  in  tlie  publishing
business  in  New  York,  in  which  he  nas  continued


PUTNAM


1»UYS


143


ever  »inrc.  l»cin>r  now  (1888)  head  of  the  firm  of
G.  P.  Piitimin's  St»i»s.  He  has  8ervo<l  on  the  execu-
tive <M>rnniitttH'8  of  the  Free-tniile  league,  the  K**-
forui  fhib.  the  Civil-MTvice  n-furm  aswK-iHtion.  nncl
oth«T  |iolitical  organi»itiiins,  and  in  1887-'H  as
set-retary  of  the  American  publishers'  copyright
league.  Me  luis  written  articles  on  literary  |»rop-
erty  for  journals  and  cvclopjcdias;  a  paniplilct  on
"  International  C'opyriglit  "  (New  York,  IHTD);  and,
conjointly  with  his  brother,  -lohn  Hishop  Putnam,
"Authors  and  Publishers"  (IHH'i).

Pl'TNAM,  JaiiieH,  jurist,  b.  in  Dan  vers,  Mass..
in  1?^."):  d.  in  St.  John,  New  Brunswick,  23  Oct.,
1780.  He  w»us  a  relative  of  (len.  Isniel  Putnam.
He  was  gnuluated  at  Harvard  in  174tt,  studied
law  with  Judge  Kdmund  Trowbridge,  and  began
practice  at  Won-ester.  He  was  ai|jM)inted  att<ir-
ney-general  of  the  province  when  Jonathan  Sew-
all  was  promoted  to  the  bench  of  the  admiralty
court,  and  was  the  last  to  hold  that  office  under
the  provincial  government.  In  1757  he  was  a
major,  and  in  service  under  Lonl  Loudon.  In
1775  he  was  one  of  those  that  signed  the  atl-
dress  to  Gov.  Thomas  Hutchinson,  approving  his
course,  and  later  he  accompanied  the  British  army
to  New  York,  and  thence  to  Halifax,  where,  in
1776.  he  emlwirked  for  England.  In  1778  a  writ
of  banishment  and  proscription  was  issued  against
him.  On  the  organization  of  the  government  of
the  province  of  New  Brunswick  in  1783,  he  was
appointcil  a  member  of  the  royal  council  and  a
juuge  of  the  superior  court,  ite  remained  in  of-
fice till  his  death.  John  Adams  was  a  student  at
law  in  Judge  Putnam's  office. — His  son,  James,
b.  in  1753;  d.  in  England  in  March,  1838,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1774,  and  wjis  one  of  the
eighteen  country  gentlemen  that  were  driven  to
Boston,  and  atldressed  (ien.  Gage  on  his  de{)arture
in  1775.  He  went  to  England,  became  a  barrack-
master,  a  meml)er  of  the  royal  household,  and  an
executor  of  the  Duke  of  Kent.

PUTNAM,  James  Osborne,  lawyer,  b.  in  At-
tica, N.  Y.,  4  July,  1818.  His  father,  Harvey
(1798-1855),  was  a  representative  in  congress  in
1888-'9  and  1847-'51,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Whig.  The  son  studied  at  Hamilton  college  and
then  at  Yale,  where  he  was  graduated  in  18;W.
He  read  law  in  his  father's  office,  was  admitted  as
a  practitioner  in  1842,  and  the  same  year  began
practice  in  Buffalo.  In  1851-'3  he  wa.s  {wstmaster
there.  In  1853  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,
where  he  was  the  author  of  the  bill,  that  became  a
law  in  1855,  requiring  the  title  of  church  real
property  to  be  vested  m  trustees.  In  1857  he  was
the  unsuccessful  nominee  of  the  American  party
for  secretary  of  state.  He  was  chosen  a  presi-
dential elector  on  the  Republican  ticket  in  1860,
and  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Havre,  France,  in
1861.  In  1880  he  became  U.  S.  minister  to  liel-
gium,  and  while  he  was  filling  this  mission  he  was
appoitited  by  the  U.  S.  government  a  delegate  to
the  International  industrial  property  congress  in
Paris  in  1881.  He  has  published  "Orations,
Spee<hes.  and  Miscellanies"  (BuflTalo,  1880^.

PL'TNAM,  John  Phelps,  jurist,  b.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  21  March.  1817;  d.  in  Boston.  5  Jan.,  1882.
His  father,  a  native  of  Hartford,  was  a  merchant
there  and  mayor  of  the  city,  and  was  descended
from  the  same  family  to  w)iich  Gen.  Israel  Put-
nam belonginl.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1837  and  at  Harvard  law-school  in  1H:W.  and
was  admitted  to  the  Uir  in  1840.  He  Ix'gan  pnic-
tice  in  Boston,  and  jirosecutetl  his  profession  for
many  years  in  that  city  with  success.  In  1851-'2
he  served  in  the  le^psla'ture,  and  in  1859,  when  the


superior  court  was  established,  he  was  appointed
one  of  the  judges.  He  was  a  trust«*e  of  the  Boston
music-hall,  and  one  of  the  chief  pnimoters  of  the
enterprise  that  resulted  in  filacing  the  great  organ
in  that  buihiing.  He  wim  also  a  tnistee  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  thc'ological  schofd  in  Cam-
bridge. B<'tween  1847  Hnd  1848  he  e«lite<l  fifteen
volumes  of  the  "Annual  Digest  "of  the  decisions
of  all  the  courts  of  the  Unite*!  States  (liost on,  1852).

Pl'TNAM,  SaUle  A.  Brook,  author,  b.  in
Matiison  Court-House,  Va..  about  1H45.  She  was
educated  by  private  tutors,  and  early  «levelof>ed  a
taste  for  literature.  She  married  the'Rev.  Richarcl
Putnam,  of  New  York,  in  18851  Her  publications
include  "  Richmond  During  the  War,  under  the
jH-n-name  of  "  Virginia  Madison "  (New  York,
1867);  "The  Southern  Amaranth"  (1868);  and
"  Kenneth  My  King"  (1872).  She  has  in  prepara-
tion "  Poets  and  P«H'try  of  America."

Pl'TNAM,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Danvers,
Mass.,  13  April,  1768;  d.  in  Somerville,  Mass.,  3
July,  1853.  He  was  graduate<l  at  Harvard  in
1787,  studied  law,  and  began  practice  in  Salem  in
1790.  He  soon  attained  high  rank  at  the  F'ssex
county  bar,  and  represented  that  county  in  the
state  senate  in  1808-'14.  and  in  the  legislature  in
1812.  From  1814  till  1842  he  was  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  Massachusetts.  Harvard  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1825. — His  daughter-
in-law,  Mary  Traill  Spence  Lowell,  author,  b.  in
Boston.  Mass.,  3  Dec,  1810,  is  a  daughter  of  the  Rev,
Charles  Lowell.  She  married  Samuel  R.  Putnam,
a  merchant  of  Boston,  in  1832,  and  subsequently
resided  several  years  abroad.  She  has  contributed
to  the  "  North  American  Review  "  articles  on  Polish
and  Hungarian  literature  (1848-'50),  and  to  the
"Christian  Examiner"  articles  on  the  history  of
Hungary  (1850-'l),  and  is  the  author  of  "  Records
of  an  Obscure  Man  "  (1861);  "The  Tragedy  of  Er-
rors" and  the  "Tragedy  of  Success,"  a  dramatic
poem  in  two  parts  (1862);  "Memoir  of  William
Lowell  Putnam"  (1862):  "Fifteen  Days"  (1866);
and  a  "Memoir  of  Charles  Lowell"  (1885).— Her
son,  William  Lowell,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  9
July,  1840;  d.  near  Ball's  Bluff,  Va.,  21  Oct.,  1861,
was  educate<l  in  France  and  at  Harvard,  where  he
studietl  mental  science  and  law.  He  entered  the
20th  Massachusetts  regiment  in  1861,  was  ordered
to  the  field  in  September,  and  was  killed  while
leading  his  battalion  to  the  resc-ue  of  a  wounded
officer.  When  he  was  borne  to  the  hospital-tent
he  declined  the  surgeon's  assistance,  bidding  him
iro  to  those  whom  his  services  could  benefit,  since
nis  own  life  could  not  l)e  saved.  He  was  a  youth  of
much  promise,  jwssessing  remarkable  natural  en-
dowments and  many  accomplishments.  See  the
memoir  by  his  mother  mentioned  aliove.

PL'TNAM.  William  Le  Baron,  lawyer,  b.  in
Bath,  Me.,  12  May,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1865,  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Portland
in  1858,  and  has  since  continued  there  in  actix'e
practice.  He  was  mayor  of  Portland  in  1869.  He
ileclined  the  appointment  of  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Maine  in  188J1  In  Septeml)er,  1887,  he
was  appointed  by  President  Clevelan<l  a  commis-
sioner to  negotiate  with  Great  Britain  in  the  settle-
ment of  the  rights  of  American  fishermen  in  the
territorial  waters  of  Canada  and  Newfoundland.

PL'YS,  Zachary  da,  French  s<ildier.  He  was
commandant  of  the  fort  of  QueUx"  in  1(^)5,  and  in
Uy)6  was  selected  to  plant  a  colony  among  the
Onondagas.  With  ten  s«ildiers  of  the  garrison  and
forty  other  F'renchmen,  he  established  a  small  set-
tlement on  Ijake  Onondaga.  In  1658  the  colony
was  surrounded  by  Indians,  who,  as  the  French


144


PUYSfiGUR


PYNCHON


were  known  to  have  no  canoes,  made  sure  of  their
destruction.  Du  Puys  pave  orders  to  have  small
light  Ixiats  built  set;retly  in  the  f^irrctof  the  house
of  the  Jesuit  missionaries,  and,  eluding  the  savages,
reached  Montreal  in  fifteen  days.  There  was  great
joy  at  his  escajK,',  but  he  expressed  his  indignation
at  being  forced  to  abandon  so  important  a  settle-
ment for  want  of  succor.  He  was  commissioned
to  act  Jis  governor  of  Montreal  in  1G05  during  the
absence  of  Maisonneuve.

PUYStUL'R,  Antolne  Hyacinthe,  Count  de
Cha-stenet  de,  French  naval  ollicer.  b.  in  Paris,  14
Feb..  1752;  d.  there,  20  Feb.,  1809.  Ho  entered
the  navy  as  midshipman  in  170(),  and  during  a
journey  to  Teneriffe  in  1772  discovered,  in  caverns
that  had  been  used  by  the  Guanchos  as  cemeteries,
well-preserved  mummies  which  afforded  to  anthro-
pologists the  means  of  determining  the  relationship
Detween  the  extinct  Guanchos  and  the  Indians  of
South  America.  During  the  war  for  American
independence  he  served  under  D'Estaing  in  1778-'9,
was  present  at  the  siege  of  Savannah,  held  after-
ward an  important  post  in  Tobago,  and  served  for
the  remainder  of  the  campaign  in  the  West  In-
dies. After  the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1783  he
wits  attached  to  the  station  of  Santo  Domingo,  and
in  178(5.  at  the  instance  of  Marshal  de  Castries,  sec-
retary of  the  navy,  he  made  a  survey  of  the  coast
of  Sjinto  Domingo,  and  of  the  currents  around  the
island.  He  emigrated  to  Germanv  in  1791,  served
for  some  time  in  the  army  of  the  Prince  of  Conde,
joined  the  Portuguese  navy  in  1795  with  the  rank
of  vice-admiral,  and  in  1798  saved  King  Ferdinand,
of  Naples,  and  conveved  him  safely  to  Sicily.  In
1803  he  returned  to  I^'rance  and  recovered  his  for-
mer estates,  but  refused  the  offers  of  Napoleon  to
reinstate  him  in  the  French  service.  He  published
"  Detail  sur  la  navigation  aux  cotes  de  Saint  Do-
mingue,  et  dans  ses  debouquements"  (Paris,  1787;
revised  ed.,  1821).

PYLE,  Howard,  artist,  b.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,
5  March.  1H53.  He  studied  art  in  a  private  school
in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1876  came  to  New  York.
After  spending  three  years  in  that  city  writing  and
illustrating  for  various  magazines,  he  returned  to
Wilmington,  where  he  has  since  resided.  Besides
furnishing  illustrations  for  various  books  and  peri-
odicals, he  has  written  and  illustrated  numerous
articles,  most  of  them  for  the  publications  of  Har-
per Brothers.  He  is  the  author  of  the  text  and
drawings  of  "The  Merrv  Adventures  of  Robin
Hood  "  (1883) ;  "  Pepper  and  Salt  "  and  "  Within
the  Canes  "  (1885) ;  and  "  The  Wonder  Clock  "  and
"  The  Rose  of  Paradise  "  (1887).  Mr.  Pyle  is  favor-
ably known  as  a  writer  of  juvenile  fiction,  in  his
illustrations  for  which  he  has  adopted  a  quaint
stvle  of  design.

"PYNCHON,  William,  colonist,  b.  in  Spring-
field. Essex,  England,  in  1590;  d.  in  Wraysbury,
Buckinghamshire,  29  Oct.,  1(562.  He  came  "to  New
England  with  Gov.  John  Winthrop  in  1630.  Prior
to  his  emigration  to  this  country  he  had  been  named
by  Charles  I.,  in  March,  1629.  as  one  of  the  paten-
tees in  the  charter  of  the  colony  of  Massachusetts
bay.  In  the  same  charter  he  was  selected  as  one  of
the  eighteen  assistants,  and  was  connected  with
the  government  of  the  company  before  its  removal
to  New  England,  and  its  treasurer.  He  was  active
in  founding  Roxbury,  Mass.,  as  well  as  in  the  or-
ganization of  its  first  church.  When  the  Massa-
chusetts colony  was  in  danger  of  being  overstocked
with  people,  in  May.  1634,  the  general  court  granted
leave  to  such  inhabitants  as  might  desire  "to  re-
move their  habitations  to  some  convenient  place."
In  the  spring  of  1636  William  Pynchon  with  his


-T^AMou^ fyr.A


Oru


wife  and  children  and  a  small  party  of  attendants
established  a  new  plantation  ufwn  the  Connecticut
river,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Agawam,  froju  which
the  settlement  took  its  name.  One  of  their  first
efforts  was  to  obtain  a  minister,  and  in  the  year
following  they  se-
cured lie  v.  George
Moxon,  a  jMjrsonal
friend  of  Mr.  Pyn-
chon and  a  gradu-
ate of  Sidney  col-
lege, Cambridge,
who  remained
only  as  long  as
Mr.  Pynchon.  It
was  supposed  at
first  that  the  new
settlement  was
within  the  limits
of  Connecticut,
and  Mr.  Pynchon
sat  in  the  legisla-
ture at  Hartford,
but  he  soon  with-
drew, in  conse-
auence  of  various
ifferences,  and  received  a  commission  from  Mas-
sachusetts with  authority  to  govern  the  colony,  and
subsequently  it  was  shown  that  Agawam  was  in-
cluded in  the  Massachusetts  patent.  In  April,  1640,
the  inhabitants  assembled  in  general  town-meeting
and  changed  the  plantation  name  from  Agawam  to
Springfield,  as  a  compliment  to  Mr.  Pvnchon  and
his  birthplace.  Mr.  Pynchon  succeeded  admirably
in  preserving  friendly  relations  between  the  Indians
and  his  colony  by  a  conciliatory  policy.  One  part
of  it  was  to  treat  them  as  independent,  as  far  as
their  relations  with  one  another  were  concerned.
The  Indians  had  confidence  in  him.  and  were  ready
to  be  guided  by  his  wishes.  In  1650  Mr.  Pynchon
visited  London,  and  while  there  published  his  most
famous  work,  entitled  *'  The  Meritorious  Price  of
our  Redemption  "(London,  1650),  which  is  now  ex-
ceedingly rare.  There  is  one  copy  in  the  British  mu-
seum, one  in  the  Congregational  library  of  Boston,
and  one,  elegantly  bound,  in  the  Brinley  library,
was  sold  for  $305.  The  book,  which  opposed  the
Calvinistic  view  of  the  atonement,  made  a  great
excitement  in  Boston,  and  it  was  spoken  of  as  er-
roneous and  heretical.  The  author  was  received  on
his  return  with  a  storm  of  indignation.  The  gen-
eral court  condemned  the  book,  ordered  that  it
should  be  burned  by  the  public  executioner,  and
summoned  the  author  to  appear  Ijefore  them,  at
the  meeting  in  May,  1(551.  Rev.  John  Norton  was
also  deputed  to  answer  the  book.  Mr.  Pynchon
acknowledged  the  receipt  of  their  communication,
and  said  that  he  had  convinced  the  ministers  that
they  had  entirely  misconceived  his  meaning.  This
letter  was  complacently  received,  and  he  was  re-
quested to  appear  before  them  again  in  October  of
tne  same  year.  Not  appearing  in  October,  he  was
requested  to  do  so  in  the  following  May ;  but  to
this  he  paid  no  attention,  and  so  the  case  ended.
However,  in  consequence  of  this  violent  action  of
the  authorities  and  the  ill-treatment  to  which  he
had  been  subjected,  he  returned  to  England  in
September.  1652,  leaving  his  children  as  permanent
residents  of  New  England.  He  established  himself
at  Wraysbury  on  the  Thames,  near  Windsor,  where
he  spent  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  an  ample  fortune,  engaged  in  theological
writing,  and  in  entire  conformity  with  the  Church
of  England.  His  works  include  a  revised  edition
of  his  book,  entitled  "The  Meritdtious  Price  of


PYNCIION


PTULiKUS


14ff


Mmi'b  HtHleniption,  or  Christ's  Siifisfiiction  din-
ouased  and  expliiiiuHl,"  with  a  ri'joiiulcr  to  Uvv.
John  Norton's  answer  (KW.'));  "  Tho  Ji-wes  Syna-
Boifue"  (10.V2);  "  H«)w  the  First  Sablmlh  was  or-
oaUKNi"  (1054):  and  "The  Covenant  of  Nature
roa<k»  with  Adam"  (1«62).  On  2«  May,  18H«,  the
950th  anniversary  of  the  founding;  of  Sprinifttehl  l)y
Pynrhfin  and  his  ass<KMates  was  celehrateil  in  that
city.  An  historieul  onitiun  wasdeliverwl  by  Henry
Morris.  The  accompanying  illustration  is  from
a  portniit  that  is  now  in  |x)8session  of  the  Essex
institute,  Sah'in,  Mjuss.  It  was  pHinte<l  in  Bngland
after  his  return.— His  son,  John,  statesnum.  h.  in
Sprinjrfleld,  Kssex.  Knghmd,  in  1021 ;  d.  in  Spring-
fleki.  Mass.,  17  Jan.,  17(W,  was  broujjht  to  New
Enffland  by  l>is  father,  and.  on  the  hitter's  return
to  Knjjland  in  UV)2,  succce<ied  him  in  the  govern-
ment of  Sprinjrtleld,  and  in  the  manftf,'ement  of  the
affairs  of  tl«e  Connecticut  river  valley,  the  greater
part  of  which,  for  himself  and  his  friends,  from
Enfield  and  SufTleld  in  Connecticut  up  to  the
northern  line  of  Massachusetts,  he  purcha.<?od  from
the  natives,  and  on  which  be  laid  out  the  towns  of
Northampton,  Hadley,  Hatfield,  Deerfield,  North-
field,  and  Westfield.  As  colonel  of  the  1st  regiment
of  Hampshire  county,  he  was  in  active  service  dur-
ing King  Philip's  an<l  tho  first  French  wars,  and
was  noted  for  his  skill  in  the  management  of  the
Indians,  by  whom  ho  was  greatly  Ijeloved.  Besides
going  on  many  other  similar  missions,  in  1080  he
made  a  treaty  with  the  Mohawks.  The  Indians  gave
him  a  written  answer,  which  was  originally  drawn
in  the  Dutch  language,  but  was  translated  into  Eng-
lish, and  recorded  in  tho  colony  records.  He  was
appointe<l  one  of  the  commissioners  to  receive  the
surrender  of  New  York  by  the  Dutch  in  1004,  and
a  deputy  to  the  general  court  of  Massachusetts
from  10.^9  till  1005.  From  1005  till  1080  he  was
an  assistant  under  the  first  Jlassjichusetts  royal
charter.  In  1080  ho  was  named  one  of  the  coun-
cillors under  the  presidency  of  Dudley;  from  1088
to  1089  ho  was  one  of  tRo  councillors  under  Sir
Edmund  Andros,  and  under  the  new  charter  he  was
annually  elected  a  councillor  from  1093  till  1703,
and  died  in  oflRce.  In  1000  he  built  the  first  brick
house  in  the  valley  of  the  Connecticut,  which  was
occupied  by  the  family  until  1831. It  was  known

as  the  Old  Fort
(see  illustration),  in
consequence  of  fur-
nishing a  refuge  to
the  inhabitants  of
Springfield  when
that  town  was  at-
tacked and  V)urne<l
by  tho  Indians  in
King  Philip's  war,
10  Oct.,  1075,  and
sustaining  a  siege  while  Pynchon  himself  was  alt-
sent  in  command  of  tho  troops  at  Hadley.  He
visited  England  several  times  in  connection  with
his  father's  estates,  and  left  an  immense  landed
pro|H>rty. — John's  great-gramlson,  CharlP8,  physi-
cian, b."  in  Springfield,  31  Jan.,  1719;  d.  there,  9
Aug.,  178JJ.  was  a  Surgeon  in  the  Massachusetts
regiments  engage<i  in  the  French  and  English  wars
in  1745  and  1755,  was  present  at  the  capture  of
Louisburg  by  tho  provincial  troops,  and  engaged
in  the  expedition  against  (-n)wn  Point.  He  was
an  intimate  friend  of  Col.  Ephraim  Williams,  the
founder  of  Williams  college,  and  was  with  hin>
when  ho  fell  at  the  first  fire  at  the  Imttle  of  I^ake
George.  Dr.  Pynchon  was  one  of  the  two  surgeons
who  treated  Iiar<jn  Dieskau  when  he  was  wounded
and  taken  prisoner  by  the  English  in  the  same  bat-

VOL. V. — 10


tie. — Another  groat-grandson,  HiUlani.  lawver.  b.
inSi>ringfleld.  12  Dec.,  ITi'S ;  d.  in  .Salem.  14  .Slarch,
1799,  was  grwluatnl  at  ilarvanl  in  174^<.  and  be-
came an  eminent  lawyer  and  a<lvocate  and  a  well-
!  known  instructor  ni  jurisiirudence.  He  was  the
author  of  a  diary  of  renuirlcable  interest,  covering
the  entire  |>eri<Ml  of  the  American  Revolution. —
William's  brother,  JoHoph,  men-hant.  b.  in  Spring-
field, 30  Oct.,  1737;  d.  in  (Juilford,  Conn..  23  Nov.,
1794,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1757,  and  was  one
of  the  projectors  of  the  settlement  of  Shelbume,
Nova  Scotia.  During  the  latter  |>art  of  his  life  he
was  devoteil  to  scientific  pursuits. — Joseph's  son,
ThomaH  Kuggles,  physician,  b.  in  uuilford,
Conn.,  in  17»M);  d.  there.'  10  Sc[>t.,  171KJ.  was  e<lu
cated  in  New  York,  and  during  the  Revolution
{)ursued  his  nunlical  studies  in  the  hospitals  of
the  English  army  in  that  city.  After  the  war
he  returned  to  Guilford,  where  he  became  cele-
brated as  a  physician  and  surgeon.  Dr.  Pyn-
chon and  his  father  and  uncle  were  loyalists,  and
strongly  opposed  to  the  dismemlierment  of  the
British  empire,  but,  after  the  war.  Ijecamo  zealous
supporters  of  the  present  constitution  of  the  Unit-
ed States.  His  death  was  caused  by  a  fall  from
a  horse. — Thomas  Ruggles's  grandson,  Thomas
Ruggles,  educator,  b.  in  New  Haven.  Conn..  19
Jan.,  1823,  was  educated  at  the  I^atin-school,  Bos-
ton, and  graduated  at  Trinity  in  1841.  He  was
classical  tutor  and  lecturer  on  chemistry  in  the
college  from  1843  till  1847,  received  deacon's  or-
ders at  New  Haven,  14  June.  1848,  priest's  orders
at  Trinity  church,  Boston,  25  July,  1849,  and  ser\'ed
as  rector  in  Stockbridge  and  I^enox,  Mass..  from
1849  till  18.55.  Ho  was  elected  professor  of  chem-
istry and  the  natural  sciences  in  Trinity  in  1854,
and  studied  in  Paris  in  1855-'0.  He  receive<l  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  St.  Stephen's  college,  N.  Y.,
in  1805,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Columbia  in
1877.  In  the  latter  year  he  resigned  the  chair  of
chemistry,  and  was  apjiointed  professor  of  moral
philosonhy,  which  |K)st  he  still  (1888)  occiipies.
On  7  Nov.,  1874,  he  was  elected  president  of  Trin-
ity, and,  in  addition  to  tho  duties  of  his  professor-
ship, he  administered  that  ofiice  till  1883,  during
tho  period  that  followed  the  sale  of  the  original
college  site  to  the  city  of  Hartford  for  a  state  capi-
tol,  necessitating  the  selection  of  a  new  site,  tne
designing  and  erection  of  the  buildings,  and  the
transference  of  the  library,  cabinet,  and  other  prop-
erty. He  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science,  the  Geological  so-
ciety of  France,  and  other  learned  IxKlies,  and  the
author  of  a  "Treatise  on  Chemical  Physics"  (1809),
and  of  various  addresses.

PYRL.El'S,  John  Christopher,  German  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Pausa,  Voigtland,  in  1713;  d.  in
Herrnhut,  Saxonv,  28  May,  1779.  He  studied  at
the  Uiiiversity  of  Leipsic  in  173;3-'8.  entered  the
ministry  of  the  Moravian  church,  and  was  sent  to
Pennsylvania  in  1740.  He  engaged  in  the  study  of
the  Mohawk  and  Mohican  languagt's.  antl  in  1744
organized  a  school  for  the  instruction  of  mission-
aries in  these  dialects.  In  1745  his  first  translations
of  hymns  into  Mohican  apptvire<l.  He  n'turnwl  to
Europe  in  1751.  His  contributions  to  the  depart-
ment of  American  i)hilolopy,  for  which  his  nigh
scholarship  well  qualified  him,  were  "  A  Collection
of  Words  and  Phrases  in  the  Irocpioisor  Onoiulajja
Jjanguage  explained  into  German";  "Afflxa  No-
minum  et  Verix)nim  Lingua?  Macquaica'."  with
which  are  bound  Iroquois  vocabularii»s ;  and  "  Ad-
ject iva,  Nomina  et  Pronomia  Linguw  Macquaice,
cum  nonnuUis  de  Verbis,  Adverbiis,  ac  Prffposi-
tiouibus  ejusdem  Lingua.\"


146


QUACKENBOS


QUARTEE


Q


QrACKENBOS,  George  Payn,  educator,  b.  in
New  York  city.  4  ik'Ul.,  Ib'Hi;  d.  in  New  Ijondon,
Merriniack  co.,  N.  11.,  24  July,  18«1.  He  was
gnwluntcd  at  Columbia  in  184Jj  and  studied  law,
but  relin(|uislied  it  to  become  a  teacher,  and  for
many  yeai-s  was  principal  of  a  larjje  collefriate
scliool  in  New  York  citv.  In  1848-'50  he  edited
the  "  Literary  Ma^azine.^'  Weslevan  gave  him  the
degree  of  Lfi.  D.  in  1863.  He  edited  several  dic-
tionaries of  foreign  languages,  and  his  school-books
include  "  First  Lessons  in  Composition,"  of  which
40,000  copies  have  Ijeen  printed  (New  York,  1851);
"  Advanced  Course  of  Rhetoric  and  Comt>osition  "
(18r)4);  "School  History  of  the  United  States"
(18oT);  "Natural  Philosophy"  (1859);  a  series  of
English  grammars  (1802-'4);  one  of  arithmetics
(18(J3-'74);  and  "Language  Lessons"  (1876).— rHis
son,  John  Diuicaii,  educator,  b.  in  New  York  city,
22  April,  1848.  was  ^nuluated  at  Columbia  in  1868,
Ijecame  tutor  there  m  history,  was  graduated  at  the
New  York  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in
1871.  and  since  1884  has  been  adjunct  professor  of
the  English  language  and  literature  in  Columbia.
He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  that  college
in  1871.  He  has  published  "  Illustrated  Historv
of  the  World"  (New  York,  1876);  "Illustrated
History  of  Ancient  Literature,  Oriental  and  Clas-
sical "(1878):  and  "History  of  the  English  Lan-
guage" (1884);  and  was  the  literary  editor  of
Appletons'  "  Standard  Physical  Geography  "  (1887).
QUACKENBISH,  Stephen  Piatt,  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  23  Jan.,  1823;  d.  in  VV'ash-
ington,  D.C.,  4  bVb..  1890.  He  became  a  midshipman
in  1840,  lieutenant  in  1855,  and  lieut.-eommander  in

1862.  During  the
civil  war  he  was
in  charge  of  the
"  Delaware,"  the
"  Unadilla,"  the
"Pequot,"the"Pa-
tapsco,"  and  the
"  Mingo,"  of  the
blockading  squad-
ron. He  covered
Gen.  Ambrose  E.
Burnside'sarmy  in
falling  back  from
A  quia  creek  and
the  landing  at  Ro-
anoke  island,  scat-
^«/^^^<^  <^  /  y  tering  a  large  body
y^Sy.  cX^*-Vic<a.d?vvi«-.^U-*»c- of  the  enemy,  took

part  in  the  battles
at  Elizabeth  City  and  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  flying  the
divisional  flag  of  Com.  Stephen  C.  Rowan,  and
engaged  the  Confederate  batteries  and  a  regiment
of  flying  infantry  at  Winton,  N.  C,  where  700  or
800  L'nion  men  had  been  reported,  and  a  white  flag
displayed  as  a  decoy  for  the  naval  vessels.  He  was
then  ordered  to  deliver  to  the  people  Gen.  Bum-
side's  and  Admiral  Louis  M.  Golasborough's  procla-
mation concerning  the  700  or  8(X)  men  reported.
When  the  "  Delaware  "  was  close  to  the  shore  a  Ixniy
of  armed  Confederates  was  reported.  She  opened
fire,  and  Winton  was  destroyed  according  to  orders,
in  consequence  of  the  display  of  the  white  flag.
He  subseouently  was  in  action  at  Sewell's  Point
landing.  Wilcox  landing,  and  Malvern  hill,  on
James  river,  where  he  commanded  the  "  Pequot."
and  received  a  shot  that  took  off  his  right  leg.  He
afterward  covered  the  rear-guard  of  the  army  in


the  retreat  to  Harrison's  landing.  While  in  charge
of  the  steam  gun-boat  "  Unadilla,"  of  the  South
Atlantic  squatlron,  in  1863,  he  captured  the  "  Prin-
cess Royal,"  which  contained  machinery  for  shap-
ing projectiles,  engines  for  an  iron-clad  then  build-
ing in  Richmond,  and  a  large  quantity  of  quinine.
Wnen  commanding  the  "  Patapsco,"  of  the  North
Atlantic  squadron,  in  1864,  he  was  engaged  in  as-
certaining the  nature  and  position  of  the  obstruc-
tions in  Charleston  harbor,  and,  while  dragging
for  torj)edoes,  his  shin  was  struck  by  one  and  sunK
in  twenty  seconds.  He  was  then  in  charge  of  the
steamer  "Mingo,"  protecting  Georgetown,  S.  C,
and,  with  a  force  of  light-draught  vessels,  nrevented
the  re-erection  of  a  fort  by  the  enemy.  He  became
commander  in  1866,  captain  in  1871,  and  commo-
dore in  1880.  In  1861-2  he  was  in  charge  of  the
navy-yard  at  Pensacola,  Fla.,  and  in  1885  he  wa»
retired  as  rear-admiral.

QUARTER,  William,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Killurine,  King's  co.,  Ireland,  24  Jan.,  1806;  d.
in  Chicago,  III.,  10  April,  1848.  He  received  his
early  training  in  the  classical  seminarj'  of  Tulla-
more,  and  was  preparing  for  the  ecclesiastical  col-
lege of  Maynooth  when  he  met  a  priest  who  had
returned  from  the  United  States.  The  accounts  he
heard  of  the  spiritual  destitution  of  his  country-
men induced  him  to  go  thither,  and  he  landed  in
Quebec  on  10  April,  1822.  He  applied  for  admis-
sion into  the  seminary,  but  was  rejected  on  account
of  his  youth,  and  met  with  a  similar  refusal  at
Montreal,  but,  after  travelling  through  the  United
States,  he  was  finally  received  into  Mount  St.
Mary's  college, Emmettsburg,  Md. He  became

f)rofessor  of  Latin  and  Greek  there,  studied  phi-
osophy  and  theology  at  the  same  time,  and  was
ordained  priest  on  4  Sept., 1829. He  was  ap-

Sointed  assistant  pastor  of  St.  Peter's  churcn,*
lew  Y'ork,  where,  during  the  cholera  epidemic  of
1832,  he  displayed  great  self-sacrifice.  He  gathered
the  children  that  had  been  made  orphans  by  the
visitation,  and  intrusted  them  to  the  care  of  the
Sisters  of  Charity,  spending  all  his  means  on  their
maintenance,  fie  was  appointed  pastor  of  St.
Mary's  parish  in  1833,  rebuilt  the  church,  which
had  been  burned,  and  founded  a  select  and  a  free
school  in  connection  with  it.  In  1843  his  name
was  transmitted  to  the  pope  by  the  council  of  Bal-
timore, which  had  just  created  the  diocese  of  Chi-
cago. He  received  the  pontifical  briefs  on  30  Sept.,
and  was  consecrated  first  bishop  of  Chicago  in
the  cathedral  of  New  York  on  10  March,  1844,  by
Archbishop  Hughes.  He  completed  the  Chicago
cathedral  from  his  own  resources  and  the  contribu-
tions of  members  of  his  family,  opened  several
Roman  Catholic  schools,  and  founded  a  college
which  afterward  was  developed  into  the  University
of  St.  Mary's  of  the  Lake.  In  1845  he  went  to  New
Y''ork  to  collect  money  for  an  ecclesiastical  semi-
nary, and  in  1846  it  was  completed  and  organized.
In  the  same  year  he'  introduced  the  Sisters  of
Mercy,  and  built  a  convent  for  them  in  Chicago,
which  soon  sent  out  branches  to  every  part  of  Illi-
nois. He  was  the  first  bishop  in  the  t'nited  States
to  establish  theological  conierences,  at  which  the
clergymen  of  his  diocese  assembled  twice  a  year  for
the  discussion  of  ecclesiastical  statutes  anci  Ques-
tions relating  to  their  calling.  He  was  particularly
attentive  to  the  emigrants  that  were  then  flocking
into  the  country,  and  organized  benevolent  socie-
ties to  aid  them.


QUARTLEY


QUKIP6


147


OrARTLEY,  Frederick  William,  enfrniver.
b.  in  IWh.  KiiKlaiul,  5  .lulv,  IHOM;  d.  in  Npw  York
city,  5  April,  1h74.  He  uilo[>t(>tl  the  profwwion  of
woo<l-en>fravinj;  Ht  sixteen  years  of  Hfje,  stU(Ue<l  in
Wales  nnd  in  1'jiris,  iind  in  IM.'i'J  came  to  New  York
city,  where  he  connected  himself  with  M'verul  jjul>-
li.sfiinp-houses.  His  lK>st-known  work  is  in  "  Pic-
turesque Ainerictt"  (New  York,  lH?i).  and  "  Pic-
tures<iuo  Kurope"  (1875).  He  als<j  painted  with
some  sucit'ss.  Amonjj  his  pictures  are  "  Niapira
Falls,"  "Hutter-.Milk  Falls,^  and  "Catskill  Falls."
— Ilis  son,  Arthur,  artist,  b.  in  Paris,  Fnince,
24  May,  1H;J9  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  19  .May.  1HH«.
When  he  was  two  years  old  he  was  taken  to  Lon-
don, where  in  1848-'50  he  studieil  at  Westminster.
He  came  to  the  Unitinl  States  in  1851,  settling;  in
New  York,  where  he  was  later  apprenticed  to  a
sijfn-painter.  Until  1862  he  followed  his  trade  in
New  York,  after  which  he  went  to  Baltimore,  en-
ga^in^  in  business  for  ten  years.  Meanwhile  for
some  time  he  had  devoted  his  leisure  hours  to  the
study  of  painting,  although  he  never  had  any  in-
struction. He  opened  a  studio  in  1873,  and  two
years  later  returned  to  New  York.  He  improvetl
rapidly,  and  soon  took  a  high  place  among  Ameri-
can marine-minters.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of
the  National  academy  in  1879,  and  an  academician
in  1886.  In  1885  he  visited  Europe,  remaining
about  one  year,  and  returning  a  few  months  before
his  death.  His  more  imjwrtant  paintings  include
"  Morning  Effect,  North  Kiver  "  and  "  Close  of  a
Stormy  Day"  (1877);  "From  a  North  River  Pier-
Hea<l "  ana  "An  Afternoon  in  August"  (1878);
"Trinity  from  the  River"  (1880);  "Queen's  Birth-
day "  (1883);  and  "  Lofty  and  Lowly  "  and  "  Dig-
nit  v  and  Impudence"  (1^84).

<irASI>.\XOVICH,SlglsmondMathIas(quas-
dah-no-vitch'),  Hungarian  explorer,  b.  in  Buda  in
1742;  d.  in  Vienna.  Austria,  m  1796.  He  receivetl
his  etlucation  in  Vienna,  and  was  afterward  assist-
ant professor  of  botany  in  the  university  of  that  city.
In  1784  he  was  sent  to  the  West  Indies  and  South
America,  and,  obtaining  from  Charles  III.,  aft«r
some  difficulties,  permission  to  enter  the  Spanish
dominions,  he  explored  for  three  years  Cuba,  Porto
Rico,  Jamaica,  and  Santo  Domingo.  He  went
afterward  to  Guiana,  and  retumtS  in  1789  to
Vienna  with  important  lK)t«nical  collections,  which
he  presented  to  the  Academy  of  sciences.  Among
his  works  are  "  Reise  durch  Guiana"  (Vienna,
1790);  "  Beschreibung  der  Insel  Cuba"  (1791);
"  Hundert  Tage  auf  Reisen  in  Porto  Rico"  (1791) ;
"Guiana  Skizzen"  (1792);  "  Geschichte  und  Zu-
stSnde  der  Indianer  in  Guiana"  (1793);  "Institu-
tiones  regni  vegetabilis"  (1794);  and  "  Historia
general  is  plantarum  .\mericanarum  "  (3  vols.,  1795).

QUAY,  Matthew  Stanley,  senator,  b.  in  Dills-
burg,  York  CO.,  Pa.,  30  Sei)t.,  18:^3.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  in  1850,  becfan  his
legal  studies  at  Pittsburg,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1854,  He  was  ap|>ointed  prothonotary  of
Beaver  c«unty  in  1855,  in  1856  elected  to  the  same
office,  and  re-electetl  in  18.59.  In  1861  he  resigned
his  office  to  accept  a  lieutenancy  in  the  10th  Penn-
sylvania reserves,  and  he  was  sul>se<iuently  nuide
assistant  commissary-general  of  the  state  with  the
mnk  of  lieutenant-colonel.  Afterward  he  was  ap-
p«)int«l  private  secretar)*  to  Gov.  Andi-ew  G.  Cur-
tin,  and  in  August,  1862,  he  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  134th  Pennsylvania  regiment.  He
was  mustereil  out,  owing  to  impaired  health.  7  Dec.,
1862,  but  participated  in  the  assault  on  Marye's
Heights,  13  !)«•<•.,  as  a  volunteer. He  was  subse-

auently  apjx)inted  state  agent  at  Washington,  but
lortly  afterward  was  recalled  by  the  legislature  to


All  the  office  of  military  secretary,  which  was  ors-
atwl  by  that  IhkIv.  He  was  elected  to  tiu>  legisla-
ture in  OetoU'r.  I'kiM.  in  1M<«.  and  1M«16.  an<l  in  1809
he  established  and  e<lil»-<l  the  Heaver  "  Radic-al."
In  1873- '8  he  was  s4'«.-retary  of  the  commonwealth,
resi^fiiing  to  accept  the  ap|Mjintment  of  reciirder
of  Philadelphia,  which  offii-e  he  resigned  in  1879.
In  January,  1871>,  he  was  again  apiK>inte4i  secre-
tary of  the  commonwealth,  filling  that  |Kwt  until
{)ctolx>r,  1882,  when  he  resigne<l.  In  1885  he  was
elected  state  treasurer  by  the  largest  vote  ever
given  to  a  candidate  for' that  office,  and  in  1887
was  chi)s«Mi  to  the  V.  S.  senate  for  the  term  that
will  end  3  March.  1893.

QUEEN,  Walter  W.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Wash-
ington. I).  C,  6  Oct.,  1824.  He  entered  the  V.  S.
navy  as  a  midshipman  from  New  York  in  1841,
was  attache«l  to  the  frigate  "  .Ma<'edonian,''  and
afterward  to  the  sloop  "  .Nlarion,"  of  the  West  India
stjuadron,  l842-'3.  During  the  .Mexican  war  he
serve<l  in  the  frigates  "('uml)erland  "  and  "Ohio,"
and  was  stationed  in  the  fort  at  Point  Isal^el  during
the  battles  of  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Pal  ma,
taking  part  in  the  attacks  on  Alvarmlo,  Tampico,
Tuxpan,  and  Vera  Cruz.  In  1847  he  was  promoted
to  passed-midshipman,  and  in  the  following  vear
was  dismissed  from  the  service  for  fighting  a  tluel,
but  was  reinsUited  in  1853.  Two  years  later  he
was  eommissionetl  lieutenant,  and  saw  service  in
the  Ea.st  and  West  India  scjuadrons.  He  was  on
special  duty  in  the  "  Powhatan  "  at  the  re-enforce-
ment of  Fort  Pickens,  and  servetl  nineteen  days  on
shore  at  the  fort  in  charge  of  the  l)oats  of  the  fleet.
He  was  in  command  of  a  division  of  the  mortar
flotilla  under  David  D.  Porter  during  the  bom-
bardment of  F'orts  Jackson  and  St.  Philip,  also
during  the  attack  on  Vicksburg,  when  Flag-Officer
David  G.  Farragut  first  passed  the  batteries  with
his  fleet.  He  l>ecame  a  lieutenant-commander  in
1862,  was  on  ordnance  duty  in  Washington  and
with  the  North  Atlantic  souadron  in  lS6'2-'3,  and
in  command  of  the  "  Wyalusing"  in  18»W-'4.  On
5  May,  1864.  with  that  vessel,  he  engage*!  the  Con-
federate ram  "  Albemarle,"  with  her  consorts  the
"  Bombshell "  and  the  "  Cotton-plant,"  compelling
them  to  seek  refuge  in  the  Roanoke  river.  He
became  commander,  with  s|)ecMal  duty  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  in  1866,  and  later  served  in  the  .South  Pa-
cific and  North  Atlantic  s«|uiuln)ns.  In  lH7JJ-*4
he  was  on  duty  in  the  Washmgton  navy-yard,  and
in  1878-'9  commanded  the  flag-ship  "  Trenton,"  on
the  European  station.  His  last  service  was  as  com-
mandant of  the  navy-vanl,  Washington,  in  1885-'6.
He  was  commissionetJ  captain  in  1874,  comminlore
in  1883,  and  rear-admiral,  27  Aug.,  1886,  being
retired  in  the  following  OctolK»r.  since  which  date
he  has  resided  in  the  city  of  Washington.

QUEIPO,  Vicente  Vasqiiez,  Spanish  states-
man, b.  in  Luci.  Galicia  in  1804.  lie  receivetl  his
education  in  Seville,  where  he  was  graduated  in
law,  and  entered  the  colonial  magistracy.  He  was
for  several  years  fiscal  procurator  in  Havana,  and
always  advocated  the  enfranchisement  of  the
negr(x?s  in  the  island.  In  1860  he  was  electe«l  sena-
tor by  the  city  of  Seville,  but  he  resigned  after  the
overthrow  of  (^ueen  Isabella  in  1868.  and  since  that
time  has  devoted  his  time  to  literary  researches.  He
has  in  preparation  a  history  of  Cul>a.  (^ueii>o  is  a
member  of  the  .\cademv  of  sciences,  and  tliat  of
historiciii  researches,  of  Madrid,  and  a  corresjKjnd-
ing  member  of  the  Institute  of  France.  Among  his
works  are  "Cuba,  sus  recursos  su  administrac-ion
v  su  iK)pulacion"  (Madrid,  18,50),  translated  into
French  in  1851,  and  "  Essai  sur  le  sy.steme  metrique
et  mon^'taire  des  anciens  peuples"  (1859).


148


QUEIROS


QUESADA


QUEIROS,  Pedro  Fernandes  de  (kay'-ros),
Portuguese  navigator,  b.  in  Evora,  Alentejo,  in
1500;  »l.  in  Panama  in  1G14.  lie  is  also  known
under  the  name  of  QuiRos,  and  most  historians  call
him  a  Spaniard.  He  was  a  pilot  in  the  Spanish
service,  and  made  several  voyajijes  to  New  Spain.
In  1(M)4  lie  received  the  commission  of  general  and
the  command  of  an  ex|)edition  to  explore  the  Pa-
cific ocean.  Two  frigates  and  a  sloop  were  built  in
Callao.  ancl  Queiros  sailed  from  thai  place,  21  Dec,
1G05,  Luis  Vacs  do  Torres  acting  as  iiis  deputy.
Their  course  was  west-southwe.st,  and  they  did  not
see  land  for  3,000  miles,  when,  on  22  Jan.,  1G(H),
they  passed  Incarnation  island,  and  afterward  the
I)ezana  archipelago,  lying  in  1 7°  53'  S.  Thev  landed
at  Sagitaria  island  (now  Tahiti)  on  10  teb.,  dis-
covered, 7  April,  Toumako,  where  King  Tamay
gave  them  valuable  information,  and  on  25  April
descried  the  Now  Hebrides  islands,  and  an  appar-
ent continent,  which  Queiros  named  Tierra  Aus-
tral del  Kspiritu  Santo.  He  arrived  in  Acapulco.
3  Oct.,  1006,  and,  proceeding  immediately  to  Mad-
rid, presented  to  Philip  III.  a  memoir  in  which  he
urged  the  advantages  of  colonizing  the  countries
that  he  had  discovered.  The  court  of  Spain  re-
fused him  support,  and  he  went  to  Panama,  intend-
ing to  organize  a  new  exjwdition  with  his  own  re-
sources, but  died  there.  His  "  Cartas  al  rey  Feline
III."  (Seville,  IGIO)  are  full  of  interesting  details.
The  original  narrative  of  his  vovage  has  been  pub-
lished in  volume  xvii.  of  the  ''  Viagero  Universal,"
but  a  copy  was  issued  during  his  life  under  the
title  "  Narratio  de  Terra  Australi  incognita "
(Amsterdam,  1613).  The  French  version  is  better
known :  "  Copie  de  la  requete  presentee  an  roi  d'Es-
pagne  sur  la  decouverte  de  la  cinguieme  partie  du
monde,  appelee  la  Terre  Australe  incogncue,  et  des
grandes  richesses  et  fertilites  d'icelle  "  (Paris,  1617).
Purchas  gave  also  an  English  version  of  it  in  his
"  Pilgrimmes"  (London,  T625).

QUENTIN,  Charles  Henry  (kan-tang),  French
missionary,  b.  in  Bordeaux  in  1621 ;  d.  in  SSo  Paulo,
Brazil,  in  1683.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  went  in  his
youth  to  South  America,  and  was  attached  to  the
missions  of  the  Amazon.  He  became  afterward
visitor  of  the  order,  founded  several  missions  in
the  provinces  of  Silo  Paulo  and  Minas  Geraes,
built  schools  and  convents,  and  labored  much  to
improve  the  condition  of  the  Indians.  He  left
several  manuscripts,  both  in  French  and  Spanish,
which  are  now  in  the  National  library  of  Paris.
One  of  them  has  been  published  under  the  title
"Journal  de  la  mission  du  pere  Charles  Quentin
dans  la  terre  du  Bresil,  de  1670  k  1680"  (2  vols.,
Paris,  1852).  It  contains  curious  and  interesting
details  of  the  early  stages  of  the  Portuguese  con-
quest and  the  Indians  of  southern  Brazil.

OlERARD,  Louis  Framjols  (kay-rar).  West
Indian  poet,  b.  in  Dondon,  Santo  Domingo,  in
1706;  died  in  Cape  Franyais  in  1749.  His  father
was  a  colonial  magistrate,  and  the  son  held  for
several  veiirs  an  oflice  in  the  department  of  the
king's  lieutenant  at  Cape  Fran9ais.  In  1736  he
published  a  volume  of  verses, "  Melodies  Indiennes  "
(Cape  Fran§ais),  which  was  received  with  favor.
The  author  pretended  in  his  preface  that  he  had
translated  and  adapted  into  French  the  Indian
recitatives  that  were  sung  at  festivities.  Encour-
agement was  given  him  and  he  received  300  livres
from  Cardinal  Fleury.  But  Queranl  pretended
afterward  to  give  a  new  series  of  Indian  poems,
which  represented  the  natives  as  having  attained  a
far  greater  state  of  civilization  than  the  early  dis-
coverers had  credited  them  with,  and  he  was  accused
of  imposing  on  the  public. His  Indian  poems  are


now  considered  to  rank  with  Villemarie's  Celtic
songs,  and  the  \u^em  of  Clotilde  de  Surville.  The
greater  part  was  certainly  the  original  work  of  the
author.  They  are  "  Chants  de  guerre  des  Caralbes  "
(Cape  Franyais.  1737);  "  Chants  de  victoire  an  re-
tour  de  la  Imtaille  "  (1737) ;  "  L'appel  aux  amies  "
(1738) ;  "  Lamentations  d'un  Indien  sur  le  corps  de
sa  fille  "  (1740) ;  "  Danses  de  mariage  "  (1740) ;  and
"  De  I'dcriture  Carall)e ;  comment  les  Indiens  con-
servaient  la  mcmoire  des  evenements  importants
au  moyen  d'un  systcme  do  cordelettes  de  diverses
couleurs  "  (1741).  which  Querard  wrote  in  answer  to
his  detractors.

QUESADA,  Gonzalo  Jimenez  de  (kay-sah-
dah),  Suanish  adventurer,  b.  in  Granada  in  1495 ;
d.  in  Mariquita  in  1597.  He  studied  law  in  Se-
ville, and  in  1535  was  appointed  chief  justice  of
the  province  of  Santa  Marta  in  South  America.
He  commanded  an  expedition  to  explore  the  in-
terior of  the  countrv.  He  left  Santa  Marta,  6
Aug.,  1536,  at  the  head  of  900  men,  and,  after  manv
hardships  and  more  than  a  year  of  warfare  witt
the  Indians,  conquered  the  j)lateau  of  Bogota,
where,  on  0  Aug..  1538,  he  founded  a  city,  which
he  called  Santa  Fe,  and  the  country  New  Grana-
da. Shortly  afterward  there  arrived  on  the  pla-
teau of  Bogota,  from  different  directions,  the  ex-
ploring expedition  of  Sebastian  de  Velalcazar,  one
of  Pizarro's  lieutenants,  who  came  from  Quito,
and  Nicolas  Federmann  (q.  v.),  from  Coro.  Nego-
tiations were  opened  between  the  three  explorers ;
Federmann  agreed,  for  $10,000,  to  turn  over  his
forces  to  Quesada.  aiid  Velalcazar  to  retire  to  the
southwestern  provinces,  leaving  Cundinamarca  to
the  first  conqueror,  pending  the  decision  of  the
crown.  Quesada,  leaving  his  brother,  Ilernan  Pe-
rez, in  charge,  set  out  for  Europe.  He  met  the
emperor  at  Ghent,  but  offended  him  by  an  os-
tentatious display  of  luxury,  and  he  was  also  op-
posed by  the  friends  of  his  former  chief,  Lugo,  who
nad  died.  Quesada  was  passed  over,  and  a  son  of
Lugo,  Alonso  Luis,  obtained  the  commission  of
governor  of  New  Granada  in  1542.  Shortly  after-
ward Quesada  obtained  leave  to  join  his  brother  in
the  New  World,  but  was  persecuted  by  the  gover-
nor, imprisoned,  and  exiled.  He  resolved  to  seek
justice  in  Spain,  and  returned  to  New  Granada  as
commander-in-chief  of  the  troops.  In  1569,  under
the  government  of  Diaz  de  Leiva  {q.  v.).  he  made  an
unsuccessful  expedition  to  discover  "  El  Dorado,"
returning  from  the  banks  of  the  river  Guaviare.
He  was  afterward  reinstated  as  captain-general,
and  died,  a  centenarian,  of  leprosy.  His  remains
were  transported  to  the  cathedral  of  Bogota.

QUESADA,  Manuel  de,  Cuban  patriot,  b.  in
Puerto  Principe  about  1830;  d.  in  Costa  Rica  in
1886.  In  1853  he  emigrated  to  Mexico  on  account
of  his  political  ideas,  and  entered  the  army,  serving
under  Juarez  against  the  empire.  He  was  soon
distinguished  by  his  bravery,  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general, and  became  governor  of  Coahuila
and  Durango. When  the  Cuban  insurrection  be-

fan  in  1868,  he  fitted  out  an  expedition  in  the
United  States  and  landed  at  Guanaja,  on  the  north-
ern part  of  the  island,  in  December  of  the  same
year.  He  devoted  his  attention  to  organizing  the
Cuban  forces  and  was  appointed  their  commander-
in-chief.  In  this  capacity  he  took  part  in  several
engagements,  especially  atSabana  Grande  and  Las
Tunas,  where  he  defeated  the  Spanish  troops.  In
1870  he  was  deprived  of  his  command  oy  the
Cuban  congress,  and  left  the  island.  He  then
made  a  tour  in  the  United  States  and  the  South
American  republics  in  search  of  aidlfor  the  Cuban
cause,  and  succeeded  in  sending  a  few  expeditions


QUESADA


QUICKEN  BORNE


149


with  Hrins  nntl  ainnuinitions  to  the  pntriotH,  among
otlu-rs  one  in  tht-  »ti>ttin«<r  "  Virginiiis,"  which  whh
capturttl  by  the  Spunittnls.  Among  those  <if  the
iTfW  tlmt  wvrv  exwuti'd  ut  .Santiiigo  do  ('uIm»  wiis
a  Hon  of  QufSHtltt.  After  the  vUttn'  of  tlie  C'liimn
insii  rivet  ion  he  settled  in  Costu  Itica,  wliere  he
WHS  emploviil  by  the  government.

QTHSAIJA,  Vicente  (laxpar,  Argentine  au-
thor, l>.  in  Buenos  Ayres.  5  April.  1H80.  He
studitnl  hiw  in  the  university  of  his  native  citv,  in
1850  was  gniduati>d  tis  LL.  I>.,  and  at  once  took  an
active  part  in  iwlitics,  contributing,  by  his  articles
in  the  press  of  MontevidiH)  and  Buenos  Ayres,  to
the  fall  of  the  tyrant  Kosas  in  18.'>2.  He  founded
in  1800  the  "  Revista  »lel  Parana,"  and  in  1804  the
"  Revista  de  Buenos  Ayres,"  and  since  1871  he  has
been  director  of  the  public  library  of  the  latter
city.  He  has  publistied  "  Impresitmes  de  viaje,
recuerdos  de  las  pn)vincias  de  Cordoba,  Santiago  y
Tuciundn  "  (Buenos  Ayres,  1852) ;  "  I^i  nrovincia
de  Cordoba  ''  (1800),  which  has  been  translated  into
German  ;  and  a  series  of  articles,  "  Los  Rccuertlos,"
"  El  Crepusculo  de  la  tarde,"  "  Lejos  del  hogar,"
and  "  El  Arpa,"  published  in  his  "  Revista,"  and
in  a  volume  (1804).

QtESNEL,  IMciidontiMJabrlel  Lonis,  (kay-
nel).  South  American  botanist,  b.  near  Cayenne  m
1749;  d.  in  Cayenne  in  1801.  He  received  his  edu-
cation in  France,  served  for  several  years  in  the
army,  and  fought  at  Tobago  in  1780.  After  the
conclusion  of  peace  he  returned,  with  the  brevet
of  major,  to  his  estate  in  tiuiatla,  and,  at  the  sugges-
tion of  Malouet  (q.  v.),  established  a  ukkIcI  farm,  and
adopted  new  methods  of  cultivation.  For  several
years  he  carried  on  his  agricultural  experiments,
but,  unwise  management  provinjj  detrimental  to
his  fortune,  he  auandoned  agriculture  and  be-
came a  traveller.  He  explored  French  Guiana
and  the  northern  provinces  of  Brazil,  and  formed
an  important  herbarium,  which  is  now  deposited
in  the  museum  of  Cayenne.  Among  his  works  are
"  Herbier  explique  ties  plantes  de  la  Guiane  "  (2
vols.,  Cayenne,  1792);  "Description  de  la  flore
Guianaise"  (1795) ;  and  "Journal  de  voyage  k  tra-
Ters  Ics  Pampas"  (1790).

qUESNEL,  Joseph,  author,  b.  in  St.  Malo,
France,  15  Xfiv.,  1749;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,
8  July,  1809.  After  finishing  his  studies,  he  shipped
on  bloard  a  man-of-war,  visited  Pondichery  and
Madagascar,  travelled  in  Africa,  and  after  three
years  returned  to  France.  After  resting  a  few
months,  he  set  out  for  French  Guiana,  and  after-
ward visitetl  several  islands  of  the  Antilles  and  ex-
plored part  of  Brazil.  He  then  travelled  in  the
valley  of  the  Mississippi,  and  finally  decided  on
settling  in  Canada.  He  married  in  Montreal,  and
resideil  in  Boucherville.  In  1788  he  wrote  "Colas
et  Colinette,"  a  vaudeville,  which  was  played  for
the  first  time  in  Montreal.  He  foUowetl  with
"  Lucas  et  C«k'ile,"  an  operetta,  "  L'Anglomanie,"  a
comedy  in  verse,  and  "  Kepublicains  Fran^ais,"  in

Srose,  which  was  afterwartl  publishe<l  in  Paris,
besides  several  songs,  he  composed  sacred  music
for  the  parish  church  of  >lontreal,  and  some
motets,  and  wrote  a  short  treatise  on  the  dramatic
art  (1805).  The  writings  of  Quesnel  are  in  the  first
volume  of  the  "  R<^pertoire  national."

QrETZALCOHUATL  (ket-zal-co-wat'-tle),  king
of  the  Toltecs,  live<l  alxjut  the  sixth  century.  Ac-
conling  to  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg  (</.  f.),  in  his
"  Histoire  des  nations  civilistVs  du  Mexique,"  a
personage  with  long  hair  reaching  to  the  waist,  and
a  pale  visage,  who  gave  his  name  as  Cecalt-Quet-
zalcohiiatl,  landed  one  morning  at  Panuco.  He
pretended  to  come  from  an  eastern  country  of  which


nolKxly  had  heard  Ix'fore,  and  was  accom|)anied
by  a  tr<K>p  of  architects,  painters',  and  Hcienlists.
P'n>ceediiig  iminetliately  to  Tollantzingo,  he  built
a  magnitU-eiit  tenijile  and  an  underground  palac-e,
and  WHS  elected  king  of  Tollun,  the  nations  of  the
Onaahuac  valley  receiving  him  as  a  mes.>«enger  of
G<xi.  His  reign  laste<l  twenty  years,  and  proved
Ijeneflcial  to  uio  {)eople,  several  nations  asking  to
\ie  admitted  in  the  confedenu-y,  till  Huemac,  king
of  Aculhuacan,  allied  with  the  di^.s^itistied  priests,
overthrew  the  monarchy,  Quetzalcohuatl  retired
to-thc  vallev  of  Huitzilaimn,  where  he  fcuinded  the
city  of  Cholula,  which  later  Uvame  the  seat  of  s
powerful  rei)ublic.  S<jme  years  afterward  Cholula
w«us  also  taken  by  Huemac,  and  Brasseur  de  Bour-
lK)urg  asserts  that  Quetzjdcohuatl  die«l  during  his
flight  from  Cholula.  But  other  historians  say
that,  after  retiring  from  Tollantzingf>,  Ouetzalco-
huatl  ri'ached  the  coast  of  Campeche  an«I  founded
Xicjilanco  on  an  island  of  the  lagoon  de  Terminos,
whence,  after  some  years,  he  retired  apiin  to  his
fabulous  country,  while  his  followers  emigrated  to
Central  America  and  founded  the  new  city  of
Tollan  near  Ococingo  in  Chiajjas.

QUICK,  Charles  William,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  4  Oct.,  1822.  He  wjis  graduated  at
Yale  in  1843,  and  at  Alexandria  theological  semi-
nary, Va.,  in  1848.  He  was  ordained  to  the  min-
istry of  the  I*rotestant  Episcoiml  church,  an<l  was
rector  of  pmrishes  in  New  York  and  Pennsylvania
till  1870,  when  he  ioined  the  ministry  of  the  Re-
formed Episcopal  church.  He  edited  The  "  Epis-
copal liecorder"  in  1800-'81,  The  "Christian
Woman  "  in  1885,  and  the  works  of  Ezekiel  Hop-
kins (Philadelphia,  1803);  "Righteousness  by
Faith,"  by  Charles  P.  Mcllvaine  (1804);  and  the
works  of  John  Owen  (10  vols..  1805).

QUICKEN  BORNE  (or  Van  Quickexborxe,
Charles).  Charles  van,  clergyman,  b.  in  Peteg-
hem.  Belgium,  21  Jan.,  1788;  d".  at  the  mission  of
St.  Francis,  in  the  Portage  des  Sioux,  Mo.,  17  Aug.,
1857.  He  studied  in  the  College  of  Ghent,  was  or-
daine<l  priest,  and  held  various  ecclesi»istical  places
in  Belgium.  He  became  a  Jesuit  in  1815,  and  at
once  asked  to  Ix?  sent  on  the  American  mission.
He  arrived  in  the  United  States  in  1817.  and  in
1819  was  ap|)ointe<l  sui)eriorof  the  Jesuit  novitiate
of  White  Marsh,  Md.  While  attending  to  the  duties
of  this  office  he  built  two  fine  churches,  one  in
Annapolis  and  one  at  White  Marsh,  and  hml,  at
the  same  time,  a  vast  district  under  his  jurisdic-
tion. After  some  years  he  was  ordered  to  transfer
his  mission  to  Missouri.  He  accordingly  set  out
with  twelve  comjianions,  and,  after  travelling  1.000
miles,  arrived  at  Florissant  and  In'gan  the  novitiate
of  St.  Stanislaus.  To  form  this  establishment  he
had  no  other  materials  than  the  timber  that  he
carried  from  the  woods  and  the  rocks  he  raised
from  the  bed  of  the  river.  He  was  his  own  archi-
tect, mechanic,  and  lalx^rer,  and,  aided  by  his
novices,  finally  constructed  the  buildings.  In  1828
he  set  al)out  building  a  university  at  St.  I^ouis,  and
also  erected  at  St.  Charles  a  church,  a  convent  of
the  Sacred  Heart,  and  a  partK-hial  rcsi«lence.  His
great  desire  from  the  first  had  been  to  evangelize
the  Indians.  He  therefori'  made  several  excursions
among  the  Osages  and  lowas,  and  made  numerous
conversions.  He  erected  a  house  and  chai>el  among
the  Kicka|KX)s,  and  this  tril>e  became  the  centre  of
his  missionary  lal)ors  in  1830.  He  had  visitwl  all
the  neighlxjri'ng  triU^s  and  formtnl  i>lans  for  their
conversion,  when  he  was  recalle<l  to  Missouri.
After  remaining  s<ime  time  in  St.  Louis,  he  was
sent  to  the  parish  of  St.  Francis,  where  he  at  once
began  the  erection  of  a  church.


150


QUINBY


QUINX'Y


oriNBY,  Oeorjcre  Washington,  clorpymnn,  b.
in  Westl^rook.  Me.,  20  Doc-.,  IHIO;  d.  in  AiifjustH,
Me.,  10  Jan.,  1884.  He  wa.s  educated  in  his  native
village  and  in  the  academies  of  Parsonsfleld  and
North  IJridgton,  Me.,  studied  for  the  ministrv,  and
in  1835  iK'gan  to  preach  in  Poland,  Me.  ite  was
8ul)soquentlv  pastor  of  Universiilist  churches  in
Livcnnore,  "North  Yarmouth,  and  Saco,  Me.,  Taun-
ton, Mass.,  and  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  He  was  editor
of  the  "iStar  in  the  West  "  for  several  years,  sul>se-
quently  of  the  "Trumpet"  and  the  "Freeman,"
and  in  lH()4-'84  of  the  "  Gospel  Banner,"  all  organs
of  the  Universalist  church.  His  publications  in-
clude "  The  Salvation  of  Christ "  (Cincinnati,  18/52) ;
"  Brief  Eximsition  and  Defence  of  Universalism  "
(1854) ;  "  >lHrriage  and  the  Duties  of  the  Marriage
Relation :  Six  Lectures  "  (ia5G) ;  " The  Gallows,  the
Prison,  and  the  Poor-House "  (1857) ;  and  "Heaven
Our  Home"  (1860).

QUINBY,  Isaac  Ferdinand,  soldier,  b.  near
Morristown,  N.  J..  29  Jan.,  1821.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1843,  stand-
ing first  in  engineering.  He  was  a  classmate  and
close  friend  of  Gen.  Grant.  He  was  an  assistant
professor  at  West  Point  in  1845-'7  and  took  part
m  several  skirmishes  on  the  Rio  Grande  and  Vera
Cruz  lines  at  the  close  of  the  Mexican  war.  He
went  to  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in  September,  1851,  to
become  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  newly
founded  university  in  that  city,  and  resigned  from
the  army,  10  March,  1852.  He  held  his  professor-
ship until  the  civil  war,  and  then  became  colonel
of  the  13th  New  York  regiment.  Under  his  com-
mand, it  marched  through  Baltimore  on  30  May,
being  the  first  body  of  National  troops  to  pass
through  that  city  after  the  attack  upon  the  6th
Massachusetts  regiment  on  19  April.  Col.  Quinby
resigned  his  commission,  2  Aug.,  1861,  and  re-
sinned his  chair ;  but  he  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  17  Marcn,  1802,  and  in  the
following  month  was  assigned  to  the  command  at
Columbus.  Ky.  In  October,  1862,  he  was  relieved,
to  take  command  of  the  7th  division  of  the  Army
of  the  Tennessee.  The  division  was  sent  to  take
part  in  the  movement  to  turn  the  Confederate
right  flank  at  Vicksburg  by  Yazoo  pass,  the  Cold-
water,  Tallahatchie,  and  Yazoo  rivers.  Amid  great
difficulties  Gen.  Quinby  pushed  on  to  Fort  Pem-
berton,  where  he  arrived  on  23  March.  Find-
ing that  there  was  no  ground  suitable  for  camp-
ing or  moving  a  large  lx)dy  of  troops,  and  the  fire
of  the  small  gun-boats  being  ineffectual,  he  con-
ceived the  idea  of  going  around  to  the  east  side
of  Fort  Pemberton,  crossing  the  Yallabush^  river
on  a  pontoon  bridge,  cutting  the  communications
of  the  fort,  and  compelling  its  surrender:  but
he  also  constructed  works  for  a  direct  attack,  and
sent  back  to  Helena  for  heavy  guns.  The  l)oat
that  carried  them  brought  orders  from  Gen.
Grant  to  abandon  the  movement  by  Yazoo  pass,
and  Gen.  Quinby  withdrew  his  force  from  before
Fort  Pemberton  on  5  April.  The  fatigues  and
anxieties  of  this  expedition  in  a  malarious  region
brought  on  a  severe  illness,  and  he  was  ordered
home  on  sick-leave,  1  May,  1863.  But  learning,  a
few  days  after  reaching  home,  the  progress  of
Grant's  movement  to  the  rear  of  Vicksburg,  he
hastened  back,  assuming  command  of  his  division
on  the  17th.  and  taking  part  in  the  assault  of  the
19th,  and  the  subsequent  movements.  On  5  June
illness  again  rendered  him  unfit  for  duty  in  the
field,  and  he  went  to  the  north  under  Grant's  or-
ders, remaining  in  Rochester  until  1  July.  He  then
commanded  the  rendezvous  at  Elmira  till  31  Dec,
1863,  when,  convinced  that  he  would  not  again  be


able  to  go  to  the  front,  he  resigned  his  commission
and  resumed  his  duties  as  profess<jr  in  the  univer-
sity. In  May,  18<W,  he  was  appointed  U.S.  marshal
for  the  northern  district  of  New  York,  and  he  held
that  office  during  Gen.  Grant's  two  presidential
terms,  holding  his  professorship  also  till  September,
1884.  In  May,  1885,  he  was  appointed  cit  v  sur%-eyor
of  Rochester,  and  he  now  (1888)  holds  tnat  office.
He  was  a  trustee  of  the  Soldiers'  home  at  Bath,
N.  Y.,  and  vice-president  of  the  board  from  the
foundation  of  the  institution  in  1879  till  his  resigna-
tion in  1886,  In  atldition  to  his  official  duties,  he  is
frequently  employed  as  a  consulting  engineer.  He
has  revised  and  rewritten  several  of  the  works  in
the  Robinson  Course  of  Mathematics,  and  the  trea-
tise on  the  " Differential  and  Integral  Calculus"
in  that  series  is  altogether  his.

QUINCY,  Ediunnd,  emigrant,  b.  in  Wigsthorpe,
Northamptonshire,  England,  in  1602;  d.  in  Mt.
Wollaston,  Mass.,  in  November  or  December,  1635.
His  family  seems  to  have  been  connected  with  the
Quincys,  Earls  of  Winchester  in  the  13th  century.
(See  Grace's  "  Memoranda  respecting  the  Families
of  Quincy  and  Adams,"  Havana,  1841.)  Edmund
Quiney  came  to  Massachusetts  in  1628,  and,  after
returning  to  England  for  his  wife  and  children,
sailed  again  in  the  ship  which  brought  the  Rev.
John  Cotton,  and  anchored  in  Boston  harbor,  4
Sept.,  1633.  He  was  one  of  the  committee  ap-
pointed to  purchase  the  rights  of  William  Black-
stone  to  the  Shawmut  peninsula.  In  1635  several
thousand  acres  of  land  in  the  Mt.  Wollaston  plan-
tation were  granted  to  Edmund  Quincy  and  Will-
iam Coddington.  afterward  one  of  the  founders  of
Rhode  Island.  This  district  was  presently  set  off
from  Boston  as  a  distinct  township  under  the  name
of  Braintree.  and  part  of  it  was  long  afterward  in-
corporated as  the  town  of  Quincy. — His  son,  Ed-
mund, b.  at  Achurch,  Northamptonshire,  in  1627;
d.  in  Braintree,  8  Jan.,  1698,  was  a  magistrate  and
representative  of  his  town  in  the  general  court.,
and  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Suffolk  regiment.  In
1689  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  committee  of
safety,  which  formed  the  provisional  government
of  the  colony  until  the  arrival  of  the  new  charter
from  William  and  Mary.  He  had  two  sons,  Daniel
and  Edmund,  the  former  of  whom  died  before  his
father. — Daniel's  only  son,  John,  statesman,  b.  in
Braintree  in  1689 ;  d.  there  in  1767,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1708.  He  held  the  office  of  speaker
of  the  house  of  representatives  longer  than  any  other
person  in  the  provincial  period,  and  was  for  forty
successive  years  a  member  of  the  council.  His
great-grandson,  John  Quincy  Adams,  was  named
for  him. — Edmund's  younger  son,  Edmund,  states-
man, b.  in  Braintree  in  October,  1681 ;  d.  in  Lon-
don, 23  Feb.,  1738,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1699,  and  entered  early  into  public  life  as  repre-
sentative from  his  native  town,  and  afterward  as
member  of  the  council.  He  was  a  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  from  1718  until  his  death.  A  contro-
versy having  arisen  as  to  the  boundary  between
Massachusetts  and  New  Hampshire,  he  was  ap-
pointed agent  for  Massachusetts,  and  embarked  for
England  in  December,  1*737,  Soon  after  his  arrival
in  London  he  fell  a  victim  to  small-pox.  He  left
two  sons,  Edmund  and  Josiah, — Tne  elder,  Ed-
mund, merchant,  b.  in  Braintree,  in  1703 :  d.  there
in  1788,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1722.  He
was  author  of  a  "  Treatise  on  Hemp  Husbandry,"

Sublished  in  1765.  One  of  his  daughters  married
ohn  Hancock. — The  younger,  Josiah,  merchant,
b.  in  Braintree  in  1709 ;  d.  there  in  1784,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1728,  Between  1737  and  1749
he  spent  much  of  his  time  in  Europe,* He  was  ap-


QUINCY


QUINCY


151


pnintod  in  17W  joint  fonunissioncr  with  Thomas
Pownull  to  nt'noliate  with  the  colonies  of  Now  York
und  IVnusylvanitt  for  ai<l  in  erecting  a  fwmtier
barrier  npiinst  the  French,  at  Ticondcroga.  He
wa.s  a  friend  and  correMiM indent  of  Franklin  and
Wasihington,  and  erected  the  mansion  wen  in  the
accomiwnying  illustration,  which  is  still  occupied


by  his  dL\>(.iiulaiils. — Josinh's  M'cond  son.  Sainnel,
lawyer,  b.  in  Hraintrec,  Mass..  i:{  April.  17*") ;  d.  in
Antijrua  in  17SSJ.  was  graduato<l  at  llarvanl  in  1754.
He  was  an  intimate  friend  of  John  Adams,  and  the
two  were  admitted  to  the  bar  on  the  .'«ame  day,  6
Nov.,  175y.  Stimiiel  Quincy  l)ecHme  eminent  in  his
profession,  and rose  to the  dijjnity  of  solicitor-

S?neral  of  the  province.  His  official  [wsition  in-
uenced  his  political  views.  He  l)ecame  a  Tory,
and  at  the  end  of  the  siege  of  Boston  in  Marcm,
1776,  he  left  the  country  with  other  loyalists.  By
way  of  compensation  for  his  exile  and  losses,  he
was  appointed  attorney-general  of  Antigua,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death. — Josiah's  third  son,
Joslah.  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,  23  Feb.,  1744;  d.  at
sea  off  (iloucester,  Mass..  26  April.  1775,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1763.  Three  years  later,  on
taking  his  nuister's  degree,  he  delivered  an  English
oration  on  '*  Patriotism,"  which  exhibited  his  won-
derful |X)wer  as  an  orator.  Heretofore  the  orations
ha«l  Imhmi  in  Latin.  He  studied  law  with  Oxen-
bridge  Thacher,  and  .succeede<l  him  in  his  exten-
sive and  lucrative  practice.  He  s<K)n  rose  to  the
foremost  rank  in  his  profession.  At  the  same  time
he  jjave  much  attention  to  |x)litics,  and  on  the  oc-
casion of  the  Townshend  measures  of  1767  he  pub-
lished in  the  Boston  "  Gazette  "  a  series  of  extreme-
ly able  articles,  signed  "  Hyperion."  After  the  so-
calle<l  "  lioston  massacre"  he  was  selected,  together
with  John  Adams,  by  Capt.  Preston  as  counsel  for
himsi'lf  and  his  soldiers  who  ha<l  fire<l  on  the  crowd.
The  iM)pular  excitement  was  such  that  it  recjuired
not  only  moral  but  physical  courage  to  perform
this  duty.  Mr.  Quincy's  own  father  wrote  him  a
letter  of  {Nisisionate  remonstrance.  That  he  should
undertake  the  defence  of  "those  criminals  charged
with  the  munler  of  their  fellow-citizens"  seemed
monstrous.  "  Good  God ! "  wrote  the  father,  "  is  it
possible!  I  will  not  l)elicve  it!"  The  son.  in  reply,
maintained  that  it  was  his  professional  duty  to  give
legal  advice  and  assistance  to  men  accused  of  a
crime  but  not  proved  guilty  of  it.  "  I  never  har-
boretl  the  expectation,"  said  he.  "  nor  any  great  de-
sire, that  all  men  should  speak  well  of  me.  To  in-
quire my  duty  and  do  it.  is  my  aim."  After  the  ex-
citement was  over,  Mr.  Quincy 's  cours«»  was  warndy
commended  by  nearly  every Ixxly.  During  the  next
two  years  his  business  greatly  increased,  but  he  still
found  time  to  write  stirring  |)olitical  pamphlets.  He
wrote  in  "  Kdes  and  (Jill's  Gazette,"  over  the  signa-
tures of  "  t'allisthenes,"  "Tertius  in  Nubibus."
"  Edwanl  Sexby,"  and  "  Marchmont  Nwlham."  He
was  also  the  author  of  the  "  Draught  of  Instructions


to  the  Boston  Ri'Presentatives  in  May.  1772."  and
the  "  UetKirt  of  a  ('ommittee  chosen  by  the  Inhabi-
tants of  Petersham,  4th  January.  1773."  All  these
pa(K*rs  an*  chanw-terized  by  clearness  an<I  IjoldnesK.
He  was  one  of  the  first  to  .say,  in  plain  terms,  that
an  ap|i(>al  to  arms,  followinl  by  a  se)tanttion  from
the  mother-country,  was  inevitable.  It  had  by  this
time  Ix-come  evident  that  he  wassufTering  fnmi  f>ul-
monary  consumption,  and  in  February,  1773.  by  the
a<lvice  of  physicians,  he  nuule  a  voyage  to  ('htirles-
ton,  and  travelle«l  through  thet'arolinas,  returning
to  Boston  late  in  May.  He  was  present  in  the  Old
South  meeting-house  on  16  Dec.,  and  as  the  men,
disgui-sed  as  Indians,  rushe<l  past  the  door  on  their
way  to  the  tea-ships,  he  exclaimed :  "  I  see  the
clouds  which  now  ris<>  thick  antl  fast  upon  our  ho-
rizon, the  thunders  roll,  and  the  lightnings  play,
and  to  that  G(h1  who  rides  on  the  whirlwind  and
din'cts  the  stonn  I  commit  my  country."  In  May,
1774,  he  published  his  most  inuHtrtant  ixilitical
work,  entitled  "  Observations  on  the  Act  c»f  Parlia-
ment commonly  called  the  lioston  Port  Bill,  with
Thoughts  on  Civil  S<K-iety  and  Standing  Armies."
In  September  of  that  year  he  sailed  for  England
as  a  confidential  agent  of  the  natriot  party  to  con-
sult and  advise  with  the  frientls  of  America  there.
He  was  politely  received  by  Lords  North  and
Dartmouth,  as  well  as  by  memlwrs  of  the  onpo-
sition,  such  as  Shelbunie  and  Harre;  but  the  r^arl
of  Hillsborough  dedaR'd.  in  the  house  of  lords:
"  There  are  men  walking  the  streets  of  London  to-
day who  ought  to  Ik?  in  Newgate  or  at  Tvbum."
The  earl  meant  Mr.  Quincy  and  Dr.  Franklin.  In
^larch,  1775.  the  young  man,  waste<l  with  di.sease,
sjiiled  for  lioston.  bearing  a  messa^je,  which  died
with  him,  from  the  Whig  leaders  m  England  to
their  friends  in  America.  As  he  felt  the  approach
of  death,  while  almost  within  sight  of  his  native
land,  he  said  again  and  a^in  that  if  he  could
only  talk  for  one  hour  with  Samuel  Adams  or
Jo.seph  Warren,  he  should  be  content  to  die.  Mr.
Quincy's  jiower  as  an  orator  was  very  great,  and,
in  spite  of  the  weakness  of  his  lungs,  his  voice
was  remarkable  for  its  resonant  and  iK'iiet rating
quality  as  well  as  for  its  sweetness,  lie  married
in  1769  Abigail  Phillips,  and  had  one  son,  Josiah.
See  "Memoir  of  the  Life  of  Josiah  Quincy.  Jr.,
by  his  Son"  (Boston,  1825:  3d  e<l.,  edite<l  bv  Eliza
Susan  Quincy,  Pioston,  1875). — His  son.  Josiah,
statesman,  b.  "in  lioston,  4  Feb.,  1772;  d.  in  Quincy.
Mass.,  1  July,  1864.  He  was  fitted  for  college  at
Phillips  academy,  Andover.  and  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  KUO  at  the  head  of  his  class.  He
studicil  law  with  William  Tudor,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1793.  His  practice  was  not
large,  and  he  hatl  considerable  leisure  to  devote
to  study  and  to  politics.  In  1797  he  married  Miss
Eliza  Susan  Morton,  of  New  York.  On  4  July,
1798,  he  delivered  the  annual  oration  in  the  Old
South  meeting-house,  and  gained  such  a  reputation
thereby  that  the  Federalists  selected  him  as  their
candidate  for  congri'ss  in  180().  The  Kepublican
newspapers  ridiculed  the  idea  of  a  memU'r  of  con-
gress onlv  twenty-eight  years  old.  and  called  aloud
for  a  cra«Ue  to  rock  him'  in.  Mr.  Quincy  was  de-
feated. In  the  spring  of  18()4  he  was  electctl  to  the
state  senate  of  Massachusetts,  and  in  the  autumn
of  that  year  he  was  electeil  to  congress.  During
his  senatorship  he  was  active  in  urging  his  state  to
suggest  an  amemlment  to  the  Federal  constitution,
eliminating  the  clause  that  j)ermitted  the  slave-
states  to  count  three  fifths  of  their  slaves  as  jiart
of  their  basis  of  representation.  If  such  a  measure
c<^)uld  have  had  any  chanc-e  of  success  at  that  mo-
ment, its  effect  would  of  course  have  been  to  break


162


QUINCY


QUINUY


up  the  Union.  Mr.  Quincy  dreaded  the  extension
of  slu very,  and  foresaw  that  the  existence  of  that
institution  was  likely  to  brinp  on  a  civil  war;  hut
it  was  not  evident  then,  as  it  is  now.  that  a  civil
war  in  18G1  was  greatly  to  be  preferred  to  civil
war  or  jieaceable  secession  in  1805. As  member  of

congress.  Mr.  Quin-
cy belonged  to  the
farty  of  extreme
'e<leralists  known
as  the  "  Kssex  jun-
to," The  Pedaral-
ists  were  then  in  a
hopeless  minority:
even  the  Massachu-
setts delegation  in
congress  had  ten
Republicans  to  sev-
en Federalists.  In
some  ways  Mr.  Quin-
cy showed  a  disposi-
tion to  independent
\  action,  as  in  refus-

A ■ J /} ■  "'J^ '^^ follow his

^  / with Randolph  s

malcontent  faction
known  as  the  "quids."  He  fiercely  opjx)sed  the
embargo  and  the  war  with  England.  But  his
most  famous  action  related  to  the  admission  of
Louisiana  as  a  state.  There  was  at  that  time  a
strong  jealousy  of  the  new  western  country  on  the
part  of  the  New  England  states.  There  was  a  fear
that  the  region  west  of  the  Alleghanies  would  come
to  l)e  more  populous  than  the  original  thirteen
states,  and  that  thus  the  control  of  the  Federal

Sovernment  would  pass  into  the  hands  of  people
escribed  by  New  Englanders  as  "  backwoodsmen."
Gouverneur  Morris  had  given  expression  to  such  a
fear  in  1787  in  the  Federal  convention.  In  1811,
when  it  was  proposed  to  admit  Louisiana  as  a  state,
the  high  Federalists  took  the  ground  that  the  con-
stitution had  not  conferred  upon  congress  the
Kwer  to  admit  new  states  except  such  as  should
formed  from  territory  already  belonging  to  the
Union  in  1787.  Mr.  Quincy  maintained  this  posi-
tion in  a  remarkable  speech,  4  Jan.,  1811,  in  which
he  used  some  strong  language.  "  Why,  sir,  I  have
already  heard  of  six  states,  and  some  say  there  will
W  at  no  great  distance  of  time  more.  I  have  also
heard  that  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio  will  Ije  far  to  the
ea'it  of  the  centre  of  the  contemplated  empire.  .  ,  .
It  is  impossible  such  a  power  could  be  granted.  It
was  not  for  these  men  that  our  fathers  fought.  It
was  not  for  them  this  constitution  was  adopted.
You  have  no  authority  to  throw  the  rights  and
liberties  and  property  of  this  people  into  hotch-pot
with  the  wild  men  on  the  Missouri,  or  with  the
mixed,  though  more  respectable,  race  of  Anglo-
llispano-Gallo-Americans,  who  bask  on  the  sands  in
the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi.  ...  I  am  compelled
to  declare  it  as  my  deliberate  opinion  that,  if  this
bill  passes,  the  bonds  of  this  Union  are  virtually
dissolved;  that  the  states  which  compose  it  are
free  from  their  moral  obligations;  and  that,  as  it
will  be  the  right  of  all,  so  it  will  be  the  duty  of
some,  to  prepare  definitely  for  a  separation — ami-
cably, if  they  can ;  violently,  if  they  must."  This
was,  according  to  Hildreth,  "  the  first  announce-
ment on  the  floor  of  congress  of  the  doctrine  of
secession."  Though  oppose<l  to  the  war  with  Eng-
land, Mr.  Quincy  did  not  go  so  far  as  some  of  the
Federalists  in  refusing  support  to  the  administra-
tion; his  great  speech  on  the  navy,  2r)  Jan.,  1812,
won  applause  from  all  parties. In  that  year  be


declined  a  re-election  to  congress.  For  the  next
ten  years  he  was  most  of  the  time  a  member  of  the
Massjichusetts  legislature,  but  a  great  part  of  his
attention  was  given  to  his  farm  at  Quincy.  He
was  member  of  the  convention  of  1820  for  revising
the  state  constitution.  In  the  following  year  he
was  siM?aker  of  the  house.  PVom  1823  to  1828  he
was  mayor  of  Bosto|i,  and  his  admitiist ration  was
memorable  for  the  number  of  valuable  reforms  ef-
fected by  his  energy  and  skill.  Everything  was
overhauled — the  rjolice.  the  prisons,  the  schools,  the
streets,  the  fire  department,  and  the  great  market
was  built  near  Faneuil  hall.  In  1829  he  was  chosen
president  of  Harvard,  and  held  that  position  until
184/3.  During  his  administration  Dane  hall  was
built  for  the  law -school  and  Gore  hall  for  the
university  library ;  and  it  was  due  mainly  to  his
exertions  that  the  astronomical  observatory  was
founded  and  equipped  with  its  great  telescope,
which  is  still  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world.  In
1884,  in  the  face  of  violent  opposition,  Mr.  Quincy
succeeded  in  establishing  the  principle  that  "  where
flagrant  outrages  were  committed  against  persons
or  property  by  members  of  the  university,  within
its  limits,  they  should  be  proceeded  against.*  in  the
last  resort,  like  any  other  citizens.  l)efore  the  courts
of  the  commonwealth."  The  effect  of  this  meas-
ure was  most  wholesome  in  checking  the  peculiar
kinds  of  ruffianism  which  the  community  has  often
been  inclined  to  tolerate  in  college  students.  Mr.
Quincy  also  introduced  the  system  of  marking,
which  continued  to  te  used  for  more  than  forty
years  at  Harvard.  By  this  system  the  merit  of
every  college  exercise  was  valued  according  to  a
scale  of  numbers,  from  one  to  eight,  by  the  pro-
fessor or  tutor,  at  the  time  of  its  performance.
Examinations  were  rated  in  various  multiples  of
eight,  and  all  these  marks  were  set  down  to  the
credit  of  the  individual  student.  Delinquencies  of
various  degrees  of  importjince  were  also  estimated
in  multiples  of  eight,  and  charged  on  the  debit
side  of  the  account.  At  the  end  of  the  year  the
balance  to  the  student's  credit  was  comparetl  with
the  sum-total  that  an  unbroken  series  of  perfect
marks,  unaffected  by  deductions,  would  have
yielded,  and  the  resulting  percentage  determined
the  rank  of  the  student.  President  Quincy  was
also  strongly  in  favor  of  the  elective  system  of
studies,  in  so  far  as  it  was  compatible  with  the
general  state  of  advancement  of  the  students  in  his
time,  and  with  the  means  of  instruction  at  the  dis-
posal of  the  university.  The  elective  experiment
was  tried  more  thoroughly,  and  on  a  broader  scafe,
under  his  administration  than  under  any  other
down  to  the  time  of  President  Eliot.  From  1845
to  1864  Mr.  Quincy  led  a  quiet  and  pleasant  life,
devoted  to  literary  and  social  pursuits.  He  contin-
ued till  the  last  to  take  a  warm  interest  in  politics,
and  was  an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  President  Lin-
coln. His  principal  writings  are  "  History  of  Har-
vard Universitv"  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1840);  *"  History
of  the  Boston  Athenaeum  "  (Boston,  1851);  "Muni-
cipal History  of  Boston  "  (Boston,  1852) ;  "  Memoir
of  J.  Q.  Adams"  (Boston,  1858);  and  "Speeches
delivered  in  Congress  "  (edited  by  his  son,  Edmund,
Boston,  1874).  His  biography,  by  his  son,  Edmund
(Boston,  1867).  is  an  adminible  work.  See  also  J.
R.  Lowell's  "  My  Study  Window."  pp.  83-114.— His
wife,  Eliza  Snsan  (Morton),  b.  in  New  York  in
1773;  d.  in  Quincy.  1  Sept.,  1850,  was  a  daughter
of  John  Morton,  a  New  York  merchant,  of  Scottish
descent,  and  Maria  Sophia  Kemper,  whose  father
was  a  native  of  Kaub,  Germany.  During  the  occu-
nation  of  New  York  by  the  liritish,  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Morton  lived  in  New  Jersey,  first  at  Elizabeth,


QUINCY


QUINN


158


afterward  at  IlaHkinf;riclf^ A  son  bom  at  the

foriiipr  i)lare  in  1 IIH  wa-s  nani<-(I  VVashinjfton,  and
his  si>t«'r  in  her  "  Memoirs"  (UM-liircs  thni  this  must
havo  IxHMi  tho  first  child  nanu><l  after  the  "  Father
of  his  Count ry."  Miss  Morton  poflMwed  musical
talent,  and  on  a  visit  to  Itoston  in  1794  she  won
Mr.  (^uiney's  heart  with  a  sonjf ;  in  a  week  from
the  day  that  he  first  met  her  and  h-arned  the  fact
of  her  existence  he  was  on^aj^-d  to  l)o  married  to
her.  ^Irs.  (^uincy  was  a  charming  and  accomplished
Ia<ly.  In  1821.  in  contpliance  with  the  req.tiest  of
her  children,  she  wrote  the  memoirs  of  her  early
life.  Forty  years  afterward  the  fnifrment  of  an
autohiopniphy  thus  Ix-jjun  was  incorinirate*!  in  the
a4lmiral)le  memoir  of  Mrs.  Quiiicy  hy  her  dauj^hter.
Eliza  Susan.  Mrs.  (^uincys  recollections  of  such
incidents  of  the  Uevolutionarv  war  as  came  within
her  childish  ken  are  especialfy  interesting. — Their
eldest  son,  Josiuh,  b.  in  Boston,  17  Jan.,  1802;  d.
in  Quincy,  2  Nov.,  1882,  was  jrnuluate<l  at  Harvard
in  1H21. He  was  mayor  of  Boston  from  184.'>  to

1849,  and  author  of  "  Fiifures  of  the  Past"  (lios-
ton,  1882).— His  son,  Josiah  PhlUip.««,  b.  in  Bos-
ton. 28  Nov.,  1829.  was  jjmduated  at  Ilarvard  in

1850,  and  is  the  author  of  the  dramas  "Charides"
(B<iston,  18.'W}),  "Lyteria"  (1855),  and  a  political
essay  on  "The  Protection  of  Majorities"  (1876). —
Another  son.  Samuel  MUler,  b.  in  Boston  in
IKW,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1852,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  Boston  bar,  and  for  several  years
edited  the  '*  Monthly  Law  Keporter."  He  entered
the  army  as  captain  in  the  2a  Massachusetts  regi-
ment. 24  May,  1801,  became  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  ?2d  U.  S.'  colored  regiment,  20  Oct.,  1863.  and
its  colonel,  24  May,  18(W,  and  on  13  March,  1865,
was  brevetted  brigatlier-general  of  volunteers.  He
has  e<lited  the  "Reports  of  Cases"  of  his  great-
grandfather, Josiah  (1865). —  President  Josiah's
second  son,  Edmund,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  1  Feb..
1808;  d.  in  Dedham,  17  May,  1877,  wjis  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1827.  He  deserves  especial  mention
for  the  excellent  biography  of  his  father,  above
mentionecl.  His  novel  "VVensley"  (Boston,  1854)
was  said  by  Whittier  to  be  the  "best  book  of  the
kind  since  the  "  Blithedale  Romance."  His  con-
tributions to  the  anti-slavery  press  for  many  years
were  able  and  valuable. — His  sister,  Eliza  Siisan,
b.  in  Boston,  15  Jan.,  1798;  d.  at  Quincy,  17  Jan  ,
1884,  was  her  father's  secretary  for  nearly  half  a
century,  and  also  furnished  various  papers  to  his-
torical societies,  and  was  well  known  for  her  chari-
ties as  well  as  for  her  literary  qualities.  From  her
diary,  dating  from  1810,  her  brothers  drew  mate-
rial for  their  publications.  She  retained  her  vigor-
ous intellect  until  her  death,  which  occurred  in  the
mansion  of  her  grandmother.  She  issued  a  pri-
vately printed  memoir  of  her  mother  (Boston,
18((4)'.— Abraham  Howard,  editor,  b.  in  Boston
in  November,  1767;  d.  in  Washington.  I).  C,  11
Sept.,  1840,  was  a  grandson  of  Edmund,  author  of
the '•  Treatise  on  Hemp  Husljandrj-."  From  1788
until  1812  he  was  engage<l  in  mercantile  business
in  Boston.  In  1808  his  interest  in  the  disputes
with  (treat  Britain  led  him  into  the  field  of  jour-
nalism, and  on  18  Nov.  of  that  year  he  publisluvl
the  first  number  of  a  weekly  paiK-r  entitle<l  the
"Columbian  Detector."  After  10  May.  1809,  it
was  publishe<l  twice  a  week.  It  was*  afterwanl
merge<l  in  the  "Boston  Patriot."  From  1828  to
1832  Mr.  Quincy  lived  at  Eastport,  Me.,  where  for
a  short  time  he  edited  the  "Northenj  Light."  In
1832,  receiving  an  appointment  in  the  navy  depart-
ment, he  removed  to  Washington.  See  C.  T.
Coote's  "  Life  and  Character  of  A.  II.  (juincy "
(Washington,  1840).


OriNCT,  JoKlah.  lawyer,  b.  in  Unox.  Maas..  7
March.  1793;  d.  in  Runu'iey.  X.  H..  19  Jan..  1875.
Although  |>repan'<|,  hi-  was  unable  »«»  take  a  col-
legiate course,  and.  on  finishing  his  studies  at  the
Ijcnox  academy,  he  began  at  f>nce  the  study  of  law  in
St(K'kbridge.  .Shortly  after  his  admission  to  the
Iwir  he  remove*!  to  Rumney,  N.  II.,  where  he  npent
the  remainder  of  his  life.  In  a  few  years  he  be-
came one  of  the  most  successful  lawyers  in  the
state.  He  was  fre<|Uently  electe<l  to  the  legislature,
and  for  one  year  was  president  of  the  state  senate.
He  was  a  man  of  great  [lublic  spirit,  and  devoted
much  time  to  the  promotion  of  the  railway  and
cilucational  inten>sts  of  New  Hami>shin>.  '  Mr.
Quincy  was  an  active  friend  of  the  various  enter-
prises of  the  Baptist  denomination,  with  which  he
w'as  identified,  serving  for  years  as  a  trustee  of
Newton  theological  seminary.

Ql'INLAN.  John,  R.  C".  bishop,  b.  in  Clovne,
County  Cork.  Ireland.  19  Oct..  1826;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, La..  9  March.  1883.  lie  received  a  good
cla.ssical  e<lucation,  determined to  study  for  the

Criesthood,  and,  with  this  view,  emigrate<l  to  the
nited  States  in  1844.  After  a  theological  course
in  Mount  St.  Mary's  seminary,  Emmettsburg.  Md.,
he  was  ordained  a  priest  in  1853,  and  stationed  at
Piqua,  Ohio,  till  18o5,  when  he  was  apnointe<l  as-
si.-tant  pastor  of  St.  Patrick's  church,  Cincinnati.
Shortly  afterward  he  was  made  president  of  Mount
St.  Mary's  college  of  the  west,  at  the  same  time  fill-
ing the  chairs  of  philosophy  and  theology.  In  1859
he  was  nominate*!  for  the  diocese  of  Mobile,  and  he
was  consecratetl  bishop  on  4  Dec.  At  this  time
there  were  very  few  pnests  in  the  diocese,  and  he
went  to  Europe  in  18(K)  for  the  pur|>ose  of  obtain-
ing clerical  aid,  as  well  as  of  paving  the  customary
visit  to  the  pope.  Bishop  Quinlan  was  ardent  in
his  devotion  to  the  temporal  and  spiritual  interests
of  lx)th  sides  in  the  conflict,  and  after  the  battle  of
Shiloh  ha.stened  to  the  field  in  a  special  train  with
succor  for  the  wounde<l.  After  the  war  he  exerted
himself  for  the  reorganization  of  his  diocese,  al-
most unaided.  He  built  St.  Patrick's  and  St.
Mary's  churches  in  Mobile,  and  erected  others  in  dif-
ferent places,  besides  restoring  those  that  had  l)een
destniyed.  He  founded  many  convents  and  schools,
and  intHKluced  various  religious  ortlers  into  his
diocese.  Bishop  Quinlan  took  part  in  the  canoni-
zation of  the  Japanese  martyrs  in  Rome  in  1867,
and  was  present  at  the  Vatican  council  in  1869.  He
visited  Rome  again  in  1882,  and  by  contracting  the
Roman  fever  undermined  his  health.  At  the  time
of  his  death  his  diocese  containtnl  40  pnests,  36
churches,  and  alwut  13  convents  and  academies.

Ql'INN,  James  Cochrane,  Canadian  clerev-
man.  b.  near  Belfast,  Ireland.  27  May.  1845.  lie
was  educated  at  Queen's  college  and  at  the  Presby-
terian college.  Belfast,  and  was  ordained  a  minister
in  August,  1878.  The  same  vear  he  went  to  New-
foundland, and  in  1874  to  Vew  Brunswick,  and,
after  serving  as  a  Presbyterian  minister  in  that
province  and  Nova  Scotia,  removed  to  Manito))a  in
1885,  and  is  now  (1888)  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  at  Emerson  in  that  province.  lie  luul
charge  of  a  station  for  the  American  ornithological
.society  at  Bat  hurst.  New  Brunswick,  and  afterward
of  one  at  Emerson,  introduced  the  system  ot  ensil-
age into  the  counties  of  Northumlx>rland  and
Gloucester,  New  Brunswick,  and  has  been  inter-
este<l  in  improving  the  stock  of  sheep  and  cattle.
He  has  published  "  Plain  Wonls  to  Anxious  In-
quirers" (Toronto.  1888);  "  Iland-Iiook  on  Poul-
try " ;  and  tracts  on  tem|H'rance  and  other  subjects.

QL'INN,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Donough-
more. County Donegal, Ireland,  in  1821 ; d.  in


164


QUINT


QUINTARD


Paris,  Pnince,  15  April,  1887.  lie  came  to  the
United  States  in  1841,  entered  the  ecclesiastical
seminary  at  Fordham,  N.  Y.,  and  was  ordained
priest  by  Bishop  Hughes  on  17  Dec,  1845,  He
subsequently  became  pastor  of  St.  Peter's  church
in  Barclay  street,  New  York,  where,  besides  having
to  clear  off  a  debt  of  |14(),(X)0,  he  was  opposed  by
the  lay  trustees,  who  had  control  of  tne  church
building.  There  was  also  $137,000  due  to  poor
men  and  women  who  had  intrusted  their  savings
to  the  care  of  St.  Peter's  church.  He  was  actively
supported  by  Bishop  Hughes,  and  finally  succ^ded
in  triumphing  over  the  trustees  and  paying  the
debts.  lie  was  appointed  pastor  of  the  cathedral
on  1  May,  1873,  and  was  also  made  vicar-general.
During  the  absence  of  Cardinal  McCloskey  in  1875
and  1878  he  had  charge  of  the  administration  of
the  archdiocese.  As  vicar-general  he  had  the  di-
rection of  the  purchase,  sale,  and  transfer  of  all
ecclesiastical  property,  and  the  supervision  of
schools,  asylums,  societies,  reformatories,  and  all
other  Roman  Catholic  institutions.  He  was  re-
appointed in  1885  by  Archbishop  Corrigan,  and  to
his  other  charges  was  added  that  of  the  financial
matters  connected  with  the  completion  of  the  new
cathedral.  His  health  at  lengtn  gave  way  under
the  pressure  of  his  duties,  and  he  went  to  Europe
in  June,  1886.  Dr.  Quinn  was  for  many  years  one
of  the  most  influential  men  in  the  Roman  Catholic
church  of  the  United  States.  Under  Cardinal
McCloskey  his  power  was  almost  absolute  in  the
archdiocese  of  New  York.  He  was  abrupt  in  ad-
dress, and  sometimes  gave  offence  by  his  uncere-
monious manners.  His  care  for  the  needy  was
well  known,  and,  although  millions  passed  through
his  hands,  he  died  poor.  His  remains  were  brought
from  Paris  to  New  York  and  interred  in  Calvary
cemetery.  Dr.  Quinn  was  a  domestic  prelate  of
the  papal  throne.

QUINT,  Alonzo  Hall,  clergyman,  b.  in  Barn-
stead,  N.  H.,  22  March,  1828.  lie  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1846,  and  at  Andover  theological
seminary  in  1852,  was  pastor  of  the  Mather  church
in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  from  1853  till  1863 ;  was  secre-
tary of  the  Massachusetts  general  association  of
Congregational  churches  from  1856  till  1881,  and
of  the  national  council  of  Congregational  churches
of  the  United  States  from  1871  till  1883.  In  1861-'4
he  was  chaplain  of  the  2d  Massachusetts  infantry.
He  served  in  the  legislature  in  1881-'3.  Dartmouth
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1866.  Dr.  Quint  is
a  member  of  many  historical  and  genealogical  socie-
ties, and  served  on  the  Massachusetts  board  of  edu-
cation from  1855  till  1861.  He  was,  from  1859  till
1876,  an  editor  and  a  proprietor  of  the  "  Congrega-
tional Quarterly,"  contributed  numerous  articles  to
the  Dover  "  Inquirer,"  and  is  the  author  of  "The
Potomac  and  the  Rapidan,  or  Army  Notes  from
the  Failure  at  Winchester  to  the  Re-enforcement
of  Rosecrans"  (Boston,  1864)  and  "  The  Records  of
the  Second  Massachusetts  Infantry,  1861-'5  "  (1867)
and  the  *'  First  Parish  in  Dover,  N.  H."  (1883).

QUINTANA,  Agustin  (kin-tah'-nah),  Mexican
missionary,  b.  in  Oaxaca  about  1660 ;  d.  there  in
1734.  He  entered  the  order  of  preachers  in  his  na-
tive city  in  1688,  and  was  soon  sent  to  the  missions
of  the  Mije  Indians.  After  twenty-eight  years  of
labor  he  was  appointed  superior  of  the  convent  of
Zaacvila,  but  he  retired  later,  on  account  of  failing
health,  to  the  main  convent  of  Oaxaca.  where  he
wrote  several  books  in  the  Mije  language.  As  they
were  the  first  that  had  been  printed,  he  made  sev-
eral visits  to  Puebla,  notwithstanding  his  sickness,
to  teach  the  printers  how  to  make  new  letters.  His
chief  work  is  "  Institucion  Cristiana,  que  contiene


el  Arte  de  la  Lengua  Mije  y  los  Tratados  de  la  San-
tisima  Trinidad,  de  la  Creacion  del  Mundo,  y  la
Redencion  nor  Jesucristo"  (Puebla,  1729).

QUINTANA  ROO,  Andres,  Mexican  statesman,
b.  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  30  Nov.,  1787;  d.  in  Mexi-
co, 15  April,  1851.  He  studied  in  the  Seminary
of  San  Ildefonso  in  his  native  city,  was  graduated
in  law,  in  1808  went  to  Mexico  to  practise  his  pro-
fession, and  soon  attained  to  reputation.  "When
Hidalgo  rose  against  the  Spanish  dominion,  Quin-
tana  took  an  active  part  in  the  cause  of  independ-
ence, and  was  forced  to  fly  from  the  capital,  but  in
different  localities  he  published  a  patriotic  paper,
"  Ilustrador  Americano,"  and  circulated  it,  not-
withstanding the  vigilance  of  the  Spanish  authori-
ties. After  the  cajiture  of  Zitacuaro  bv  the  in-
surgents, he  joined  the  governing  junta  t)iere,  and
by  their  order  published,  on  16  Sept.,  1812,  a  mani-
festo under  the  name  of  "  Aniversario,"  which  ex-
plained the  principles  of  independence  and  related
the  events  of  the  past  two  years.  When  the  first
Mexican  congress  as-
sembled at  Chilpan-
cingo,  14  Sept.,  1813,
Quintana  was  elected
vice-president,  and
as  such  signed,  in  the
absence  of  President
Murguia,  the  first
formal  declaration  of
the  independence  of
Mexico,  16  Nov.,
1813.  He  followed
the  congress  from
place  to  place,  and
after  the  capture  of
Morelos,  when  that
body  was  dissolved,
he  suffered  from  the
persecution  of  the
Spanish  authorities.
Afterward  Iturbide  appointed  Quintana  judge  of
the  supreme  court,  and,  when  the  empire  was  over-
thrown, the  latter  established  in  1823  the  journal
"  El  Federalista  Mexicano,"  which  soon  became  a
leader  of  public  opinion.  He  was  several  times
deputy  to  congress  and  senator,  won  reputation  as
an  orator,  and  in  1838  was  appointed  minister  of
the  interior.  He  was  one  of  the  first  to  offer  a
voluntary  contribution  to  aid  the  government  in
repelling  the  French  invasion.  Besides  his  jour-
nalistic labors  and  political  pamphlets,  Quintana
wrote  many  patriotic  odes  and  a  translation. in
verse  of  the  Psalms,  but  his  poetical  compositions
have  only  been  published  in  magazines.

QUINTARD,  Charles  Todd,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Stamford,  Conn.,  22  Dec,  1824.  His  father,
Isaac,  a  Huguenot,  was  born  in  the  same  house,
and  died  there  in  the  ninetieth  year  of  his  age.
The  son  was  a  pupil  of  Trinity  school.  New  York,
studied  medicine  with  Dr.  James  R.  Wood  and  Dr.
Valentine  Mott,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1847.  He  after-
ward removed  to  Georgia,  and  began  the  practice
of  medicine  in  Athens.  In  1851  he  accepted  the
chair  of  physiology  and  pathological  anatomy  in
the  medical  college  at  Memphis,  Tenn.,  and  be-
came co-editor  with  Dr.  Ayres  P.  Merrill,  of  the
Memphis  "  Medical  Recorder."  In  1855  he  took  or-
ders as  a  deacon  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.
He  was  advanced  to  the  priesthood  m  the  following
year,  and  in  January,  1857,  became  rector  of  Cal-
vary church,  Memphis.  He  resigned  at  the  end
of  the  year  to  accejit  the  rectorship  of  the  Church
of  the  Advent,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  at  the  request  of


%naA/2cp


QUIROGA


QUIROOA


155


^^^^t^ (^  PUULGU^


the  bishop.  At  the  Wj^imiinj;  of  the  civil  war  he
was  apjKiintctl  chaplain  of  the  1st  Tennessee  regi-
ment, ami  he  s*)  continual  during  the  war.  in  ad-
dition to  his  duties  being  frequently  called  u|Min

to  act  as  physi-
cian and  surgeon.
Attheclos«'of  the
war  he  returned
to  his  parish  at
Nasiiville.  After
the  death  of  Bish-
op  Otey,  Dr. Quin-
tan! was  elected
bishop  of  Tennes-
see ou  7  Sept.,
18G5.  and  was  con-
secrated in  St.
Luke's  church,
Philadelphia,  on
1 1  Oct.  following.
He  re-establishe<l
the  University  of
the  south  at  Se-
wanee,  Tenn.,  and
was  its  first  vice-chancellor.  Fie  visited  England
several  times  in  the  interest  of  the  university,  and
receivetl  large  sums  of  money  and  gifts  of  books
from  memlK'rs  of  the  established  church  in  that
country.  He  has  labored  assiduously  in  the  pro-
motion of  schemes  for  Christian  education  in  his
diocese,  including  Columbia  institute,  founded  by
Bishop  Otey,  Fairmount  college,  the  School  of  the
Sisters  of  St.  Mar>''s,  at  Memphis,  St.  James  hall,  at
Bolivar,  and  St.  Luke's  school  at  Cleveland.  Bish-
op Quintard  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Columbia  in  1866,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Cam-
bridge, England,  in  1867.  He  is  the  author  of  oc-
casional charges  and  sermons.

QUIROGA,  Juan  Faciindo  (ke-ro'-gah),  Argen-
tine soldier,  b.  in  San  Juan,  in  the  province  of
Rioja,  Argentine  Republic,  in  1790:  d.  in  Barranca
Yaco,  near  Cordova,  28  Dec,  1835.  His  parents
were  shepherds,  and  sent  him  in  1799  to  sch(X)l  in
San  Juan,  but  he  soon  assaulted  his  teacher  and  fled,
working  as  a  lalwrer  to  gain  a  livelihood.  He  was
sent  in  1806  by  his  father  with  a  cargo  of  merchan-
dise to  Chili ;  but  he  lost  it  at  the  gaming-table,  and
when  on  his  return  he  was  reproachetl  by  his  fa-
ther, the  youth  assaulted  him  and  fled  to  the  pam-
pas, where,  with  a  few  daring  companions,  he  led
the  life  of  a  robber.  In  1818  he  wa.s  captured  and
iniprisfjned  in  San  Luis  by  order  of  the  governor,
Despuis.  In  the  same  prison  there  were  several
Spanish  officers,  and  they  concerted  a  plan  for
escape,  removing  the  shackles  from  the  crimi-
nals to  aid  them,  but  Quiroga  fell  on  his  libera-
tors and  killed  several  of  them.  For  this  ser-
vice he  was  set  at  liberty,  and  the  fame  of  this
exploit  soon  surrounded  him  with  a  numerous
band  of  followers,  with  whom  he  began  a  career
as  a  partisan  chief.  The  province  of  Rioja  ha<l
long  Deen  divided  by  the  feud  of  the  families  of
Ocampo  and  Davila.  and  in  1820  the  government
was  in  the  hands  of  the  former  familv,  which  at-
tracted Quiroga  by  giving  him  the  rank  of  general
in  command  of  the  state  forces;  but  soon  the  lat-
ter, who  was  to  escort  the  remnants  of  a  mutinous
Federal  battalion  out  of  the  state,  made  joint  cause
with  them,  attacked  and  captured  the  capital,  and
would  have  shot  the  governor  but  for  the  interven-
tion of  one  of  his  chief  officers.  He  now  recalled
the  banished  Davila:  but,  as  the  latter  would  not
submit  to  Quiroga's  dictation,  he  was  deposed,  and,
as  he  resisted  with  some  loyal  regiments,  he  was
attacked  and  killed  by  Quiroga,  who  proclaimed


himself  independent  chief  of  the  province.  In
1826  the  president,  Bernardo  Rivadavia  (q.  t'.),
whose  authority  was  im|)otent  against  the  pro-
vincial chieftains,  invited  Quiroga  to  co-operate  in
the  war  against  Brazil,  and  the  latter  defeated  I>a
Madrid  at  Tala,  thus  gaining  supremacy  also  in
the  jirovince  of  Tucuman.  After  the  election  of
Manuel  Dorrego  (q.  v.)  in  1827.  Quirf>ga  sustained
with  enthusiasm  the  Federal  principle,  represented
by  Dorrepo,  as  lejiving  the  provincial  chieftains
only  nonunally  subject  to  the  central  government.
When  Dorrego's  successor,  Juan  Lavalle,  of  the
opposite  party,  sent  Gen.  Jose  M.  Paz  (q.  v.)  against
the  Federal  partisans,  Quiroga  was  defeated  at  Ta-
blada  in  1829  and  at  Oncativa  in  IWW.  He  fled
to  Buenos  Ay  res,  where  he  was  ordered  by  R«)sas,
who  meanwhile  had  assume<l  the  fK)wer,  to  march
against  Paz  and  Madrid,  and  at  the  hea<l  of  2(X)
criminals,  whom  he  had  taken  frfun  the  peniten-
tiary, and  some  troops,  he  defeate<l  Paz  at  Chacon,
and  Madrid  at  Ciudadela  in  18:31,  ravaged  the
country,  and  committed  numerous  crimes.  In
1834  he  returned  to  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  l)e-
^n  to  talk  against  Rosas.  The  latter,  not  dar-
mg  to  attack  him  openly,  tried  to  get  him  out
of  the  capital,  and  commissioned  him  to  arrange
a  quarrel  between  the  governors  of  Santiago  and
Tucuman.  Quiroga  accepted,  and,  setting  out  in
November,  1835,  soon  restoretl  order.  On  his  re-
turn he  was  advised  that  near  Cordova  a  party
of  gaucho  assassins  was  lying  in  wait  for  liim ;
but  he  answered  that  there  was  no  man  in  the
pampas  who  dared  to  kill  him.  and,  continuing
his  ]oumey,  was  murdered  at  Barranca  Yaco  by
Santos  Perez  and  his  party.  See  Domingo  F.  Sar-
miento's  "  Facundo  Quiroga  y  Aldao,  o  Civiliza-
cion  V  Barbaric  en  las  Pampas  Argentinas"  (Bue-
nos Ayres,  1852).

Ol'lROGA,  Vasco  de,  Mexican  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Madrigal.  Old  Castile,  in  1470;  d.  in  Uruaf)am,
14  March,  1565.  He  studied  law  and  theology,  and
was  one  of  the  judges  of  the  chancellor's  court  of
Valladolid.  when  he  was  appointed  by  the  queen
regent  in  1530  one  of  the  judges  of  the  second  au-
diencia,  which,  under  Seliastian  Ramirez  de  Fuen-
leal,  arrived  in  Mexico  in  the  beginning  of  1531.
With  the  proceeds  of  his  office  he  founded  near
the  capital  the  hospital  of  Santa  Fe,  and  by  his
just  measures  soon  gathered  a  population  of  30,000
Indians,  whom  he  converted  to  Christianity,  and
taught  to  lead  a  civilized  life.  For  that  reason,
when  the  newly  conouered  Chichimec  Indians  of
the  province  of  Michoacan  became  rebellious  in
1533,  he  was  sent  there  as  visitor,  and  soon  pacified
the  rebels  by  his  prudent  and  just  measures,  re-
maining with  them  as  their  pastor  and  protector.
The  emperor  nominated  him  first  bishop  of  Micho-
acan, and  he  transferred  the  seat  of  the  bishopric
from  Tzintzuntzan  to  Patzcuaro,  where  he  founded
a  cathedral,  the  Seminary  of  San  Nicolas,  and  an-
other hospital  of  Santa  Pe,  like  the  one  near  Mexi-
co. His  exertions  to  gather  the  Indians  in  several
large  towns,  and  make  each  the  centre  of  an  indus-
try, were  very  successful,  and  he  was  greatly  be-
loved by  his  subjects.  In  1547  he  went  to  Spain
on  business,  and  was  often  called  by  the  emf)eror
and  council  of  the  Indies  to  give  advice  regarding
colonial  questions.  After  his  return  to  Mexico  he
assisted  in  1555  in  the  first  provincial  council,  and
died  on  a  pastoral  visit  in  Uruapam.  His  Uxly
was  buried  m  the  cathedral  of  Patzcuaro.  Ik'sides
several  manuscripts  on  ecclesiastical  affairs,  he
wrote  "  Doctrina  para  los  Indios  Chichimecos,*'  in
the  Chichimec  language  (Mexico,  1568),  and  "Re-
glas  y  Ordenanzas  {)ara  los  Uospitales  de  Santa  FS


156


QUIROS


QUITMAN


de  Mt^xico  y  de  MichoacAn."  to  which  is  appended
a  bio;rruphy  of  the  author  (Mexico.  176(5).

Ql'IROS,  .4(riistin  de(ke'-ros),.Siiaiiish  mission-
ary, b.  in  Aiidiijar  in  15(H);  d.  in  Mexico,  13  Dec,
10'22.  After  starving  as  attorney  of  the  Inquisition
in  Seville,  Cordova,  and  Granmta,  he  went  to  South
America,  and  was  attached  to  the  missions  of  Yu-
catan. He  Ix'canie  afterward  rector  of  the  Jesuit
college  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  in  1611  was
elected  visitor  of  the  missions  of  New  Spain,  which
office  he  held  till  his  death.  His  efforts  were  al-
ways directeil  toward  benefiting  the  country  and
develo[)ing  its  resources,  and  he  also  showed  kind-
ness to  the  Indians,  prohibiting  the  imposition  of
heavy  labor  upon  them  in  the  missions  under  his
jurisdiction,  building  schools,  convents,  and  mon-
asteries, and  endeavoring  to  preserve  the  monu-
ments of  Aztec  civilization.  lie  wrote  commenta-
ries on  different  lx)oksof  the  Bible  (Seville.  l«32-'3),
and  left  in  manuscript  "  llistoria  verdadera  de  la
Conquista  de  Mexico,"  which,  it  is  said,  discloses
important  facts  that  are  not  generally  known.
The  latter  is  in  the  archives  of  Mexico.

QUITMAN,  Frederick  Henry,  clergyman,  b.
in  Wfst[)halia,  7  Aug..  17(50;  d.  in  Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.,
26  June,  1832.  The  small  island  in  the  Rhine  on
which  he  was  born  was  sul)sequently  swept  away
bv  an  extraordinary  freshet.  He  received  his
classical  and  theological  training  at  the  University
of  Halle,  and  after  its  completion  he  spent  two
years  as  private  tutor  in  the  family  of  the  Prince
of  W'aldeck.  In  the  year  1781  he  was  ordained  to
the  ministry  by  the  Lutheran  consistory  of  Amster-
dam, and  was  sent  as  pastor  of  the  Lutheran  con-
fregation  on  the  island  of  Cura(;oa  in  the  West
ndies.  Here  he  remained  until  1795,  when  the
political  disturbances,  caused  by  the  revolution  of
the  negroes  in  the  West  Indies,  influenced  him  to
take  his  family  to  New  York,  with  the  intention
of  returning  to  Holland,  where  a  life-pension
awaited  him.  But  during  his  stay  in  New  York
he  a-icertained  the  distressing  needs  of  the  Lu-
theran church  in  this  country,  and  determined  to
remain.  During  the  same  year,  therefore,  he  ac-
cepted a  call  from  the  united  congregations  at
Schoharie  and  Cobleskill.  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained
about  two  years.  In  1798  he  accepted  a  call  from
four  congregations  near  Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.  In  1815
he  resigned  as  nastor  of  the  hist  two,  and  in  1825
as  nastor  of  all  the  congregations  except  Rhine-
beck, to  which  he  now  devoted  all  his  time.  In
1828  he  was  compelled  to  retire  from  all  public
duties.  In  1814  he  received  from  Harvard  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  He  held  high  offices  in  his  church,
and  from  1816,  the  date  of  the  founding  of  Hart-
wick  seminary,  he  was  at  the  head  of  its  board  of
trustees  as  long  as  the  condition  of  his  health  per-
mitted. He  published  a  "Treatise  on  Magic"
(Albany,  N.  Y.,  1810):  "Evangelical  Catechism"
(Hudson,  N.  Y.,  1814);  and  "Sermons  on  the  Ref-
ormation "  (1817) ;  and  edited  the  "  Hyran-Book  of
the  Ministerium  of  New  York"  (181 7). — His  son,
John  Anthony,  soldier,  b.  in  Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.,
1  Sept.,  1799;  il.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  17  July,  1858,
was  designed  by  his  father  for  the  Lutheran  min-
istry, and,  on  the  completion  of  his  studies  at  Hart-
wick  seminary  in  1816,  was  appointe<l  tutor  in  its
classical  department.  In  1818  he  accepted  a  pro-
fessorship in  Mount  Airy  college,  Germantown,  Pa.
His  inclination  always  had  l)een  for  the  legal  pro-
fession nither  than  the  ministry,  and  during  his
stay  here  he  decided  in  favor  of  the  former.  He
went  to  Ohio  in  1819  at  the  invitation  of  Piatt
Brush,  a  member  of  congress,  in  whose  family  he
became  a  tutor,  and  with  whom  he  studied  law. In


1821  he  settled  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  where  he  soon  be-
came well  known.  He  served  as  a  trustee  of  the
academy  and  of  the  state  university,  was  president
of  an  anti-gambling
society,  an  anti-duel-
ling society,  and  of
numerous  other  asso-
ciations that  were  es-
tablished to  amelio-
rate the  condition  of
his  fellow-men.  In
1825  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature  of
Mississippi,  in  1828-
'34  he  was  chancel-
lor of  the  state,  and
he  afterward  became
president  of  the  state
senate.  In  1832  he
was  a  delegate  to  the
convention  to  frame
a new constitution

for  the  state.  While  a  member  of  the  state  senate
in  1835,  he  was  choscsn  its  president,  and  charged
with  the  functions  of  governor,  that  office  having
become  vacant.  In  1836  he  raised  a  body  of  men  to
aid  the  Texans  against  the  incursions  of  the  Mexi-
cans, and  after  the  capture  of  Santa-Anna  returned
to  his  home  in  Natcnez,  where  he  became  major-
general  of  the  state  militia.  In  1846  he  was  ap-
pointed brigadier-general  in  the  U.  S.  army,  and
ordered  to  report  to  Gen.  Taylor  at  Camargo.  He
distinguished  himself  at  the  battle  of  Monterey  by
his  successful  assault  on  Fort  Tenerice  and  by  his
daring  advance  into  the  heart  of  the  city.  He  led
the  assault  at  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  subse-
quently led  an  expedition  against  Alvarado.  in  con-
junction with  the  naval  forces  under  Com.  Matthew
C.  Perry.  He  was  with  the  advance  under  Gen.
Worth  in  taking  possession  of  the  city  of  Puebla,
for  which  he  was  brevetted  major-general,  and  pre-
sented by  congress  with  a  sword.  He  stormed  the
formidable  works  at  Chapultepec,  carried  the  Belen
gate  by  assault,  and  was  appointed  by  Gen.  Win-
field  Scott  governor  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  ad-
ministered the  affairs  of  the  city  with  moderation
and  success,  and  not  only  elicited  the  commenda-
tion of  his  own  countrj',  but  secured  the  respect  of
the  conquered  people.  On  his  return  he  was  almost
by  acclamation  elected  governor  of  Mississippi.  In
1848  and  in  1856  he  was  named  in  the  National
Democratic  conventions  for  the  vice-presidency,
but  he  was  not  nominated.  Gen.  Quitman  favoped
the  annexation  of  Cuba  to  the  United  States,  and,
while  he  held  the  office  of  governor  of  his  state,  a
prosecution  was  instituted  against  him  by  the  U.  S.
government  for  alleged  complicity  in  Lopez's  fili-
bustering expedition.  He  resigned  the  governor-
ship, but  the  jury  was  unable  to  agree,  and  he  was
released.  He  was  nominated  again  for  governor,
but  withdrew  from  the  canvass.  In  1854  he  was
elected  to  congress,  and  in  1856  he  was  re-elected
without  opposition.  During  his  entire  term  in
congress  he  was  at  the  head  of  the  military  com-
mittee. Throughout  life  he  was  an  avowed  advo-
cate of  the  doctrine  of  state-rights  and  the  leader
of  the  extreme  southern  party.  As  early  as  1851
he  claimed  for  the  states  the  right  of  secession  and
the  inability  of  the  Federal  government  to  demand
or  force  the  return  of  a  seceding  state,  and  sug-
gested the  propriety  of  org^anizing  a  southern  con-
federacy. See  "  Life  and  Correspondence  of  John
A.  Quitman.  Major-General,  U.  S.  A.,  and  Gov-
ernor of  the  State  of  Mississippi,"  by  J.  F.  H.  Clai-
borne (New  York,  1860).  "


RABAUD


RADKMACHER


167


R


RABAl'D,  Charles  Hector  (rah-M,  French  !
ailiniiiiMrator,  >i.  in  I)t«<p|K-  in  1711  ;  il.  in  I'liris  in  j
1704.  liei-ntfrt'd  th«' colonial  mlniinistration,  hold
omj»l«>yniont.s  in  Ciinmla,  Louisitina,  and  the  Ia-o-
wnnl  and  Win<lward  islands,  and  from  ll'M  till  his
dentil  wius  a.ssistant  colonial  intcndant  of  justice
and  iM)licc  in  Stmto  Doniin^fo.  While  ho  was  there
he  collected  the  materials  for  his  "  Hccueil  des  lois,
arrett^s  et  onlonnances  n)yale«,  des  arreUs  des  con-
seils  sujx'rieurs,  et  des  mcKliflcations  introduites  jMir
les  cours  de  justice  en  appliquant  la  coutQme  de
Paris,  |Hnir  les  colonies  des  iles  du  vent  iet  sous  le
Tent " (6  vols.,  Paris,  17«l-5).  This  work  is  invalu-
able to  the  historian  that  .studies  the  colonial  a«l-
ministration  under  Ltmis  XIV'.  and  I»uis  XV'..  as
the  archives  of  the  French  colonies  in  the  West
Indies  were  for  the  most  part  scattered  or  lost  dur-
ing the  colonial  insurrections.

RABOrRI>IN,  Henry  Etienne  (rah-boor-
dan^'),  French  historian;  b.  in  Cambraiin  1711 ;  d.
there  in  17t>4.  It  is  said  that  he  was  the  natural
son  of  a  high  dignitary  of  the  church.  He  entered
clerical  life,  was  appointe<l  abbot  of  a  rich  ablxjy,
and  afterwanl  held  the  office  of  assistant  deputy-
keeper  of  the  logs  and  charts  in  the  navy  department
at  Paris.  His  works  include  "  Relation  des  voyages
et  decouvertes  des  Fran^ais  dans  les  deux  Ame-
riques"(4  vols.,  Paris,  1759);  "  Histoire  de  la  de-
couverte  de  I'Amerique"  (2  vols.,  1761);  and  "Ijcs
precurseurs  de  Christophe  Colomb,"  in  which  the
author  contends  that  Columbus  was  not  the  dis-
coverer of  America  (2  vols.,  1764).

BABrN,  >Villiam,  statesman,  b.  in  Halifax
county,  N.  C,  8  April,  1771 ;  d.  at  Powelton,  Han-
cock CO.,  Ua.,  24  Oct.,  1819,  To  this  place  his
father  ha<l  removed  from  North  Carolina  when  he
was  a  youth.  The  son  was  frequently  elected  to
the  legislature.  In  1817  he  was  president  of  the
state  senate,  and  as  such  became  ejc-oflicio  governor
of  the  state  on  the  resignation  of  Gov.  Mitchell.
In  the  following  year  he  was  elected  to  the  same
post  by  popular  vote,  and  died  in  office.  While  he
was  governor  he  had  a  sharp  correspondence  with
Gen.  Antlrew  Jackson  growing,  out  of  the  Seminole
war,  then  in  progress.  Gov.  Rabun's  devotion  to
the  church  of  which  he  was  a  member  was  not  sur-
passed by  his  fidelity  as  a  civilian.  While  ho  was
governor  he  performed  the  duties  of  chorister  and
clerk  in  the  Baptist  church  at  Powelton.

RACINE,  Antoine,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
ill  St.  Ambrose,  near  Quebec,  26  Jan.,  1822.  His
ancestors  came  to  Canada  in  1638.  One  of  them
was  Abraham  Martin,  who  gave  his  name  to  the
Plains  of  Abraham.  Antoine  received  his  early
education  from  an  uncle,  who  was  pastor  of  a  neigh-
boring parish,  and  in  1834  entered  the  Petit  semi-
naire  of  Queljec.  He  afterward  studied  theology
in  the  Grand  s^'minaire,  and  was  ordained  priest
on  12  Sept.,  1844,  held  various  charges,  t<K)k  much
interest  m  colonization,  and  put  forward  his  views,
with  others,  in  a  journal  tnat  he  founded  and
called  the  "Canadien  Emigrant."  He  was  trans-
ferred to  the  Church  of  St.  John  in  Quebec  in  1853.
On  1  Seiit.,  1874.  he  was  nominated  first  bishop  of
the  newly  create«l  diocese  of  Sherbnioke,  and  he  was
consecrated  by  Archbishop  Tascheri'au  on  18  Oct.
following.  He  took  jwsscssion  of  his  see  two  days
afterward,  and  at  once  proceeded  to  erect  an  ec-
clesiastical college  in  his  epi.sco^ml  city,  which  he
opened  .on  30  Aug..  1875,  and  dedicated  to  St.
Charles  Borrotneo. This  has  become  a  flourishing


institution  under  his  patronage.  Bishop  Racine
has  also  establL>ih(>d  several  other  religious,  charita-
ble, and  educational  institutions.  His  di<H-ese  con-
tains 7  convents,  a  hospital,  an  asylum,  14<)  si-htxdti,
2  collegi's,  62  priests,  and  a  Roman  Catholic  {>opu-
lation  of  nu>re  than  47.(«M).

RADA,  Juan  de  (ruh-dah),  S|mnish  captain,  b.
in  Navarre,  in  the  latter  half  of  the  15th  century;
d.  in  Jauja,  Peru,  in  1542.  In  1534  he  went  to  Peru
with  the  exfiedition  of  Pedro  de  Alvanwlo,  and  af-
terward served  under  the  orders  of  Diego  Almagro.
He  soon  won  the  esteem  of  Almagro,  was  a|)pointed
mediator  in  the  arrangement  with  Francisco  Pi-
zarro  a>>out  the  government  of  the  jirovincoof  New
Tole<lo,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  .Salinas.  After
Almagro's  death,  Rada  tf)ok  charge  of  his  son,  as
tutor,  and  was  the  principal  instigator  of  the  plot
a^inst  the  Marquis  Pizarro,  and  the  leader  of  the
eighteen  men  that  penetrated  into  the  governor's
house  on  26  June,  1541,  and  murdered  him.  Rada
prcK'laimed  the  son  of  Almagn)  governor  of  Peru,
and  ccmcentrated  troops  to  attack  the  tmrtisans  of
Pizarn)  in  ('uzco.  but  died  on  the  march  in  Jauja.

RADCLIFFE,  Thomas,  Canadian  stjldier,  b.  in
Castle  Coote,  County  Roscommon,  Ireland,  17  April,
1794;  d.  on  Amherst  island,  Ontario,  6  June,  1841.
He  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  Rev.  Thomas  Rad-
cliffe,  rector  of  St.  Paul's  Episcopal  church,  Dulv
lin,  was  educated  at  Trinity  college  in  that  city,
and  entered  the  army  in  181 1.  He  served  as  a  lieu-
tenant of  the  27th  regiment  in  the  i)eninsular  war,
and  saw  service  in  the  war  with  the  United  States,
being  present  at  the  battle  of  Platt.sburg.  He  was
with  tne  army  of  occupation  in  France,  and  on
its  reduction  in  1816  was  placed  on  the  half-{)ay
list.  In  1832  he  came  to  Upper  Canada  and  set-
tled in  Adelaide,  London  district.  He  served  dur-
ing the  rebellion  of  1887,  and  commanded  the  troops
that  captured  the  .«chooner  "Anne,"  which  formed
part  of  the  exj>edition  against  Amherstburg.  At
the  beginning  of  the  trouble  he  raised  a  body  of
militia,  to  the  command  of  which  he  was  appointed
by  Sir  .John  Colbome.  After  the  suppression  of  the
rel)ellion,  Col.  RadclifFe  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lative council,  in  which  he  sat  till  his  death.

RADDl,  Giuseppe  (rad-dee),  Italian  Ixitanist,  b.
in  Florence,  Italy,  9  July,  1770;  d.  on  the  island  of
Rhodes,'  6  Sept.,  1829.  '  He  was  apprenticed  to  a
druggist,  but  obtainetl  employment  in  the  Museum
of  natural  history  of  Florence.  The  grand  duke,
Ferdinand  III.,  afterward  became  his  protector,
and  in  1817  sent  him  to  Brazil  to  study  the  crypto-
gams of  the  country.  Ra<ldi  explored  the  btisins
of  Orinoco  and  Amazon  rivers,  and  formed  a  col-
lection of  plants  and  animals.  In  1828  he  was
appointed  a  meml)er  of  the  commission  that  was
charged  with  studying  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphs
under  the  direction  of  ChamiKillion.  but  he  was
taken  sick  and  died  in  Rhodes  on  his  return  to  Flor-
ence. His  works  include  "  Crittogame  Brasiliane  "
(2  vols.,  Florence,  1822) :  and  "  Plantarum  Brasilien-
sium  nova  genera  et  species  nova>  vel  minus  cogni-
tir,"  in  which  he  descrilKnl  156  new  species  of  ferns,
etc.  (1825).  licandro  de  Sacramento  (q,  r.)  gave  the
name  of  Raddia  Raddicn  to  a  cryptogamous  plant,
and  Candolle  has  n-tained  the  name  in  his  classifi-
cation of  the  American  flora.

RADEMACHER.  Joseph  (rah-de-inah  -kerX
R.  C.  bislx.p.  b.  in  Westphalia.  Mich.,  3  Dec..  184a
He  finished  his  theological  course  in  St.  Micliael's
seminary,  Pittsburg,  was  ordained  priest  on  2  Aug..


158


RADFORD


RAE


1863,  and  stationed  at  Attica,  Ind.,  at  the  same
time  attendini;  several  other  missions.  In  18G9  lie
was  transferred  to  the  |)a.storate  of  the  Church  of
St.  I'uul  of  the  Cross,  Columbia  City,  and  in  1877
was  appointed  pastor  of  the  Church  of  St.  Mary,
Fort  Wayne,  and  shortly  afterward  chancellor  of
the  diocese.  His  next  post  was  that  of  pastor  of
St.  Mary's  church,  Ijafayette.  His  zeal  and  ability
in  these  several  places  recommended  him  for  pro-
motion. He  wjus  nominated  to  the  see  of  Nashville
on  21  April,  1883,  and  const^crated  bishot)  on  24
June  following  by  Archbishop  Feelmn.  of  Chicago.
Since  that  time  he  has  worked  earnestly  and  suc-
cessfully for  the  advancement  of  his  diocese,  which,
at  present  (1888)  contains  28  priests,  5  ecclesiastical
students,  36  churches,  2  orphan  asylums,  15  female
religious  institutions,  15  parochial  schools,  5  acade-
mies, and  a  college.

RADFORD,  WnUam,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Fin-
castle,  Va..  1  March.  1808;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
8  Jan.,  1890.  He  became  midshipman  on  1  >Iarch,
1825,  and  lieutenant  on  9  Feb.,  1837.  During  the  war
with  Mexico  he  served  on  the  western  coast  of  that
country,  and  commanded  the  party  that  cut  out  the
"  ^laleic  Adel,"  a  Mexican  vessel-of-war,  at  Mazat-
lan  in  1847.  He  was  made  commander  on  14  Sept.,
1855,  assigned  to  the  "  Cumberland  "  in  1861,  and
became  captain  on  16  July,  1862,  and  commodore
on  24  April,  1863.  He  served  on  court-martial
duty  at  Fort  Monroe,  and  commanded  the  "  New
Ironsides "  and  the  iron-clad  division  of  Admiral
Porter's  squadron  at  the  two  attacks  on  Fort
Fisher  in  December,  1864,  and  January,  1865.
Admiral  Porter  wrote:  "Com.  Kadford  has  shown
al)ility  of  a  very  high  order,  not  only  in  fighting
and  manoeuvring  his  vessel,  but  in  taking  care  of
his  division.  His  vessel  did  more  execution  than
any  other  in  the  fleet,  and  I  had  so  much  confi-
dence in  the  accuracy  of  his  fire  that  even  when
our  troops  were  on  the  parapet  he  was  directed  to
clear  the  traverses  of  the  enemy  in  advance  of
them.  This  he  did  most  effectually,  and  but  for
this  the  victory  might  not  have  been  ours."  He
was  appointed  rear-admiral  on  25  July,  1866,  com-
manded the  European  squadron  in  i869-'70,  and
was  retired  on  1  March,  1870.

RADIGL'ET,  MaximUien  Ren6  (rah-de-gay),
French  explorer,  b.  in  Landerneau,  Finisterre,  17
Feb.,  1816.  After  studying  in  the  School  of  the  fine
arts  at  Paris,  he  became  iji  1838  secretary  to  Ad-
miral Charles  Baudin  and  Count  de  Las  Casas,  who
had  lieen  sent  to  negotiate  with  the  government  of
Hayti  for  the  payment  of  an  indemnity  to  the  de-
scendants of  the  French  citizens  that  had  been
murdered  during  the  troubles  of  1798-1803.  He
was  influeiitial  m  bringing  the  negotiations  to  a
speedy  conclusion,  preventing  the  impatient  ad-
miral several  times  from  bombarding  Cape  Hay-
tien.  From  1841  till  1845  he  was  in  South  America
and  the  Marquesas  islands,  as  secretary  to  Admiral
Du  Petit-Thouars,  and  he  has  since  devoted  himself
to  literary  labors.  Among  other  works,  he  has  pub-
lished "Souvenirs de  I'Amerique  Espagnole:  Chili,
Perou,  Bresil "  (Paris,  1856 ;  revised  ed.,  1874).

RAE,  John,  explorer,  b.  in  Clestrain  House,  in
the  Orkney  islands,  30  Sept.,  1813.  Sir  Walter
Scott  visited  Clestrain,  when  travelling  in  the  Ork-
ney islands.  t«  gain  local  information  for  writing
"t'he  Pirate."  Mr.  Rae  studied  medicine  at  the
University  of  Edinburgh  from  1829  till  1883,  when
he  was  graduated,  entered  the  service  of  the  Hud-
son bay  company  as  surgeon,  and  lived  at  Moose
fort  from  18Ji5  till  1845,  making  many  explora-
tions in  British  America.  In  1846-'7  he  visited
the  Arctic  sea,  and  spent  the  winter  in  a  stone


^^/^/id^tJycck.


CUL


house  at  Repulse  bay  without  fuel,  during  which
time  he  traced  aljout  635  statute  miles  of  new
land  and  coast  forming  the  shores  of  Connnittee
bay.  In  1848  he  accompanied  Sir  John  Richard-
son in  a  search  for  Sir  John  Franklin  along  the
coast  from  Mackenzie
river  to  Coppermine
river,  and  in  1850  was
I)laced  in  charge  of  a
similar  expedition  by
the  Hudson  bay  com-
pany. He  chose  the
route  by  Great  Bear
lake  an(i  Coppermine
river,  tracing  630  miles
of  unexplored  coast
along  the  southern
shores  of  Victoria  and
WoUaston  lands,  and
finding  two  pieces  of
wood  that  were  prob-
ably parts  of  Sir  John
Franklin's  vessels.
The  Jlsquiraaux  gave
him  scant  information  regarding  the  party  they
had  seen  a  few  years  liefore,  and  Dr.  Rae  explains
in  a  pamphlet,'  published  in  London,  that  the
reason  he  did  not  immediately  search  for  his  sup-
posed countrymen  wa«  owing  to  his  imperfect
Knowledge  of  their  route,  and  to  the  condition  of
the  lowlands  flooded  by  melting  snow,  which  ren-
dered progress  impossible.  In  1853  the  Hudson
bay  company  fitted  out  a  boat  expedition  at  his  re-
quest to  complete  the  survey  of  the  Arctic  coast
along  the  west  shore  of  Boothia,  and  during  this
expedition  to  Repulse  bay  in  1853-'4  he  discovered
a  new  river,  whicn  falls  into  Chesterfield  inlet.  In
the  following  spring,  after  travelling  1,100  miles,
he  was  the  first  discoverer  of  certain  traces  of  Sir
John  Franklin's  partjr,  for  which  he  was  paid
£10,000  by  the  English  government.  He  pur-
chased from  the  Esquimaux  numerous  relics,
among  which  were  Sir  John  Franklin's  cross  of
knighthood,  a  gold  cap-band,  silver  spoons  and
forks,  coin,  and  several  watches.  In  1860  he  took
charge  of  a  survey  for  laying  a  cable  between  Eng-
land and  America,  via  Ffiroe,  Iceland,  and  Green-
land, and  in  1864  he  conducted  a  telegraph  survey
from  Winnipeg  to  the  Pacific  coast,  through  the
British  territory,  and  crossing  the  Rocky  moun-
tains about  latitude  53°.  This  line  was  not  formed,
as  the  Canada  Pacific  railway  was  laid  in  a  more
southern  course,  and  the  telegraph  followed  tlie
railway.  In  1852  he  received  the  founder's  gold
medal  of  the  Royal  geographical  society  of  Lon-
don. He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the
University  of  Edinburgh,  and  that  of  M.  D.  from
McGill  college,  Montreal,  in  1880,  and  was  also  a
member  of  the  Natural  history  society  of  that  city
and  of  several  distinguished  societies.  Dr.  Rae
was  the  author  of  a  "  Narrative  of  an  Expedition
to  the  Shores  of  the  Arctic  Sea  in  1846  and  1847"
(London,  1850).  See  "Dr.  Rae  and  the  Report  of
Cant.  McClintock  "  (New  York,  1860).

RAE,  Lnzerne,  educator,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  22  Dec,  1811;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  16
Sept.,  1854.  He  changed  the  spelling  of  his  name
from  Ray  to  Rae.  After  gracluation  at  Yale  in
1831  he  became  instructor  of  the  deaf  and  dumb
in  the  Hartford  asylum,  which  office  he  held  until
his  death,  except  in  1838-'9,  when  he  served  as
chaplain  of  the  Insane  hospital  in  Worcester,  Mass.
He  was  editor  of  the  "Religious  Herald''  from
184^^  till  1847.  and  of  the  "  American  Annals  of  the
Deaf  and  Dumb"  from  1848  till  1854,  and  pub-


IIAFV


RAPN


159


h


HsIumI  nnonymously  numprous  iK>c»m!<.  which  were
collci-twl  HJul  priiiUHl  privHtely  uikUt  thi*  title  of
"Tfxt  Hiul  I'dntoxt"  (Hartford,  \tHVi).  He  alwj
ptthcriHl  iimteriHl  for  a  "  History  of  New  Kngland,"
which  was  not  comph'tiHl.

RAFF,  (tporge  Wertz,  author,  b.  in  Tuacara-
wa-s  Stark  fo.,  Ohio,  24  Man-h,  182.*);  «1.  in  Can-
ton, Ohio,  14  April.  \»HH.  He  was  chiefly  s<'lf.
edueatetl.  From  1848  till  IHoO  he  was  clerk  of  the
supreme  court.  Stark  county,  and  he  was  judjje  of
the  probate  court  in  ISSS-T).  and  was  a  inenjU-r  of
the  city  council  and  board  of  e«lucation  in  Canton,
Ohio.  He  foundetl,  in  1887,  the  Central  savings-
bank  of  Canton,  of  which  he  was  presi<lent  until
his  death.  His  publications  are  "Guide  to  Ex-
ecutors and  Administratt)rs  in  Ohio"  (Cleveland.
1850):  "Manual  of  Pensions.  Hounty  and  Pay"
(Cincinnati,  18<{2) ;  "The  l^aw  relating  to  lioads
and  Highways  in  Ohio"  (1863);  and  the  "War
Claimant's  Guide"  (18(;«).

RAFFENEAl'-UELILE,  Alyre  (raf-no-deh-
leel).  French  physician,  b.  in  Versailles,  23  Jan.,
1778;  d.  in  Montpellier,  5  Julv,  18.'i0.  He  engaged
in  the  study  of  ntants  under  Jean  Lemonnier,  was
in  the  Paris  meuical  schix)!  in  1796,  and.  being  at-
tached in  1798-1801  to  the  scientific  exiKnlition  that
was  sent  to  Egypt.  I)ccame  manager  of  the  agricul-
tural garden  at  Cairo.  In  18(^2  he  was  appointed
French  vice-consul  at  Wilmington.  N.  C,  and  also
asked  to  form  an  herbarium  of  all  American  plants
that  could  l)e  naturalized  in  France.  He  sent  to
Paris  several  cases  of  seeds  and  grains,  and  discov-
ered some  new  graminea  and  presented  them  to
Palissot  de  Beauvois  (q.  v.),  who  descril)ed  them  in
his  "  Agrostographie."  Raffeneau  made  extensive
explorations  through  the  neighlK)ring  states,  and,
resigning  in  18()5,  began  the  study  of  medicine  in
New  York.  During  an  epidemic  of  scarlet  fever  he
was  active  in  visiting  the  tenements  of  the  poor,
and  in  1807  he  obtained  the  degree  of  M.  D.  Re-
turning to  France,  he  was  gratluatetl  as  doctor  in
medicine  at  the  University  of  Paris  in  1809,  and
in  1819  appointed  professor  of  botany  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Monti)ellier.  which  post  he  held  till  his
death.  His  works  include,  besides  those  already
citetl,  "  Sur  les  efifets  d'un  poison  de  Java  appele
I'upas  tieute.  et  sur  les  diflferentes  especes  de
strychnos  "  (Paris,  1809) :  "  Memoire  sur  quelques
especes  de  graroinees  propres  k  la  Caroline  du
Nord  "  (Versailles.  1815) :  "  Centurie  des  plantes  de
TAm^rique  du  Nord "  (Montpellier,  1820);  "Flore
d'Egypte "  (5  vols.,  Paris,  1824) ;  "  Centurie  des
plantes  d'Afrique  "  (Paris.  1827);  and  "  De  la  cul-
ture de  la  patate  douce,  du  cranilK»  maritima  et  de
ToxhIIs  creiiata  "  (Montju-llier,  183(5).

KAFINESQUE,  Constatitine  Saninel,  boU-
nist,  b.  in  Galatz,  a  suburb  of  Constantinople,
Turkey,  in  1784;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  18  Sept.,
1842.  He  was  of  French  parentage,  and  his  father,
u  merchant,  died  in  Philadel{)hia  alniut  1791.  The
son  came  to  Philadelphia  with  his  brother  in  1802,
and,  after  travelling  through  Pennsylvania  and
Delaware,  returned  with  a  collection  of  botanical
8{»ecimens  in  1805,  and  went  to  Sicily,  where  he
sijent  ten  years  as  a  merchant  and  in  the  study  of
lK)tany.  In  1815  he  sailed  for  New  York,  but  was
shipw'reckeil  on  the  Long  Island  coast.-  and  lost
his  valuable  books,  collections,  manuscripts,  and
drawings.  In  1818  he  went  to  the  west  and  lie-
came  professor  of  botany  in  Transylvania  uni-
versity, Ix'xington,  Ky.  Subsequently  he  travelleil
and  lectured  in  various  places,  endeavoretl  to  es-
tablish a  magazine  and  a  botanic  garden,  but  with-
out success,  and  finally  settle<l  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  resided  until  his  deatli,  and  where  he


Kublishefl  "The  Atlantic  Journal  and  Friend  of
!nowle«Ige,  a  Cyclopnxlic  Journal  anil  Review."  of
which  only  eight  numliers  apiiearcil  (18Ii3-*3).  The
numlter  of  genera  an<l  s|»e<.'ies  that  he  intro<luced
into  his  works  pnxluccil  great  confusion.  A
gradual  deterioration  is  found  in  RafincMpie's  bo-
tanical writings  from  1819  till  1830.  when  the  i>as-
sion  for  establishing  new  genera  antl  sin^-ies  seems
to  have  Ix'come  a  mononwinia  with  him.  He  a.s-
sumed  thirty  to  one  hutidri>d  years  as  the  average
time  required  for  the  prcKluctlfin  <»f  a  new  siK-t-ies,
an<l  five  hundred  to  a  thousand  years  for  a  new
genus.  It  is  said  that  he  wrote  a  paper  describing
"  twelve  new  species  of  thunder  and  lightning.
In  addition  to  translations  and  unfinished  liotani-
a»l  and  zo<)logical  works,  he  was  the  author  of
numerous  I»ooks  and  j)amphlets,  including  "Ca-
ratteri  di  alcuni  nuovi  generi  e  nuove  sjiecie  di
animali  e  piantc  della  Sicilia"  (Palermo.  1810);
"  Precis  de  ddcouvertes  et  travaux  somiologiques
entre  1800  et  1814"  (1814);  "  Princijies  fonda-
mentaux  de  somiologie"  (1814);  "Analyse  de  la
nature"  (Palermo,  1815);  "  Antikon  liotanikon  "
(Philadelphia,  1815-'40);  "  Ichthvologia  Ohioensis"
(Lexington,  1820);  "Ancient  History,  or  Annals
of  Kentucky  "  (Frankfort,  1824) ;  "  Me<lical  Flora,
etc..  of  the  'L''nite<l  States"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia.
1828-'30) ;  "  American  Manual  of  the  Grajie-Vines  "
(1830);  "American  Florist"  (18:^2);  "The  Amer-
ican Nations,  or  the  Outlines  of  a  National  History  "
(2  vols..  1836) ;  "  A  Life  of  Travels  and  ReseJirches
in  North  America  and  South  Europe "  (ISJlG) ;
"  New  Flora  and  Botanv  of  America  "  (4  jwrts,
1836) ;  "  Flora  Tellurianii "  (4  parts.  18:J6-'8) ; "  The
World,"  a  poem  (1830);  "Safe  Banking"  (18:^7);
notes  to  Thomas  Wright's  "  Original  Theory,  or  New
Hypothesis  of  the  Universe  "  (1837) ;  "  Sylvia  Tellu-
riana"  (1838);  " A Isographia  Americana"  (1838);
"The  American  Monuments  of  North  and  South
America  "  (1838) ;  "  Genius  and  Spirit  of  the  He-
brew Bible "(1838);  "Celestial  Wonders  and  Phi-
losophy of  the  Visible  Heavens"  (1839) ;  "  Pleasure
and  I)iities  of  Wealth  "  (1840) ;  and  a  "  Dissertation
on  Water-Snakes,"  published  in  the  London  "  Lit-
erary Gazette  "  (1819).  "  The  Complete  Writings  of
C.  S.  Raflnesque  on  Recent  and  Fossil  Conchology  "
have  been  edited  by  William  G.  Binney  and  George
W.  Tryon,  Jr.  (Philadelphia,  1864).  See  a  review
of  the  "  Botanical  Writings  of  Rafinesque,"  by
Asa  Gray,  in  "Silliman's  Journal  "  (1841).

RAFN,  or  RAVN,  Karl  Christian  (rown),  Dan-
ish archa>ologist,  b.  in  Brahesborg,  Funen  island,
16  Jan.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Copenhagen.  24  Oct.,  1864.  His
father,  a  man  of  education  and  refinement,  culti-
vated a  farm  on  his  ancestral  estate,  and  sent  his
son  to  Odeijse.  and  in  1814  to  the  University  of
Copenhagen,  where  he  was  graduatetl  in  jurispni-
dence  and  then  served  as  lieutenant  in  the  light
dragoons  at  Funen,  devoting  his  leisure  to  the
study  of  Norse  literature,  and  engaging  in  re-
searches on  the  ancient  history  and  literature  of
the  Scandinavian  countries.  He  taught  I^atin
in  the  Military  school  in  1820,  became  in  1821
deputy  librarian  of  the  Royal  library  of  Copen-
hagen", and  was  one  of  the  founders  in  1825  of  the
Society  for  northern  antiquities,  having  for  its
object  the  collection  and  publication  of  ancient
manuscripts  throwing  light  on  the  history  of  the
Scandinavian  peoples,  of  which  he  was  the  secre-
tary till  his  death.  While  assistant  in  the  library
of  the  university,  he  undertook  a  critical  revision
of  all  the  inedited  Norwegian  and  Icelandic  inanu-
scrit)ts  in  the  collection.  He  studietl  esiiei-ially  the
ancient  Sagas  and  the  expeilitions  of  tne  Iceland-
ers to  North  America. Gov.  Arnold's  "  Old  Mill "


160


RAGOZIN


RAINEY


at  Newjwrt,  which  is  represented  in  the  illustra-
tion, he  considered  a  relic  of  one  of  their  colonies.
Many  honors  were  iK'stowed  upon  him.  In  1828  he
was  iniwle  u  knight  of  the  order  of  Danebrog  and
also  lield  the  title  of  Etatsraad.  or  state  council-
lor. Of  his  works,  which  number  a>x)ut  70  vol-
umesi,  the  best  known  is  *'  Antiquitates  Americana^ "

(1837),  which  has
been  transhitetl  in-
to various  lan-
euaees.  In  this  he
"*'  " '  , V holds  that  Amer-

ica was  discovered
by  Norsemen  in
the  10th  century,
and  that  from  the
nth  to  the  14th
century  the  North
American  coast
had  been  partially
colonized  as  far  as
Massachusetts  and
Rhode  Island,  and
that  the  Vikings
had  been  as  far
south  as  Florida.
He  gives  an  ac-
count of  the  discovery  of  the  "  Skalholt  Saga,"  a
Latin  manuscript  dated  1117,  found  in  the  ruins  of
Skalholt  college,  which  describes  a  voyage  along
the  cojist  of  North  America  southward  from  Vin-
land  (Massachusetts)  to  a  point  where  the  explorers
repaired  their  ships  and  tnen  sailed  northward  un-
til stopped  by  numerous  falls,  which  they  named
Ilvidsaerk,  and  there  buried  the  daughter  of  Snorri,
who  was  killed  by  an  arrow.  The  locality  was  sup-
posed to  be  the  Chesapeake  bay,  and  the  falls  those
of  the  Potomac  river.  His  works  include  "  Nord-
ische  Helden-Geschichten"  (3  vols.,  Coi)enhagen.
182.>-'30);  "Krakumal,  sen  Epicedion  Rognaris
Lodbroci.  regis  DaniiP  "  (182G) ;  "  Fornaldar  Sagner
Nordlanda "  (3  vols.,  1829-30) ;  "  Fareginga  Sagu  "
(1832);  " Antiouitates  Americana;"  (1837);  and
"  Groenlands  Historiske  Mindesmaerker,"  in  con-
junction with  Frim  and  Magnussen  (1838-'45).

RACiOZIN,  Z^na'lde  Alexeievna,  author,  b.  in
Russia  about  1835.  She  had  no  regular  education,
but  studied  by  herself,  and  travelled  extensively  in
Europe,  especially  in  Italy.  In  1874  she  came  to
the  Lnited  States,  where  she  has  been  naturalized.
She  has  written  numerous  articles  for  Russian  and
American  magazines,  and  is  a  member  of  the
American  oriental  society,  of  the  Soci»'te  ethnolo-
gique.  and  the  Athenee  oriental,  of  Paris,  and
the  Victoria  institute,  London.  Her  most  impor-
tant writings  are  the  volumes  "  The  Story  of  Cnal-
dea  "  (New  York,  1886) ;  "  The  Story  of  Assyria  "
(1887);  and  "The  Story  of  Media,  Babvlon,  and
Persia  "  (1888)— all  in  the  "  Story  of  the  'Nations  "
series.  They  form  the  first  three  volumes  of  a  work
on  the  ancient  history  of  the  East,  more  especially
in  its  political  and  religious  aspects,  which  will  be
complete  in  seven  or  eight  volumes,  and  on  which
she  IS  now  (1888)  engaged.

RAGUENEAU,  Paul  (rahg-no),  missionary,  b.
in  Paris,  France,  in  1605;  d.  there,  3  Sept.,  1680.
He  was  a  Jesuit,  and  was  sent  to  Canada  in
June,  1636.  After  his  arrival  he  went  to  labor
among  the  Hurons,  by  whom  he  was  called  "  Aon-
dechete."  In  1(J40  he  was  sent  by  the  French
governor  to  treat  with  the  Iroquois  for  the  restora-
tion of  some  French  prisoners  that  they  held ;  but,
though  he  was  well  received,  he  did  not  succeed  in
his  mission.  He  was  superior  of  the  missions  in
1650,  and  in  that  capacity  decided  to  bring  such


of  the  Hurons  as  had  escaped  the  fury  of  the
Irocjuois  to  Quebec  for  safety.  In  \(i57  he  .set  out
with  another  Jesuit  and  some  French  colonists  for
Onondaga,  where  large  numl>ers  had  Ijeen  convert-
ed. He  was  coldly  treated,  and,  on  his  reproach-
ing the  Onondagas  for  murdering  some  Hurons
among  them,  a  plot  was  formed  to  take  his  life
and  those  of  his  companions.  He  escat)ed  to  the
mission  of  St.  Mary's,  but  found  that  the  Indians
there  had  also  become  hostile,  and  succeeded,  after
much  difficulty,  in  reaching  Quebec.  He  con-
tinued among  the  Hurons  up  to  September,  1(J66,
when  he  returned  to  France,  and  acted  as  agent
for  the  Canadian  missions  during  the  remainder  of
his  life.  His  works  are  "  Vie  dela  Mere  St.  Augus-
tine, religieuse  hospitaliere  de  Quebec  en  la  Nou-
velle  France "  (Paris,  1672 ;  Italian  translation,
Naples,  1752);  "lielation  de  ce  oui  s'est  pjisso  de
plus  remarguable  es  missions  des  reres  de  la  Com-
pagnie  en  la  Nouvelle  France,"  covering  the  years
1645-'52  and  1656-'7  (7  vols.,  Paris,  1647-57).  The
second  volume  was  translated  into  Latin  under  the
title  '*  Narratio  historica  "(1650).  The  fourth  con-
tains "  Journal  du  Pere  Jacoues  Buteux,  du  voyage
qu'il  a  fait  pour  la  mission  aes  AUithamegues,"  and
letters  from  other  Canadian  missionaries.  Rague-
neau  also  wrote  "  Memoires  touchant  les  vertus
des  Peres  de  None,  Jogues,  Daniel,  Brebeuf,  Lalle-
mant.  Gamier  et  Chabanel."

RAGUET,  Condy,  merchant,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  28  Jan.,  1784;  d.  there,  22  March,  1842.
He  was  of  French  descent,  received  his  educa-
tion at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  entered
the  counting-house  of  a  merchant,  and  was  sent
as  supercargo  to  Santo  Domingo  in  1804,  where
he  spent  four  months.  On  his  return  he  pub-
lished "A  Short  Account  of  the  Present  State
of  Affairs  in  St.  Domingo."  After  a  second  voy-
age to  that  island  in  1805.  he  published  "  A  Cir-
cumstantial Account  of  the  Massacre  in  St.  Do-
mingo." In  1806  he  entered  business  in  Phila-
delphia, and  was  successful.  t)uring  the  war  of
1812  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  defence  of  the
city,  encamping  with  a  regiment,  of  which  he  was
colonel,  near  Wilmington,  Del.  After  the  war  he
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Phila-
delphia in  1820.  From  1822  till  1827  he  was  U.  S.
consul  in  Rio  Janeiro,  and  he  was  appointed  charge
d'affaires  in  1825,  and  negotiated  a  treaty  with
Brazil.  After  his  return  to  the  United  States  in
1830  he  edited  several  journals  devoted  to  free-
trade  doctrines,  and  contributed  largely  to  the
"  Port-Folio"  and  other  periodicals  upon  this  sub-
ject. He  served  in  the  legislature,  was  president
of  the  chamber  of  commerce  and  other  organi-
zations, and  was  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society.  In  1839  he  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  St.  Mary's  college,  Baltimore.  He
edited  "  The  Free-Trade  Advocate  "  (2  vols..  Phila-
delphia, 1829);  "The  Examiner"  (2  vols.*  l»34-o);
and  " The  Financial  Register "  (2  vols.,  18:37-9) ;
and  was  the  author  of  "  An  Inquiry  into  the  Causes
of  the  Present  State  of  the  Circulating  Medium
of  the  United  States  "^Philadelphia,  1815);  "The
Principles  of  Free  Trade"  (1835);  and  a  treatise
"  On  (Jurrency  and  Banking  "  (1839),  which  was
republished  in  London  (1839),  and  translated  into
French  (Paris,  1840).

RAINEY,  Joseph  H..  congressman,  b.  in
Georgetown,  S.  C,  21  June,  1832^  d.  there.  1  Aug.,
1887.  He  was  born  a  slave,  but  acquired  a  good
education,  principally  by  observation  and  traveL
His  father  was  a  barber,  and  the  son  followed  that
occuiMition  until  1862,  when,  after  b^ng  forced  to
work  on  Confederate  fortifications,  he  escaped  to


RAINS


RAINSFORD


161


ft 1^


the  Woitt  Indict,  remaining  there  until  the  close  of
the  war.  He  then  retiirne*!  Ut  S4^uth  Carolina,  was
t'liH'tetl  a  (K'K'jjiite  to  the  State  constitutiunal  con-
vention of  liHiH,  and  was  a  irtenilKT  of  the  state
Kenate  iti  1H70.  He  was  elected  a  renrewtitative
fn)iu  South  Carolina  to  cnu^re.sM,  a»  a  ue|iublican.
to  tin  the  vm-ancy  caus<>d  by  the  non-ri'ception  of
Ik>njanun  F.  Whitteniori'.  wrvinjj  frtjm  4  March,
ISm,  till  15  Aug.,  187U.  He  took  (tart  in  the  de-
bate on  the  civil-rights  bill,  and  was  a  nieinlNT  of
the  committee  on  frei^dmen's  and  Indian-affairs.
He  was  a  conservative,  and  his  ]>olitical  life  was
remarkably  i)ure.

KAINS,  (tabriol  JaniOH,  soldier,  b.  in  Craven
county,  N.  C.,  in  June,  1H(W;  d.  in  Aiken,  S.  C,  6
Sept.,  IHHl.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1H27,  assignetl  to  the  infantry,  and
sen'ctl  in  garris(^)n  and  against  hostile  Indians  till
the  Mexican  war,  l>eing  promoted  captain  on  25
Dec.,  1837,  and  brevettetl  major,  28  April,  1840,  for
gallantry  in  the  action  with  the  Seminoles  near
Fort  King.  Kla.,  where  he  routinl  a  su|)erior  force,
and  was  twice  severely  wounded.  One  of  his  in-
juries was  considered  mortal,  and  several  obituary
notices  of  him  were  published.  He  was  one  of  the
first  to  Ix!  engagetl  in  the  Mexican  war,  being  one
of  the  defenders  of  Fort  Brown  in  May,  1846.
When  the  demand  for  the  surrender  of  this  post
w^as  made  by  Gen.  Ampudia.  Capt.  Rains  gave  the
deciding  vote  against  compliance  with  it  in  a  coun-
cil of  officers.  After  the  battle  t)f  Resaca  de  la
Palma  he  was  onlcred  to  the  United  States  on  re-
cruiting duty,  and  organized  a  large  part  of  the
recniits  for  Gen.  Scott's  campaign.  He  became
major  on  9  March,  1851,  and  from  1853  till  the
civil  war  was  on  the  Pacific  coast,  where  he  made
a  reputation  as  a  successful  Indian  fighter,  and  in
1855  was  a  brigadier-general  of  Washington  terri-
tory volunteers.  He  was  made  lieutenant-colonel
on  5  June,  1860,  but  resigned  on  31  July,  1861,  and
joined  the  Confederate  army,  in  which  he  wascom-
missioneil  brigadier-general.  He  led  a  division  at
Wilson's  Creek,  did  good  service  at  Shiloh  and
Perrysville,  and  after  the  Iwittle  of  Seven  Pines,
where  he  was  wounded,  was  highly  commended  by
Gen.  Daniel  H.  Hill  for  a  rapiti  and  successful
flank  movement  that  turned  the  tide  of  battle  in
favor  of  the  Confetlerates.  He  was  then  placed  in
charge  of  the  conscript  and  torpedo  bureaus  at
Richmond,  organized  the  system  of  torpedoes
that  nrotectetV  the  harlx)rs  of  Charleston,  Sa-
vannan.  Mobile,  and  other  places,  and  invented
a  sub-terra  shell,  which  was  successfully  used.
At  the  close  of  the  war  Gen.  Rains  resided  for
some  time  at  Augusta,  Ga,,  but  he  afterward  re-
moved to  Aiken,  S.  C.  His  death  resulted  from
the  wounds  that  he  had  received  in  Florida  in
1840.  —  His  brother.  George  Washington,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Craven  county,  N.  C..  in  1817.  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1842.  and  as-
8igne<i  to  the  corps  of  engineers,  but  was  trans-
ferred to  the  4th  artillery  in  1843.  and  in  1844-'6
was  assistant  professor  oi  chemistry,  mineralogy,
and  geology  at  Wast  Point.  He  served  with  credit
during  the' war  with  Mexico  on  the  staffs  of  Gen.
Winfield  Scott,  and  Gen.  Pillow,  and  was  bre-
vettc<l  captain  and  major  for  gallantry  at  Con-
treras,  Churubusco.  and  Chapulte|M>c.  Afterward
he  served  on  garrison  and  recruiting  duty  and
against  the  Seminole  Indians  in  1849-50.  and  was
promote<l  captain,  14  Feb.,  1856.  On  31  Oct.  of
that  year  he  resigned  and  became  j»art  proprietor
and  president  of  the  Washington  iron-works  and
the  Highland  iron-works  at  Newburg,  N.  Y.  He  en-
tered the  Confederate  army  in  1861,  was  conmiis-

TOL. V, — 11


sioncfl  colonel,  and  was  at  once  given  the  tank  of
building  and  equipping  a  |N>wder-mill.  This  he
<lid  under  great  ditliculties,  and  creati-d  at  Au-
gusta, (la.,  the  Confeilenite  jM>wder-work8.  which
were,  at  the  close  of  the  war,  among  the  U'st  in  the
world.  He  was  pronjotwl  brigadier-general  before
18<i5.  Since  1867  he  has  l>een  professor  of  chem-
istry and  pharmacy  in  the  medical  defiartment  of
the  University  of  Georgia,  and  he  was  dean  of  the
faculty  till  1884.  Gen.  liains  has  obtained  three
{Mitents  for  improvements  in  steam  portable  en-

fines.  He  has  published  a  treatise  on  "Steam
•ortable  Engines"  (Newburg.  N.  Y.,  I860):  "Ru-
dimentary Course  of  Analytical  and  Applied
Chemistry"  (Augusta,  Ga.,  1872);  "Chemical
Qualitative  Analysis"  (New  York,  1879);  a  jwm-
phlet  "  History  of  the  Confederate  Powder^ Works,"
which  he  read  before  the  Confe<lerate  survivors' as-
sociatiim  (Augusta,  1882).  and  numerous  essays. —
Gabriel  James's  son.  Sevieb  McClelan,  soldier,  b.
in  1851,  was  graduate<l  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1876,  and  killed  in  the  action  of  Craig's
Mountain,  Idaho,  with  hostile  Indians.  3  July.  18<7.

RAINS,  James  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in'  Nash-
ville, Tenn..  10  April,  1833 ;  d.  near  Murfreesboro',
Tenn.,  31  Dec.,  1862.  After  graduation  at  Yale  in
1864  he  studied  law,  was  city  attorney  of  Nash-
ville in  1858,  and  attorney-general  for  fiis  judicial
district  in  1860.  He  was  a  Whig,  and  in  1857  ed-
ited the  "  Daily  Republican  Ranner."  In  April,
1861,  he  entered  the  Confederate  army  as  a  private,
was  ap(M)inted  lieutenant-colonel,  anil  made  com-
mandant of  a  garrison  of  two  regiments  at  Cum-
berland gap.  In  1862  he  was  commissione<l  briga-
dier-general. While  ordering  a  charge  at  the  battle
of  Stone  river,  31  Dec,  1862,  he  received  a  bullet
through  his  heart.

RAINS,  John,  pioneer,  b.  near  New  river,  Va.,
about  1750;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  in  1821.  In
June.  1769,  he  was  one  of  a  party  of  hunters  that
jienetrated  as  far  west  as  Cumlx'rland  river,  and
returned  with  such  glowing  accounts  of  the  coun-
try as  greatly  aided  James  Robertson  in  forming
a  colony  for  its  settlement.  The  colony,  number-
ing about  300,  among  whom  were  Rains  and  his
family,  arrived  at  the  present  site  of  Nashville  in
December,  1779.  Rains  had  singular  skill  in  wood-
craft, and  such  prowess  as  an  Indian  fighter  as  to
be  generally  given  conmiand  in  the  many  exi)edi-
tions  it  was  neces-sary  to  lead  against  the  Cnero-
kees,  who  continually  harassed  the  settlement.
He  had  an  intense  love  of  the  woods,  and  no  great
regard  for  the  refinements  of  civilized  society.  His
definition  of  political  freedom  was  a  state  wheri'in
every  man  did  as  he  pleased,  without  encroaching
ufwn  the  rights  of  his  neighbor.  Physicians  and
attorneys  he  considered  the  Iwne  of  civilized  soci-
ety, lie  once  said :  "  All  was  health  and  harmony
among  us  till  the  doctors  came  bringing  tliseases
and  the  lawyers  sowing  dissensions ;  and  we  have
had  nothing  but  death  and  the  devil  ever  since."

RAINSFORD,  William  Stephen,  clergyman,
b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  30  Oct.,  1850.  His  early  edu-
cation and  training  were  obtained  under  tutors  at
home.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Cambridge,  England,  in  1872,  ordained  deacon  in
1872  by  the  bishop  of  Norwich,  and  priest  in
1875  by  the  same  bishop.  He  was  curate  of  St.
(tiles's'church,  Norwich,  in  1872-'6.  went  to  Canada
in  1877,  and  was  assistant  rector  of  St.  James's
cathedral,  Toronto,  in  1878-'82.  In  1888  he  was
called  to  the  rectorship  of  St.  George's,  New  York
city,  which  jjost  he  still  (1888)  occupies,  and  is
also  chaplain  of  the  7l8t  regiment  National  guard.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Trinity  in


162


RALEGH


RALEGH


1887.  Dr.  Rainsford,  besides  contributions  to  cur-
rent litiTiiture,  has  published  a  volume  of  paro-
chial ".S'l-mons"  (New  York.  18H7).

KALKGH,  Sir  Walter,  English  navigator,  b.
in  Hayes,  in  the  jMirish  of  Kmileigh,  Devonshire,
England,  in  1552;  d.  in  Westminster,  England,  29
Oct.,  I(n8.  His  iwtronymic  was  written  in  thirteen
different  ways,  hut  Sir  Walter  himself  spelled  it
Ralegh. Little  is  known of  his  father,  Walter,

except  that  he  was
a  gentleman  com-
moner, and  that  an
earnest  wayside  re-
monstrance  from
him  with  the  Ro-
manist rioters  of
the  west  in  1544
caused  his  impris-
onment for  tliree
days,  and  threats
of  hanging  when
he  was  lil»erated.
His  mother  was
the  daughter  of
Sir  Philip  Cham-

[lernown.  of  Mod-
>urv,  and  the  wid-
ow of  Otto  Gilbert,
, /^^  P bv  whom  she  was
j^n/y" the  mother  of  Sir
ff^  John, Sir Hum-

*^  phrey,  and  Sir  Ad-

rian Gilbert.  Walter  became  a  commoner  at  Oriel,
Oxford,  in  1568.  and  j)robably  attended  the  Uni-
versity of  France  in  1509,  but  left  the  same  year
to  join  a  troop  that  was  raised  under  the  Prince
de  Conde  and  Admiral  Coligny  in  aid  of  the  French
Huguenots.  Subsequently,  according  to  most  au-
thorities, he  served  in  the  Netherlancrs  under  Will-
iam of  Orange,  and  became  an  accomplished  sol-
dier and  a  determined  foe  to  Roman  Catholicism
and  the  Spanish  nation.  On  his  return  to  Eng-
land he  found  that  his  half-brother.  Sir  Hum-
phrey Gilbert,  had  just  obtained  a  patent  for  es-
tablishing a  plantation  in  America,  and  he  en-
tered into  the  scheme.  They  went  to  sea  in  1579,
but  one  of  their  ships  was  lost,  and  the  remainder,
it  is  sjiid,  were  crippled  in  an  engagement  with  the
Spanish  fleet,  and  they  returned  without  making
land.  li^ilegh  then  served  as  captain  against  the
Desmond  rebellion  in  Ireland,  and  won  the  com-
mendation of  his  superiors  by  his  bravery  and  ex-
ecutive ability.  On  his  return,  according  to  the
popular  legend,  he  met  Queen  Elizabeth  one  day
as  she  was  walking  in  the  forest,  and,  on  her  ap-
proach to  a  miry  place  in  her  path,  took  off  his
mantle  and  laid  it  down  for  her  to  tread  upon.
The  queen,  wht)  was  susceptible  to  gallant  atten-
tion, at  once  admitted  him  to  court,  loaded  him
with  favors,  and  employed  him  to  attend  the
French  ambassador,  Simier,  on  his  return  to  France,
and  afterward  to  escort  the  Duke  of  Anjou  to  Ant-
werp. A  contemporary  writer  says:  "  He  possessed
a  good  presence  in  a  handsome,  well-compacted
bodv,  strong  natural  wit  and  better  judgment,  a
bold  and  plausible  tongue,  the  fancy  of  a  {)oet  and
the  chivalry  of  a  soldier,  and  was  unrivalled  in
splendor  of  dress  and  equipage."  He  soon  used  his
influence  to  promote  a  second  expedition  to  Amer-
ica, but  was  prevented  by  an  acciilent  from  g<jing
in  person,  and  left  the  command  of  the  fleet  to  Sir
Humphrey  Gilbert  (q.  v.).  who  was  lost  on  the  home-
ward voyage.  Ralegh  then  obtained  a  new  charter
in  1584,' with  power  to  land  colonies  "  in  any  re-
mote, heathen,  and  barbarous  lands  not  actually  ,


possessed  by  any  Christian  prince  or  people,"  and
secured  the  provision  that  such  colonists  were  "  to
have  all  the  privileges  of  free  denizi>ns  and  natives
of  England,  and  were  to  l>e  governed  according  to
such  statutes  as  should  by  them  be  established,  so
that  the  said  statutes  or  faws  conform  as  conven-
iently as  nmy  l)e  with  those  of  England,  and  do
not  impugn  the  Christian  faith,  or  any  way  with-
draw the  people  of  those  lands  from  our  alle-
giance." These  guarantees  of  {political  rights  were
renewed  in  the  subseouent  ciiarter  of  1006,  under
which  the  English  colonies  were  planted  in  Amer-
ica, and  constituted  one  of  the  impregnable  grounds
uiKjn  which  they  afterward  maintamed  the  strug-
gle that  ended  in  separation  from  Great  Britain.
The  expedition  consisted  of  two  vessels,  which
sailed,  27  April,  1584,  under  the  command  of  Capt.
Philip  Ammlas  and  Arthur  Barlowe.  They
reached  the  West  Indies  on  10  June,  and  the  Amer-
ican coast  on  4  July.  They  then  explored  Pamlico
and  Albemarle  sounds  and  Roanoke  island,  re-
turning to  England  about  the  middle  of  Septem-
ber, and  giving  such  glowing  accounts  of  their  dis-
coveries that  Elizabeth  called  the  new-found  land
Virginia,  in  memory  of  her  state  of  life,  and  con-
ferred knighthood  on  Riile^h,  with  a  monopoly  of
mines,  from  which  he  enioyed  a  large  revenue.
She  also  granted  a  new  seal  to  his  coat-of-arms,  on
which  was  graven  "  Propria  insignia,  Walteri  Ral-
egh ^lilitis,  Domini  et  Gobeniatoris  Virginiie."
Ralegh,  who  was  now  a  member  of  parliament,
obtained  a  bill  confirming  his  patent,  collected  a
company  of  colonists,  and  on  9  April,  1585,  sent  a
fleet  of  seven  ships  in  command  of  his  cousin,  Sir
Richard  Grenville,  and  in  immediate  charge  of
Sir  Ralph  Lane  (9.  r.),  who  soon  quarrelled  with
Grenville.  The  latter,  after  landing  the  colony  at
Roanoke  island  in  July,  sailed  for  England  on  25
Aug.,  proniising  to  return  the  next  Easter.  But
misfortunes  befell  the  colonists ;  they  became  dis-
heartened, and  in  Julv,  1586,  despairing  of  Gren-
ville's  return,  went  to  England  in  one  of  Sir  Fran-
cis Drake's  vessels,  that  commander  having  passed
the  settlement  on  his  way  from  his  expedition
against  Santo  Domingo,  Carthagena,  and  St.  Au-
gustine. The  fruit  of  this  settlement  was  little
more  than  a  carefully  prepared  description  of  the
country  by  Thomas  f  lariot ;  illustrations  in  water-
colors  by  the  artist,  John  White,  of  its  inhabitants,
productions,  animals,  and  birds;  and  the  introduc-
tion into  Great  Britain  of  tobacco  and  fX)tat<^»es,
the  latter  being  first  planted  in  Ireland  on  Ralegh's
estate.  Soon  after  the  departure  of  the  colontsts
with  Lane,  a  ship  arrived  with  supplies  from  Ral-
egh, and  a  few  days  afterward  Grenville  returned
to  Roanoke  island  with  tliree  ships,  well  provis-
ioned, but,  finding  that  the  colonists  had  all  left,
went  back  to  England,  leaving  fifteen  men  and
supplies  sufficient  to  last  them  two  years.  Mean-
while Ralegh  had  been  appointed  seneschal  of  Dev-
on and  ('ornwall,  and  lord  warden  of  the  stanna-
ries, and  hatl  obtained  a  grant  of  12,000  acres  of
forfeited  land  in  Ireland.  His  favor  in  court  con-
tinued to  increase,  but  he  was  hated  by  a  large
faction.  He  now  determined  to  found  an  agricul-
tural state,  and  in  April,  1587,  despatched  a  body
of  emigrants  to  make  a  settlement  on  Chesapeake
bay.  He  granted  them  a  charter  of  incorporation
and  appointed  a  municipal  government  for  the  city
of  Ralegh,  intrusting  the  administration  to  John
White,  with  twelve  assistants.  They  founded  their
city,  not  on  the  bay,  but  on  the  site  of  the  former
settlement  on  Roanoke  island,aiid  when  their  ships
returned.  Gov.  White  went  home  tv  hasten  re-en-
forcements. But  the  fleet  that  Ralegh  fitted  out


RALEGH


RALEOn


168


for  the  colony's  relief  was  impretwed  by  the  gov-
crninont  for  the  war  with  Sitain.  Wliite,  with
KaU'fch's  aitl,  sul)!*«'<|ut'ritly  siuftHMlwl  in  sailing;
with  two  vi'ssels  that  fell  into  th«<  hanil!«  of  the
Spaniards,  and  he  wa.H  able  to  Hentl  no  n>livf  till
15W»,  whon  ho  arrived,  on  15  Au(f.,  U)  find  that  all
the  ct>lonist»  had  disaninaired.  It  wa»  «liscovered
years  afterward  that  four  men,  two  U)ys,  and  a

firl  had  l)et>n  a«lopte<l  into  the  Ilattonu*  trilx?  of
ndinns.  The  rest  ha<l  U'en  starvi-d  or  iimssaoreil.
Kale^'h  had  now  spent  £4().00(»  in  his  efforts  to
colniii/.c  Vir^jinia.  Unable  to  do  more,  he  there-
fori"  lt'a.se«l  his  patent  to  a  com|)any  of  men-hants,
with  the  hone  of  at^-hieving  his  object ;  but  he  was
disapiwintj-d.  He  ma«le  a  fifth  attempt  to  afford
bis  lost  colony  aid  in  1002  by  sentlinc  Capt.  Sam-
uel Mace  to  search  for  them ;  but  Mace  returned
without  executing  his  orders.  lialegh  wrote  to
Sir  Rol)ert  Cecil  on  21  Aug.,  1(K)2.  that  he  would
send  Mace  back,  and  expressed  his  faith  in  the
colonization  of  Virginia  in  the  words,  "  1  shall  yet
live  to  see  it  an  Knglishe  nation."  Although  the
colonists  perished,  Kalegh  secured  North  Ameri-
ca to  the  English  through  his  enterprise,  made
known  the  advantages  of  its  soil  and  climate,
fixed  Chesapeake  bay  as  the  pro{)er  nlace  for  a
ct)lony,  and  created  a  spirit  that  leu  finally  to
it-s  successful  settlement.  He  was  a  member  of
the  cfmncil  of  war  and  lieutenant-gttieral  and
commander  of  the  forces  of  Coniwall  in  1587,
and  the  next  year,  when  the  armada  ap{)eared,
hung  ujx)n  its  fear  in  a  vessel  of  his  own,  and  an-
noy^ it by  quick  and unexpected movements.


He  was  with  Sir  Francis  Drake  in  his  expedi-
tion to  restore  Don  Antonio  to  the  throne  of
Portugal  in  1589,  and  captured  several  Spanish
vessels.  On  his  return,  he  visitetl  Iri'land,  and  con-
tracted a  friendship  with  Edmund  SjH'user,  whom
he  brought  to  England  and  introduced  to  Eliza-
beth, with  the  gift  of  the  first  three  b(H)ks  of  the
"  Faerie  Queen."  In  the  hope  of  shattering  the
Spanish  power  in  the  West  Indies,  he  then  collected
A  fleet  of  thirteen  vessels,  for  the  most  part  at  his
own  expense,  and  captured  the  largest  Spanish
prize  that  had  been  brought  to  England.  In  1591
ne  offended  Elizal)eth  bv  his  marriage  with  her
maid  of  honor,  Elizabeth  Throgmorton.  and  was
imprisoned  for  several  months,  and  bjinished  from
court.  But  he  spent  his  time  in  the  Tower  in
planning  another  ex|)edition  to  Guiana,  and  the
next  year  sent  out  one  Jacob  Whiddon  to  exam-
ine the  coast  near  Orinoco  river.  After  receiving
Whiddon's  report,  Ralegh,  with  a  srjuadron  of  five
ships,  sailed  on  9  Feb.,  1595.  When  he  arrive<l  at
the  end  of  March  he  captured  the  .Spanish  town  of
St.  Joseph,  and  suliseJiuently  ma<U  a  jierilous  voy-
age up  the  Orinoco.  When  he  n-turned  the  same
year  he  publishwl  an  account  of  his  voyage  in  his
"Discovery  of  the  I^arge,  Kich, and  Beautiful  Em-
pire of  Guiana  "  (London,  1596),  in  which  he  related


all  the  wonderful  things  he  hwl  hear»l  from  the
Spaniards  and  natives,  including  El  Donulo,  the
Amazons,  and  the  EwHipaiioma.  a  tnU*  that  had
eves  in  their  shouUlers  and  mouths  in  their  bri'arta.
His  book  was  read  eagerly,  an«l,  l)esides  t hese  child-
ish stories,  is  full  of  valuable  infonnation.  After
his  co-o|ieration  in  the  capture  «if  Cadiz  he  was  re-
st<»re<l  to  Elizal»eth*s  fav«>r.  and  in  1597  went  on
an  ex|)edition  under  the  Earl  of  Essex  against  the
Azores,  but  (luarrelletl  with  his  commander,  and
n'tunnil.  He  was  inaile  goverimr  of  Jersey  in
U'AH),  but.  having  Un-n  accused  of  an  agency  in  the
deatli  of  Essex,  which  event  vtas  tvnm  folIowe<l  by
the  death  of  ElizalK-th,  he  fell  into  disfavor,  ami,
on  the  accession  of  James  I.,  was  8trip|>e<l  of  his
pri'ferments,  forbidden  the  roval  presence,  and
charged  with  a  plot  to  place  Ija<ly  AraU'lla  Stuart
on  the  throne.  His  estates  were  coiifist-ated,  and
he  was  sentenced  to  be  l)eheadi'<l.  but  was  re-
prieve<l,  and  passe<l  the  thirteen  sul)siHjuent  years
in  the  Tower.  During  his  imprisf)nment  he  com-
posed his  "  History  of  the  World  "  (Ijondon,  1614),
which  was  superior  in  style  and  manner  to  any  of
the  English  historical  compositions  that  had  pre-
ceded it.  Ralegh  was  liberated  in  1615,  but  not
pardoned.  He  then  obtaine«l  from  James  a  com-
mission as  admiral  of  the  fieet,  with  ample  privi-
leges and  fourteen  ships,  and  in  Novenutor,  1617,
reached  Guiana.  His  force  consisted  of  431  men.
and  he  was  accompanied  by  his  son  Walter  and
Capt  Lawrence  Keymis.  Kalegh  was  too  ill  with
a  fever  to  join  the  expc<lition,  but  sent  Keymis  and
young  Walter  with  2J)0  men  in  boat.s  up  the  Orino-
co. They  landed  at  the  Spanish  settlement  of  St
Thomas,  and,  in  defiance  oi  the  j)eaceable  instruc-
tions of  James,  killed  the  govenior  and  set  fire  to
the  town.  Young  Walter  was  killed  in  the  action.
Unable  either  to  advance  or  maintain  their  posi-
tion, the  British  retreated  to  the  ships.  Keymis,
reproached  with  his  ill  success,  committe<l  suicide,
many  of  the  sailors  mutinied,  the  ships  scattered,
and  Ralegh  landed  in  Plymouth,  16  June.  1618,
broken  in  fortune  and  reputation.  He  was  ar-
rested and  committe<l  to  the  Tower,  on  the  charge
of  having,  without  authoritv,  attacked  the  Spanish
settlement  of  St.  Thomas,  lie  failed  in  an  attempt
to  escape  to  France  by  feigning  madness,  and  it
was  sutwequently  decided  to  execute  him  on  his
former  sentence.  He  was  l)eheade<l  in  the  old  pal-
ace-yard at  Westminster.  Italegh  was  of  im|)osing
presence,  dauntless  courage,  and  varied  accom-
plishments. His  knowledge  of  the  i>rinciples  of
political  economy  was  far  in  advance  of  his  age.
Among  his  other  literary  ventures  he  founded  the
Mermaid  club.  The  city  of  Raleigh.  N.  C,  is
named  in  his  honor.  The  illustration  represents  his
birthplace,  Hayes  farm.  Besides  the  works  already
mentioned,  he  wrote  many  poems  of  merit,  the
most  noteti  of  those  attribiitcu  to  him  l)eing  "  The
Soul's  Errand."  His  "Remains"  were  published
by  his  crandson.Sir  Philip  Ralegh  (Ix>n<lon.  1661);
his  "  Miscellanies,"  with  a  new  account  of  his  life,
bv  Thomas  Burch  (1748) ;  his  collected  poems  by
Sir  Edward  Bridges  (1814);  and  his  complete
works,  with  his  life,  by  William  Ohlys  (8  vols.,  Ox-
ford, 1829).  Numerous  biographies  have  Ikh^u  writ-
ten of  him,  of  which  the  most  reliable  are  thi>sc  by
Arthur  Cavlev  (2  vols..  Ixindon,  180.'>-'6);  Mrs.  A.
T.  Thompson '(1830):  Patrick  Eraser  Tytler(183:i);
Ro».ert  Sfmthev  (1887);  Sir  Rol»ert  Schoniburgk,
added  to  his  "  Voyages  to  Guiana  "  (1847) ;  Edward
E«lwards,  with  a  full  c-olU-ctiim  of  Ralegh's  letters
(2  vols.,  1866);  John  A.  St.  John  (18<J8);  Incre«»
N.  Tar»)ox  (1884);  and  Edmund  W.  Goese,  in  the
" English  Worthies  Series"  (1886).


164


RALL


RAMfiE


RALI^  or  RAHL,  Johan  Gottlieb,  Hessian
soldier,  b.  in  Ilesse-Cassel,  about  1720;  d.  in  Tren-
ton, N.  J.,  26  Det'.,  1776.  He  served  during  the
seven-vonrs'  war  in  Europe,  and  with  his  regiment
formed  part  of  the  contingent  tliat  was  hired  from
the  elector  f>f  Hesse-Cassel  by  George  III.  for  si>r-
vice  in  this  country.  lie  participated  in  the  battle
of  White  Plains,  and  in  the  capture  of  Fort  Wash-
ington, in  which  he  rendered  valuable  service,  and
after  the  evacuation  of  New  Jersey  by  the  patriot
army  commanded  an  advanced  {x)st  at  Trenton,
where  he  wius  surprised  and  killed  in  Washing-
ton's at  tack  on  that  town.

RALPH,  James,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  about  1695  ;  d.  in  Chiswick,  England,  25  Jan.,
1762.  He  was  clerk  to  a  conveyancer  in  Philadel-
phia, and  alxjut  1718  liecame  the  intimate  associate
of  Benjamin  Franklin,  who  describes  him  as  his
"  insej)arable  companion,  genteel  in  his  manners,
ingenious,  extremelv  eloquent,  and  I  never  knew  a

Erettier  talker."  lie  accompanied  Fninklin  to
ondon  in  1724,  deserting  his  wife  and  child  for
his  friend,  and,  being  without  money,  lived  at
Franklin's  expense,  lie  afterward  attempted  to
become  an  actor,  and  sul)sequently  to  edit  and
write  for  newspapers,  but  with  little  success.  He
then  settled  as  a  school-master  in  Berkshire,  se-
cured the  notice  of  Lord  Melcombe,  and  obtained
much  notoriety  as  an  adherent  of  the  Prince  of
Wales's  faction,  employing  his  talents  as  pam-
phleteer, poet,  and  political  journalist  in  the  inter-
est of  that  part  v.  Toward  the  close  of  Sir  Robert
Walpole's  administration  he  was  bought  oflf  from
the  opposition,  and  at  the  accession  of  George  III.
received  a  pension,  but  lived  to  enjoy  it  hardly
more  than  six  months.  Franklin  says  he  "  did  his
best  to  dissuade  Ralph  from  attempting  to  be-
come a  poet,  but  he  was  not  cured  of  scribbling
verses  till  Pope  attacked  him  in  the  lines  in  the
'  Dunciad,'  beginning

'  Silence,  ye  wolves,  while  Ralph  to  Cynthia  howls.
And  makes  night  hideous;  answer  him,  ye  owls.' "
He  published  "  The  Muses'  Address  to  the  King,"
an  ode  (London,  1728) ;  '*  The  Tempest  "  (1728) ;
"The  Touchstone,"  a  volume  of  essays  (1728);
"Clarinda,"  a  poem  (1729);  "  Zeuma, '  a  poem
(1729) ;  "  A  Taste  of  the  Town,  a  Guide  to  all  Pub-
lick  Diversions  Answered"  (1730);  "The  Fashion-
able Ladv,"  a  comedy  (1730) ;  '•  The  Fall  of  the
Earl  of  fissex  "  (1731) ;  *'  A  Critical  View  of  the
Publick  Buildings  of  London "  (1734) ;  "  The
Groans  of  Germany,"  a  political  pamphlet,  of
which  15,000  copies  were  sold  at  once  (1734) ;  '*  The
Use  and  Abuse  of  Parliament"  (2  vols.,  1744);
the  "  History  of  England  during  the  Reigns  of
King  William,  Queen  Anne,  and  George  I.,"  which
Charles  James  Fox  eulogized,  and  is  a  work  of
great  merit  as  regards  information  (1744);  "The
Cause  of  Authors  bv  Profession  "  (1758) :  "  The
History  of  Prince  1" iti "  (Frederick,  Prince  of
Wales),  in  manuscript,  never  published,  by  some
ascribed  to  him ;  and  many  dramatic  works,  lam-
poons, and  essays.

RALSTON,  "Robert,  merchant,  b.  in  Little
Brandywine,  Pa.,  in  1761 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
11  Aug.,  1836.  He  became  a  merchant  at  an  early
age,  and  amassed  a  large  fortune  in  the  East  Indian
trade,  which  he  spent  liberally  in  benevolent  en-
terprises. He  contributed  largely  to  the  establish-
ment of  the  Widows'  and  orphans'  asylum,  and  the
Mariner's  church  in  Philadelphia,  founded  the
Philadelphia  Bible  society,  which  was  the  first  of
the  kind  on  this  continent,  and  in  1819  liecame
first  president  of  the  board  of  education  of  the
Presbyterian  church.


RALSTON,  Samnel,  clergyman,  b.  in  County
Donegal.  Ireland,  in  1756;  d.  in  Carroll,  Pa..  25
Sept.,  1851.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Glasgow,  came  to  this  country  in  1796,  and  took
charge  of  the  Presbyterian  congregat  ions  of  Mingo
Creek  and  Williamsixirt,  Pa.,  from  1796  until  his
death.  Washington  college.  Pa.,  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1822.  His  writings  are  contro-
versial for  the  most  part,  and  include  "  The  Curry-
Comb  "  (Philadelphia.  1805) ;  "  Baptism,  a  Review
of  Alexander  Campbell's  and  Dr.  Walker's  De-
bate" (1830);  "A  Brief  Examination  of  the
Prophecies  of  Daniel  and  John "  (1842) ;  "  The
Seven  Last  Plagues "  (1842) ;  and  "  Defence  of
Evangelical  Psalmody"  (1844).

RALSTON,  Thomas  Neely,  clergyman,  b.  in
Bourbon  county,  Ky,.  21  March,  1806.  He  was
educated  at  Georgetown  college,  Ky.,  joined  the
state  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church
in  1827,  and  was  its  secretary  for  twelve  years.  He
was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  met  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  in  1845,  to  organize  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church,  south,  and  secretary  of  that  body
in  1850,  subsequently  becoming  chairman  of  the
committee  to  revise  the  discipline  of  the  church.
He  was  president  of  the  Methotlist  female  collegi-
ate high-school  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  in  1843-'7.  and
in  1851  edited  the  "  Methodist 'Monthly."  Wes-
leyan  university,  Florence.  Ky.,  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1857.  His  publications  include
"  Elements  of  Divinity  "  (Louisville,  Ky.,  1847) ;
"  Evidences,  Morals,  and  Institutions  of  Christian-
ity "  (Nashville,  Tenn.,  1870) :  "  Ecce  Unitas,  or  a
Plea  for  Christian  Unity  "  (Cincinnati,  1870) ;  and
"  Bible  Truths  "  (Nashville,  1887).

RALSTON,  William  C,  banker,  b.  in  Wells-
ville,  Ohio,  12  Jan.,  1826;  d.  in  San  Francisco,
Cal.,  27  Aug.,  1875.  His  father  was  a  carpenter
and  builder,  and  for  several  years  he  assisted  in
his  father's  workshop,  but  in  1849  he  went  to
the  Pacific  coast.  He  became  president  of  the
Bank  of  California,  and  also  took  a  deep  interest
in  the  building  of  railroads  and  the  establishment
of  woollen-mills,  sugar-refineries,  silk-factorie.s,
and  steamship-lines  to  Australia  and  China  He
also  invested  largely  in  the  construction  of  the
Palace  and  Grand  hotels,  which  enterprises  ulti-
mately ruined  him.  In  August,  1875,  James  G.
Flood  made  a  sudden  demand  on  the  Bank  of  Cali-
fornia for  nearly  $6,000,000,  and,  although  the
institution  had  assets  to  cover  all  its  indebtedness,
it  was  not  able  to  meet  this  unexpected  call.  Its
doors  were  closed,  and  the  immediate  resignation
of  the  president  was  asked.  The  latter  surrendered
all  his  available  personal  property  to  meet  the
deficiencies  of  the  Dank,  but,  stung  by  the  affront
that  had,l)een  put  upon  him,  he  drowned  him.self.

RAMEE,  Stanislas  Henri  de  la  (rah-may),
French  naturalist,  b.  in  Perigueux  in  1747;  d.  in
Fontainebleau  in  1803.  He  studied  medicine  and
botany  in  Toulouse,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty  hatl
formed  a  valuable  herbarium  of  the  flora  of  Lan-
guedoc,  when  he  went  to  Paris  to  study  under  Buf-
fon,  whom  he  assisted  for  several  years  in  the  Royal
botanical  garden.  In  1783  he  was  sent  to  Peru  to
study  the  effects  of  cholera,  which  then  was  raging
in  Callao,  and  he  visited  afterward  the  Andes  of
Peru,  Central  America,  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,
Cuba,  and  several  of  the  West  Indies,  returning
with  valuable  collections  in  natural  history.  His
works  include  "  Nova  Systema  Naturae  "  (2  vols.,
Paris,  1 792) ;  "  Monographic  des  drogues  et  medica-
ments simples  de  I'Amerique  du  Sud"  (1794);  and
"  Prodome  des  plan tes  recueillies  e*i  Amerique  et
dans  les  Indes  Occidentales  "  (1798).


RAMKT


RAMIREZ  DE  QUiKONES 105


RAMCT.  NiroUH(rali-inay).  Fn<noh  philoloirist,
b.  ill  tlu"  county  of  Soissonnois  in  107U  ;  «l.  in  Hor-
(It'HUX  in  17:W.  He  made  extensive  voyH(;esthroU);h
the  \Vt>st  Indies.  GiUHna,  liOiiisiiina, 'und  Kcveml
fmrt-s  of  South  America,  and  was  a  sharfh«»l«ler  of
the  Mississipi  conifittny,  aiidan  iulv<K'ateof  colonial
extension.  His  works  inchule  " Traite  d'une  |K>li-
tique  coloniaie"  (Utrecht.  1712);  "  ftnules  sur
I'orijjine  et  la  formation  de  la  lan^^ue  (."arall)0 "
(17nJ) ;  "  Meinoire  |H>ur  servir  k  la  defense  du  sys-
teme  financier  de  I^aw  "  (Amstenlam.  1721);  "  For-
mations t^rammaticaleset  phonetiques  des  dialectes
Indiens  "  (2  vols.,  172.'}) ; "  Dictionnaire  de  la  lan);ue
Tui>i  "  (1720);  and  "  Analojjie  entre  les  laiij^ues
In«liennes  de  rAmcritiuo  du  Sud  et  les  langues
(Vlfi<|lies."

RAMfREZ,  Alejandro  (rah-me'-n>th),  C'lilmn
fiiiiiiicier,  h.  in  Alaejos,  Valladolid,  in  1777;  d.  in
Havana,  Culta.  in  1H21.  When  he  was  flftwn  years
old  he  entere«l  in  the  service  of  the  government  at
Alcalade  Heiiares.  In  1704  he  went  to  Guatemala,
where  he  was  emploved  in  the  deimrtment  of
finance,  and  U'came  its  superintendent.  In  this
capacity  he  made  many  im|)ortant  reforms,  im-
pnive«l  the  means  of  communication  in  the  coun-
try, intnxluced  the  cultivation  of  several  useful
plants,  and  founded  many  (>ublic  schools  and  a
public  library.  He  was  appointed  in  1813  super-
intendent of  the  finances  of  Porto  Rico,  where  one
of  his  first  me^isures  was  to  open  the  ports  of  the
island  to  foreign  commerce.  He  founded  a  board
of  commerce,  a  Ixtard  of  agriculture,  a  literary  and
scientific  society,  and  many  public  schools',  and
gave  a  great  impulse  to  the  development  and  prog-
ress of  the  island.  In  1816  he  was  promoted  su-
perintendent of  the  finances  of  Cuba,  where  he
founde<l  the  cities  of  Uuantanamo,  Sagua,  Nuevi-
tas,  and  Mariel.  A  census  of  the  pot)ulation  and
resources  of  the  island  was  taken,  ana  the  tobacco
monopoly  was  al)olished.  He  established  at  Ha-
vana a  botanical  garden,  an  anatomical  museum,  a
free  aca«lemy  of  drawing,  and  numerous  public
schools,  and  promoted  the  development  of  the
commerce,  agriculture,  and  industries  of  the  isl-
and. He  was  one  of  the  best  and  most  honest
officers  that  was  ever  sent  by  Spain  to  her  colonies
in  America,  and  his  memory  is  neld  in  high  esteem
throughout  the  island.  His  portrait  hungs  in  the
reception-nwm  of  the  Socie<iad  economica,  whose

E resident  ho  was,  and  it  has  been  profwsed  to  erect
is  statue  in  Havaniu

RAMIREZ,  Francisco,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Mexico  in  1823;  d.  in  Brazos  Santiago,  Texas,  18
July,  18(Jl).  He  entered  the  priesth(M)d,  and  in  the
revolution  of  1857  sided  witli  the  clerical  party  in
opposing  Benito  Juarez.  He  gained  the  reganl
and  confidence  of  the  French  during  the  occufMi-
tion  of  Mexico,  and  through  the  influence  of  the
archbishop  of  Morelia  he  was  created  bishop  of
C'anulro  and  vicar-a|K)stolie  of  Tamauli|>as.  Dur-
ing the  empire  he  was  attached  to  the  court,  and
was  appointed  by  Maximilian  to  l)e  his  almoner
and  a  member  of  the  im[)erial  cabinet  and  council.
On  the  fall  of  the  empire  he  escaped  to  Texas,
vhere  he  livwl  in  great  obscurity  and  poverty.

RAMIREZ,  Igrnacio,  calle«l  Hl  Niuromante,
Meximn  philos<ipher,  b.  in  San  Miguel  el  Grande,
23  June,  1818;  d.  in  Mexico.  15  June,  187}>.  He
was  of  pure  Aztec  bloo«l. He  Ih-cuu  his  studies  in

Sueretaro,  ami  finished  them  in  the  College  of  San
rej![orio  in  Mexico,  where  he  was  graduated in
law  in  1841. In  1840  he  founde<l  the  iwper  "  Don  j
Simplicio,"  and  U^gnn  to  publish  a  series  of  philo-
sophical articles,  umler  the  pen-name  of  "  El  Nigro-  I
mante,"  and  many  satirical  poems,  in  which  he  se-  j


verely  criticiswl  the  government  of  Gen.  Paredes,
so  that  his  itaiK-r  wiu«  HupprefUHnl  and  he  was  im-
prisoned. VS'lien  the  federal  system  was  estab-
lished in  the  same  year,  Ramirez  was  ap[M>inted
s«'cn'tary  to  the  governor  of  the  state  of  Mexico,  re-
orpinized  the  miministration,  and  during  the  Amer-
ican invasion  iHpiipiMHl  and  organized  the  state
tr<M)ps,  taking  part  in  the  battle  of  Padieriia.
After  the  evacuatif)n,  he  was  ap|><iinted  pr^ife^s<»r
of  law  in  the  Literar)'  institution  of  Mexic-o,  and  at
the  same  time  eave  lectures  on  literature  an«l  phi-
losophy ;  but  nis  lil>eral  ideas  alarmed  the  Con-
servatives, and  he  was  rem<ive<l.  In  1851  he  was
electe<l  deputy  to  congress  by  the  state  of  Sinaloa,
and  in  the  next  year  he  was  a[>jH)inte<1  government
secretary  of  that  state,  where'lie  introduce<I  many
reforms.  The  revolution  of  the  same  vear  caustHi
him  to  emigrate  to  Ijower  California,  where  he  dis-
covered rich  pearl-ovster  banks.  In  185ii  he  was
called  by  Sanchez  Solis  to  his  newly  foundetl  col-
lege in  Mexico,  where  he  o|)6ned  a  course  of  philos-
ophy that  attracted  students  by  the  thousand,  but
fell  under  the  suspicion  of  the  dictator,  Santa-Anna,
who  imprisoned  Ramirez.  After  the  fall  of  Santa-
Anna,  Ramirez  was  returning  to  Sinaloa,  when  he
met  Gen.  Ignacio  Comonfort,  who  a|>|Hiiiited  him
his  general  secretary ;  but  when  he  saw  that  Com-
onfort was  separating  from  the  Lil^erals,  Ramirez,
being  electetl  deputy  for  Sinaloa,  joined  the  of»-
position.  After  the  dissolution  of  congress  by  Com-
onfort, which  he  disapprove*!,  he  was  persecuted,
and  on  his  flight  to  Sinaloa  was  capture<l.  carried
to  Queretaro,  and  condemned  to  deatn  ;  but  the  sen-
tence was  commuted,  and  after  long  imprisonment
he  was  lil)erated.  He  joined  Juarez  immediately
in  Vera  Cruz,  and  was  sent  to  the  northwestern
states,  to  prepare  for  the  triumph  of  the  reform
measures.  After  the  overthrow  of  Miramon  at
Calpulalpam,  Ramirez  retununl  to  Mexico  with
Juarez,  was  an|X)inte«l  minister  of  justice,  instnic-
tion,  and  public  works,  and  as  sucli  executed  the
law  of  5  Feb.,  1801,  dissolving  the  mtmastic  orders,
hastened  the  building  of  the  Vera  Cruz  railway,
reformed  the  law  of  mortgages,  founded  the  Na-
tional library,  and  saved  the  valuable  paintings
that  existed  in  the  convents,  forming  a  gallery  in
the  Academy  of  San  Carlos.  After  accomplishing
these  reforms  he  ri'signed.  and  when  the  Republican
government  alwndonetl  the  capital  liefore  the  in-
vading French  army,  he  went  to  Sinaloa  and  after-
ward to  Sonora  to  organize  resistance.  When  the
law  of  3  Oct.,  18(i5,  was  pmmulgated.  Ramirez  re-
turned to  Sinaloa  to  defend  in  the  courts-martial
the  guerillas  that  had  been  capture<l  by  the  French ;
but  he  was  stwn  banished,  and  went  to  ,S»in  Fran-
cisco, Cal.  Returning  afterwanl  to  ^lexico,  he
was  imprisoned  by  the  imperial  government  in  San
Juan  de  Ulua,  and  banished  to  Yucatan.  After
the  re-establishment  of  the  republic,  he  was  a|>-
pointed  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  for  Mime
years  was  associate  editor  of  "  Kl  Corn*o  de  Mexico."
After  his  re-election  as  judge  in  1874.  lie  sl«Ied
with  Iglesias  and  other  judges  against  Ix'nlo  de
Tejada,  and  was  imprisoned  in  Isoveml»er.  1876;
but  after  the  battle  of  Tecoac  he  was  liberated,
and  apjMiinted  by  President  Diaz  secretary  of  jus-
tice, instruction,  and  public  works.  He  resigne<l  in
May,  1877,  and  return«Ml  to  the  supreme  court,
where  heservetl  until  his  death.  His  many  literary
works  were  never  collected,  but  his  "  Pn>ye<'to  de
ensefianza  primaria,"  written  in  1873,  was  published
by  the  governor  of  Chihuaha.  Carlos  Pat^heco  (1884).
RAMIREZ  l)EQri5fONES,  Pedro,  b.  in  Strain
late  in  the  15th  century  ;  d.  at  Lima,  Peru,  alKiut
1570. When  the  audiencia  of  Confines,  or  Central


166


RAMOS  ARIZPE


RAMSAY


Atnorioa,  was  created  in  1542,  Ramiroz  was  ap-
noinled  judge,  and  took  possession  of  his  ofliee  in
Coinayagua  in  1543.  In  1546,  when  Pedro  de  la
Gasca  (q.  v.)  arrived  at  Santa  Marta,  liiiniirez  was
commissioned  bv  the  audiencia  to  carry  to  him  a  re-
enforcement  of  SOO  men,  and  took  part  in  the  hattle
of  Xaciuixaguana.  Me  returned  to  Uuatemala  in
154y,  went  to  Spain  in  1552,  and  on  his  return  to
Guatemala  was  ordered  bv  roval  decree  to  sulxlue
the  rebellious  Indians  of  Putchutla  and  Lacandon,
which  he  did  in  less  than  three  months.  As  a  re-
ward for  his  numerous  services,  in  1505  he  was
electetl  president  of  the  Confines,  and  later  he  was
promoted  to  Lima,  where  he  died.

RAMOS  ARIZPE,  Miguel  (rah'-mos-ah-rith'-
pay).  Mexican  statesman,  b.  in  San  Nicolas  (now  Ra-
mos Arizjx?),  Coahuila,  15  Feb.,  1775 ;  d.  in  Mexico,
28  April,  1843.  lie  studied  in  the  Seminary  of  Mon-
terey and  the  College  of  Guadalajara,  where  he  was
graduated  in  law,  and  began  to  practise  his  pro-
fession, but  later  he  entered  the  church,  and  was
ordained  in  1803  by  the  bishop  of  Monterey,  who
made  him  his  chaplain.  Soon  ho  was  appointed
professor  of  civil  and  canonical  law  in  the  Semi-
nary of  Monterey,  and  afterward  he  became  vicar-
^eneral  and  ecclesiastical  judge  of  several  parishes
in  Tamaulipas.  In  1807  he  returned  to  Guadala-
jara, and  was  graduated  as  doctor  in  theology  and
canonical  law,  and  made  a  canon  of  the  cathedral.
He  was  elected  in  September,  1810,  deputy  to  the
cortes  of  Cadiz,  took  his  seat  in  March,  1811,  and
labored  to  prepare  for  the  independence  of  his
country :  but  wnen  the  constitution  was  abrogated
by  the  returning  king  in  1814,  and  Ramos  refused
honors  that  were  offered  him  to  renounce  his
principles,  he  was  imprisoned.  When  the  con-
stitution was  re-established  in  1820,  he  regained
his  liberty,  took  his  seat  again  in  the  cortes,  and
was  appointed  in  1821  precentor  of  the  cathedral
of  Mexico.  In  the  next  year  he  returned  to  his
country,  was  elected  to  the  constituent  congress,
and  formed  part  of  the  commission  that  modelled
the  Federal  constitution  of  1824.  In  November,
1825,  he  was  called  by  President  Guadalupe  Vic-
toria to  his  cabinet  as  secretary  of  justice  and
ecclesiiistical  affairs,  which  place  he  occupied  till
March,  1828.  In  1830  he  was  sent  as  minister  to
Chili,  and  on  his  return  in  1831  he  was  appointed
dean  of  the  cathedral  of  Mexico.  When  President
Manuel  Gomez  Pedraza  took  charge  of  the  execu-
tive in  December,  1832,  he  made  Ramos  Arizpe
secretary  of  justice,  which  portfolio  he  also  held
under  X'alentin  Gomez  Farias  till  August,  1833.
In  1841  he  was  a  member  of  the  government  coun-
cil, and  in  1842  he  was  deputy  to  the  constituent
congress,  which  was  dissolved  by  President  Nicolas
Bravo.  lie  was  afterward  a  member  of  the  junta
de  notables,  but  failing  health  forced  him  to  retire,
and  soon  afterward  he  died.

RAMSAY,  David,  physician,  b.  in  Lancaster
county.  Pa.,  2  April,  1749;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,
8  May,  1815.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1765,  at  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1773,  meanwhile  teaching  for
several  years.  Settling  in  Charleston,  he  soon  ac-
quired celebrity  as  a  physician,  and  also  was  active
with  his  pen  in  behalf  of  colonial  rights.  At  the
beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  took  the
field  as  a  surgeon,  and  served  (luring  the  siege  of
Savannah.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  South
Carolina  legislature  in  1776-'83,  and  a  member  of
the  council  of  safety,  in  which  capacity  he  became
so  obnoxious  to  the  British  that,  on  the  capture  of
Charleston  in  May,  1780,  he  was  included  among
the  forty  inhabitants  of  that  place  that  were  held


Kue^AA^^j(nM<^yy%*^A^


in  close  confinement  at  St.  Augustine  for  eleven
months  as  hostages.  Dr.  Ramsay  was  a  delegate
to  the  Continental  congress  in  1782-'6,  long  a  mem-
ber of  the  South  Carohna  .senate,  and  its  president
for  seven  years.  His  death  was  the  result  of  wounds
that  he  received
from  the  pistol  of  a
maniac,  concerning
whose  mental  un-
soundness he  had
testified.  During
the  progress  of  the
Revolution,  Doctor
Ramsay  collected
materials  for  its  his-
tory, and  his  great
impartiality,  hisflne
memory,  and  his
acquaintance  with
many  of  the  actors
in  the  contest,  emi-
nently qualified  him
for  the  task.  His
occasional  papers
relating  to  the  times
had  considerable
popularity.  Among
these  was  a  "  Ser-
mon on  Tea,"  from  the  text  "Touch  not,  taste
not,  handle  not,"  and  an  "Oration  on  American
Independence"  (1778).  His  other  works  include
"History  of  the  Revolution  of  South  Carolina
from  a  British  Province  to  an  Independent  State  "
(Trenton,  1785) ;  "  History  of  the  American  Revo-
lution "  (Philadelphia.  1789) ;  "  On  the  Means  of
Preserving  Health  in  Charleston  and  its  Vicinity  "
(Charleston,  1790) ;  "  Review  of  the  Improvements,
Progress,  and  State  of  Medicine  in  the  Eighteenth
Century"  (1802);  "Life  of  George  Washington"
(New  York,  1807);  "History  of  South  Carolina
from  its  Settlement  in  1670  to  the  Year  1808"
(Charleston,  1809) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Mrs.  Martha  Lau-
rens Ramsay,  with  Extracts  from  her  Diary"
(1811);  "  Eulogium  on  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1813) ;  "  History  of  the  United  States,
1607-1808,"  continued  to  the  treaty  of  Ghent  by
Samuel  S.  Smith  and  others  (Philadelphia,1816-'17),
forming  the  first  three  volumes  of  "  Universal  His-
tory Americanized,  or  an  Historical  View  of  the
World  from  the  Earliest  Records  to  the  Nineteenth
Century,  with  a  Particular  Reference  to  the  State
of  Society,  Literature,  Religion,  and  Form  of  Gov-
ernment of  the  United  States  of  America"  (12
vols.,  1819).  Dr.  Ramsay  married,  first,  Frances,  a
daughter  of  John  Witherspoon,  and  then  Martha,
daughter  of  Henry  Laurens. — His  second  wife,
Martha  Lanrens,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  3  Nov.,
1759;  d.  there,  10  June,  1811,  accompanied  her
father,  Henry  Laurens,  on  his  missions  abroad,  and
so  spent  ten  years  of  her  early  life  in  England  and
France.  While  Mr.  Laurens  was  minister  at  Paris
he  presented  his  daughter  with  500  guineas,  with
part  of  which  she  purchased  100  French  testa-
ments and  distributed  them  among  the  destitute  of
Vigan  and  its  vicinity,  and  with  the  rest  she  estab-
lished a  school.  In  1785  she  returned  to  Charles-
ton, and  in  1787  she  married  Dr.  Ramsay.  Subse-
quently she  assisted  her  husband  in  his  literary
work,  and  prepared  her  sons  for  college.  See  "  Me-
moirs of  Mrs.  Martha  Laurens  Ramsay,  with  Ex-
tracts from  her  Diary  "  by  her  husband  (Charles-
ton, 1811).— Dr.  Ramsay's  brother,  Natlianiel,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Lancaster  county.  Pa.,  1  May,  1751 :  d.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  23  Oct.,  1817,  wa^  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1767,  and,  after  studying  law,  was  ad-


RAMSAY


RAMSEUR


167


mitt*"*!  in  1771  to  tho  MnrvlHiid  liar.  In  177.'5  he  !
wus  H  (li'li'pttc  from  his  county  to  tho  MnryUntl  ,
oonvi'Mtion,  and  conliinii><l  lu'tiv*-  in  tho  American
caus(>.  IxH-omiiiff  in  177M  captHin  in  the  first  Itat-
tiUitm  that  wa.s  rais***!  in  the  stat<>.  He  n'm-htnl  tht>
Amiy  in  tim»  to  tako  part  in  thoimtth>  of  Ijon^;  i
Islatul.  and  fontiniu>4l  uixicr  Wiishin>^on,  attaining  i
the  rank  of  lieut4'nant-<-o|oni>l  c-omniandant  of  the
8(1  rejjiniont  of  tho  Maryland  lino.  When  flen.
CharK'8  Ixm>'s  command  n'tircnl  I »e fore  tho  British
troops  at  Monmouth,  Wa,-*hin>rton  called  to  him
Col.  Charles  Stewart  and  Col.  Kamsay,  and.- taking
the  latter  by  tlie  hand,  said :  "I  shall  <l<'|)end  on
your  immediate  exerti<ms  to  chiM-k  with  your  two
regiments  the  pro)jrt»ss  of  the  enemy  till  I  can  form
the  main  army."  Col.  Kamsav  maintained  tho
ffround  ho  had  taken  till  he  was  feft  without  troops.
In  this  situation  he  enjfagwl  in  single  combat  with
some  British  dragiH>ns,  an<l  was  cut  clown  and  loft
for  deml  on  the  fieUl.  This  important  service
arrest e<l  the  pn)gress  of  the  British  army,  and  gave
time  to  the  commander-in-chief  to  bring  up  and
«8!*ign  pro|>er  jKisitions  to  the  main  army.  Col.
Ramsay  wa-s  then  captured,  and  sul>80<piently  saw
no  active  service.  A  long  j)orio<l  was  |»assed  on
parole  or  in  imprisonment,  and  when  exchange
Drought  release  nis  place  had  been  filled.  After
the  war  he  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession,
and  representetl  Maryland  in  congress  during
1786-'7.  He  was  ma<le  marshal  of  the  district  of
Maryland  in  1790,  and  again  in  1794,  in  addition  to
which  he  n»ceived  the  a|)|K)intment  of  naval  olflcer
for  the  district  of  Baltimore  in  1794,  which  he  held
during  five  administrations.

R.\MSAT,  (ileorirp  Douglas,  soldier,  b.  in  Dum-
fries, Va.,  21  Feb.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
2;i  >iay,  1882.  His  father,  a  merchant  of  Alexan-
dria, V'a.,  removed  to  Washington  early  in  the  19th
century.  The  son  was  graduate*!  at  the  V.  S.  mili-
tary jwmlemy  in  1820,  assigned  to  the  artillery,  and
serve<l  on  garrison  and  tojwigraphical  duty  till  25
Feb.,  ISSa,  when  he  was  made  captain  of  ordnance.
He  then  had  charge  of  various  arsenals  till  the
Mexican  war.  when  he  was  engaged  at  Monterey
and  brevetted  major  for  gallantry  there.  He  was
chief  of  ordnance  of  Gen.  Taylor's  army  in  1847-'8,
and  again  commande<l  arsenals  till  1803,  when  he
was  a  momU^r  of  the  ordnance  boarti.  He  was
mmle  lieutenant-colonel.  3  Aug..  18(51.  and  was  in
charge  of  Wjishington  arsenal  from  that  time  till
1863.  On  15  Sept.  of  that  year  he  was  made  chief
of  onlnance  of  the  U.  S,  army  with  the  rank  of
brij;a<lier-general,  and  he  was  at  the  head  of  the
ordnance  bureau  in  Washington  till  12  Sept.,  1864,
when  he  was  retired  from  active  service.  l)eing  over
sixty-two  yeai-s  of  age.  He  continueil  to  serve  as
insj)ector  of  arsenals  till  1866.  then  in  command  of
the  arsenal  at  Washington  till  1870,  antl  afterward
as  member  of  an  examining  board.  He  was  bre-
vetted major-general.  V.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865,
"for  long  and  faithful  ser\'ices."  Gen.  Ramsay
was  an  active  meml)er  of  the  Protestant  Kpiscopal
church,  and  for  many  vearsser^•ed  as  senior  wanlen
of  St.  .John's  church,  Washington. — His  son,  Fran-
cis Miinroe,  naval  ofTicer,  b.  in  the  District  of
Columbia,  5  April,  18JM,  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman in  lH,iO.  He  i)ecame  lieutenant  in  18.'i8,
lieutenant-commander  in  1862,  mrticijmted  in  the
engagi'Mientsat  Haines's  bluff,  \  azoo  river.  30  April
aixl  1  .May.  186:^.  in  the  expedition  up  the  Yaz«x>
river,  tle-stroying  the  Confe<lerate  navy-yanl  and
vessels,  and  in  the  fight  at  Liverpools'  landing.
He  commande<l  a  battery  of  throe  heavv  guns  in
front  of  Vicksburg  from'  19  Juno  till  4  .luly.  186:^
and  the  3d  division  of  the  Mississippi  squadron


fr»)m  the  latter  date  till  Septomlier.  1864.  He  wai*
in  charge  of  tho  ox|M-«lition  up  Black  and  Oua-
chita rivers  in  March.  1864,  and  of  that  into  Atcha-
falaya  river  in  .Fiine  of  that  year,  .»nd  enjfage«l  the
enemy  at  SimmsjM>rt.  Im.  Hecomman<ied  the  giin-
lioat  "  I'nadilla,'  of  the  North  Atlantic  s(|uadron,
in  1864-'5,  participaletl  in  the  attacks  on  Fort
Fisher,  for  wnich  he  wascf>mmendo<l  in  the  official
reiH)rt  for  "skill, conduct,  judgment, and  braverj',"
and  in  the  several  cngagement.s  with  F'ort  Ander-
son and  other  forts  on  Cape  Fear  river.  He  ))e<-amo
commander  in  18WJ.  fleet-captain  and  chief  of  staff
of  the  South  Atlantic  squadron  in  lH({7-'9.  captain
in  1877,  and  was  in  command  of  the  tor|>edo  station
in  1878-'80.  Ho  was  su|M'rintendeiit  of  the  U,  S.
naval  academy  from  1881  till  1880,  and  since  1887
has  been  in  command  of  the  "  lioston."  He  was  a
memU'rof  the  Naval  examining  lx)ard  in  1886-'7.

RAMSAY,  Thomas  Kennedy,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  in  Avr.  Scotland.  2  Sept..  1826;  d.  in  St.  Ilugucs,
guelK'ci  23  Dec,  1886.  He  was  educato<l  at  St.
Andrews,  came  to  Canada  earlv  in  life,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  18.52.  He
receive<l  tho  degree  of  M.  A.  from  Lennoxville  uni-
versity in  1855.  was  secretary  of  the  commission  for
cotlifying  the  laws  in  18.59,  and  was  appointed
queen's  counsel  in  1867.  He  l)ecame  assistant  judge
of  the  supreme  court  of  Quol>ec  in  1870,  and  puisne
judge  of  the  court  of  queen's  Ijonch  in  187!*.  He
was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the  Dominion
parliament  in  1807.  Judge  Hamsay  fouiuled  the
'*  Ij<^)wer  Canada  Jurist,"  and  early  in  his  career  was
editor  of  the  "Journal  do  jurisprudence"  of  Mon-
treal. He  is  also  the  author  of  various  law-books.

RAMSEUR.  Stephen  Uodson,  soldier,  b.  in
Lincolnton,  N.  C,  31  Mav,  18;i7;  d.  in  Winchester,
Va.,  20  Oct..  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  18(K),  assigned  to  the  4th
artillery,  and  jtlace<l
on  garrison  duty  at
Fortress  Monroe.  In
1861  he  was  trans-
ferred to  Washing-
ton, but  he  resigned
on  6  April  and  en-
tered the  Confe<ler-
ate  service  as  captain
of  the  light  artillery.
Late  in  1861  he  pro-
ceoiled  to  Virginia
and  was  stationed  on
tho  south  side  of  the
James,  and  in  the
spring  of  1862  he  was
or(lere<l  to  rej>ort
with  his  Iwittory  to
(ion.  John  B.  Magru-
der.  During  Gen.
McClellan's  advance

up  tho  peninsula  he  had  command  of  the  artil-
lery of  the  right  wing  with  the  rank  of  major.
Soon  afterward  he  was  promote<l  colonel,  assigned
to  the  49th  North  Carolina  infantry,  and  with
this  regiment  particiiwited  in  the  latter  part  of
the  peninsular  campaign.  Ho  reci'ived  the  ap-
pointment of  briganier-general  on  1  Nov.,  1862,
succeeded  to  the  l»riga<le,  compos«Hl  of  North  Caro-
lina n'giments,  that  was  formerly  commanded  by
Gen.  George  B.  Anderson,  and  was  attached  toGeii.
Thomas  J.  Jacks<in's  cori)s.  serving  with  credit  at
Chancellorsville  and  Gettysburg.  Subsequently  he
served  in  the  Wilderness,  and  on  1  Juno.  1864.  was
given  the  temporary  rank  of  major-general  and
assigned  a  division  that  had  Ikhmi  commande<i  by
Gen.  Jubal  A.  Earlv. Gen.  Karaseur  followed  the


168


RAMSEY


RAND


latter  commandpr  in  the  brief  campaign  in  the
Shenandoah  valley,  participated  in  the  battle  of
Winchester,  and  was  mortally  wounded  at  Cedar
Creek  while  rallying  his  troops.

RAMSEY,  Alexander,  anatomist,  b.  probably
in  Land<m,  JIngland,  in  1754;  d.  in  Parsonsfield,
Me.,  24  Nov..  1824.  He  studied  medicine  under
George  Cruikshank  in  London  for  several  years,
and  Ijecamo  famous  for  his  anatomical  preparations.
He  came  to  this  country  about  180().  and  delivered
a  short  course  of  lectures  on  anatomy  and  physi-
ology in  Columbia  college.  He  j)ossesscd  much  pro-
fessional learning,  but  his  vanity,  arrogance,  and
pomp,  combined  with  his  grotesriue  person,  inter-
fered with  his  success  as  a  tejicner,  and  won  him
the  name  of  "the  Caliban  of  science."  He  atlopted
the  theory  that  the  bite  of  a  venomous  snake  wjis
rendered  innoxious  by  alkalies,  and  died  from  the
results  of  an  experiment  on  himself.  He  published
"  Anatomy  of  the  Heart,  Cranium,  and  Brain "
(Edinburgh,  1813),  and  •'  Plates  on  the  Brain "
(London.  1813).

RAMSEY,  Alexander,  secretary  of  war,  b.  near
Harrisburg,  Pa..  8  Sept.,  1815.  He  was  educated
at  Lafayette  college,  and  in  1828  became  clerk  in
the  register's  office  of  his  native  county.  He  was
secretary  of  the  Electoral  college  of  Pennsylvania
in  1840,"the  next  year  was  clerk  of  the  state  house

of  representatives,
was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Whig  in
1842,  and  served  till

1847.  He  was  chair-
man of  the  state
central  committee
of  Pennsylvania  in

1848,  and  was  ap-
pointed first  terri-
torial governor  of
Minnes(jta  in  1849,
holding  office  till
1853.  During  this
service  he  nego-
tiated a  treaty  at
Mendota  for  the  ex-
tinction of  the  title
of  the  Sioux  half-
breeds  to  the  lands

on  Lake  Pepin,  and  two  with  the  Sioux  nation  by
which  the  U.  S.  government  acquired  all  the  lands
in  Minnesota  west  of  Mississippi  river,  thus  opening
that  state  to  colonization,  lie  also  made  treaties
with  the  Chippewa  Indians  on  Red  river  in  1851  and
1853.  He  became  mayor  of  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  in  1855,
was  governor  of  the  state  in  18(K)-'3,  and  in  the
latter  year  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Re-
publican, holding  his  seat  in  1863-'75.  and  serving
as  chairman  of  the  committees  on  Revolutionary
claims  and  pensions,  on  post-roads  and  on  territo-
ries. He  became  secretary  of  war  in  1879.  suc-
ceeding George  W.  McCrary,  and  held  office  till  the
close  of  Hayes's  administration.  He  was  appointed
by  President  Arthur,  in  1882,  a  member  of  the  Utah
commission,  under  the  act  of  congress  known  as
the  Edmunds  bill  (see  Edmunds,  George  F.),  con-
tinuing in  that  service  till  1886.  In  1887  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  centennial  celebration  of  the  adop-
tion of  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.

RAMSEY,  James  Gattys  McGregor,  author,
b.  in  Knox  county,  Tenn.,  in  1796;  d.  in  Knoxville,
Tenn.,  in  1884.  His  father,  Francis  A,  Ramsey,
(1760-1819),  emigrated  to  the  west  early  in  life,
and  became  secretary  of  the  state  of  "  Franklin,"
which  was  subsequently  admitted  to  the  Union
under  the  name  of  Tennessee. The  son  was  lib-


/pZ^yv<^eA^


erallv  educate<l,  and  studietl  medicine,  receiving
the  degree  of  M.  I).,  but  never  practise<l  his  profes-
sion. In  early  nianhmKl  he  engaged  in  banking,
and  in  later  days  he  was  elected  pre.sident  of  the
Bank  of  Tennessee,  at  Knoxville.  While  yet  a
young  man  he  lx;gan  the  collection  of  material  for
a  history  of  Tennessee.  The  papers  of  Gov.  Sevier
and  Gov.  Shelby  were  placed  in  his  hands,  and  from
them  and  other  valuable  documents  he  published
the  "  Annals  of  Tennessee  to  the  End  of  the  Eigh-
teenth Century  "  (Charleston,  S.  C,  1853).  He  also
foundetl  the  first  historical  society  in  the  state,  and
at  his  death  was  president  of  the  one  at  Nashville,
which  he  left  in  a  flourishing  condition.  When
Tennessee  seceded  from  the  Union  he  was  appointed  '
financial  agent  for  the  southern  wing  of  the  Con-
federacy, lie  Joined  the  Confederate  army  on  its
retreat  from  Knoxville,  and  remained  with  it  till
its  final  dissolution.  During  the  occupation  of
that  city  by  National  troops  the  house  in  which
his  father  hatl  lived  and  ne  had  been  bom  was
burned,  and  all  the  valuable  historical  papers  it
contained  were  destroyed.  In  consequence  of  the
war  he  lost  most  of  his  property'.

RANI),  Asa,  clergyman,  b.  m  Rindge,  N.  H.,  6
Aug.,  1788;  d.  in  Ashbumham,  Mass..  24  Aug.,
1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1806,
and  ordained  as  a  minister  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  in  January,  1809.  After  a  pastor-
ate of  thirteen  years'  duration  at  Gorham,  Me.,  he
edited  the  "Christian  Mirror"  at  Portland,  Me.,
in  1822-'5,  afterward  conducted  the  "Recorder"
and  the  "  Youth's  Companion  "  at  Boston,  and  in
1833  established  a  booK-store  and  printing-office
at  Lowell.  He  published  the  "  Observer  "  at  this
place,  lectured  against  slavery,  and  was  then  pas-
tor of  churches  at  Pompey  and  Peterborough,  N.  Y.
He  published  "  Teacher's  Manual  for  Teaching  in
English  Grammar"  (Boston,  1832),  and  "The
Slave-Catcher  caught  in  the  Meshes  of  the  Eter-
nal Law  "  (Cleveland,  1852).— His  son.  William
Wllberforee,  author,  b.  in  Gorham,  Me.,  8  Dec.,
1816,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1837,  at  the
Theological  seminary  at  Bangor,  Me.,  in  1840.  and
in  the  latter  year  was  licensed  to  preach  as  a  Con-
gregational minister.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Re-
formed Dutch  church  of  Canastota,  N.  Y.,  from
1841  till  1845,  editor  for  the  American  tract  so-
ciety. New  York  city,  in  1848-'72,  and  has  since
been  its  publishing  secretary.  He  is  the  author
of  "  Songs  of  Zion '  (New  York,  1850 ;  enlarged  ed.,
1866) ;  "  Dictionary  of  the  Bible  for  General  Use  "
(1860;  enlarged  and  largely  rewritten,  1887);  and
other  smaller  books.

RANI),  Benjamin  Howard,  educator,  b.  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  16  Feb.,  1792;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  9  June,  1862.  He  settled  in  Philadelphia
early  in  the  19th  century,  and  was  engaged  in  the
teaching  of  penmanship,  in  which  for  more  than
twenty-five  vears  he  had  a  high  reputation.  Mr.
Rand  published  "  The  American  Penman  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1856);  "Rand's  Penmanship"  (8  parts);
"Rand's  Copy-Book  "  (9  parts);  and  "Appendix"
(5  parts).  These  books  ran  through  several  edi-
tions, and  at  the  time  oL  his  death  the  sale  of  the
different  numbers  had  aggregated  more  than  one
and  a  half  million  copies. — His  daughter,  Marion
Howard,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  5  Jan.,
1824,  d.  in  Grahamville,  S.  C.  9  June,  1849.  con-
tributed largely  to  "The  Offering."  " The  Young
People's  Book,*'  "Graham's  Magazine."  "Godey's
Lady's  Book,"  and  other  periodicals.  Specimens  of
her  poetry  are  contained  in  Read's  "  Female  Poets
of  America"  and  in  May's  "American  Female
Poets." — His  son,  Benjamin  Howard,  physician.


RAND


RAND


169


b.  in  PhiladHphift,  Pa..  1  Oct..  1R27:  d.  thoro,  14
K«'l).,  188JJ,  WHS  f;ra(luatc<l  at  Jefferson  me<lical
colli'tro  in  184W.  after  MtudyitiK  under  Dr.  KolK-rt
M.  Huston.  Durinjr  the  la-sl  two  years  of  hi.s
8tudent  life  lie  si-rved  as  clinical  assistant  to  Dr.
Thonms  D.  MlUter  and  l)r.  .Joseph  I'ancotist.  In
1850  ho  was  eieclwl  professor  of  chemistry  in  the
Franklin  institute,  ami  he  also  held  a  similar  chair
in  the  Philtulelphia  medical  colle|ro  in  IH.'ili-'W.
From  1852  till  18<W  he  was  secretary  of  the  Phila-
delphia academy  of  natural  sciences.  In  1804  ho
ac-cepted  the  professorship  of  chemistry  in  Jeffer-
son me«lical  college,  whicn  he  held  until  his  rcsij;-
nati<ni  in  1H77  l)r.  Itand  wjus  elected  a  fellow  of
the  Philadelphia  college  of  physicians  in  1K53.  a
fellow  of  the  American  philoso[)hi<-al  society  in
18C8,  and,  besides  membership  in  other  societies,
was  connected  with  the  American  nuHlical  associ-
ation, lie  made  many  contributions  to  medical
journals,  edite<l  the  third  edition  of  Dr.  Samuel  L.
Metcalf's  "Caloric:  its  Agencies  on  the  Phenome-
na of  Nature"  (Philadelphia,  1S.')9),  and  was  the
author  of  "An  Outline  of  Mcilical  Chemistry"
(1855)  and  "Klements  of  Mc<lical  Chemistry"
(1863). — Another  son,  Theodore  Dehon,  mineralo-
gist, b.  in  Philatlelphia,  Pa.,  16  .Sept.,  1836,  was
educatecl  at  the  Acadeniy  of  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church  in  Philadelphia,  and  then  stuuied
law.  After  his  admission  to  the  Imr  he  opened  an
office  in  his  native  city,  and  has  since  continued  in
practice.  Mr.  li^ind  early  turned  his  attention  to
natural  science,  especially  to  mineralofjy,  and  his
cabinet  of  specimens  ranks  as  one  of  the  best  pri-
vate collections  in  the  United  States,  containing
Tery  nearly  a  complete  set  of  the  rocks  and  miner-
als of  Philadelphia  and  its  vicinity.  In  1871  he
became  a  meml)er  of  the  board  of  managers  of  the
Franklin  institute,  and  since  1873  he  has  been
treasurer  of  the  American  institute  of  mining  en-
gineers. Mr.  Kand  ha-s  been  a  member  of  the  council
of  the  Philtulelphia  academy  of  natural  sciences
since  1875,  and  director  of  its  mineralogical  and  geo-
logical section.  His  public^itions  include  many
f»aj)ers  on  the  mineralogy  and  geology  of  Philadel-
phia and  its  vicinity  in  the  transactions  of  scientific
societies  of  which  he  is  a  meml)er,  and  he  has  pre-
pareti  a  geological  map  and  explanatory  text  for  the
reports  of  the  geological  survey  of  Pennsylvania.

K.\ND,  Edward  Sprague,  merchant,  b.  in
Newburvport,  Mass.,  in  1782;  d.  there  in  N'ovem-
ber,  186Ji.  He  was  educated  at  the  Dummer  acade-
my in  his  native  place,  and  afterward  entered  his
father's  store  as  a  clerk.  When  he  was  eighteen
years  of  age  he  went  to  Euroi>e  as  a  supercargo,
and  before  he  was  twenty-one  ne  was  establishe*!
as  a  commission  merchant  in  Amsterdam.  Leav-
ing that  city,  he  made  voyages  to  the  Canary  isl-
ands, Havana,  and  elsewhere,  and  after  revisiting
this  country  he  went  to  Russia.  On  his  return
from  St.  Petersburg  in  1810  he  was  shipwrecketl  on
the  Naze,  Norway.  After  the  treaty  of  peace  with
Great  Britain  in  1815  he  was  for  many  years  en-
gageil  in  the  Kast  India  trade.  In  1821,  with
others,  he  purchased  a  woollen-mill  at  Salisbury,
now  known  as  the  Salisbury  mills,  of  which  he  was
for  a  long  time  president.  In  1827  he  withdrew
from  commerce  and  engaged  in  manufacturing.
From  1H27  till  18:J5  he  was  president  of  the  Me-
chanics' l)ank,  Newburvport,  and  he  sat  for  several
years  in  each  branch  of  the  legislature.  lie  was
often  a  «lelegate  to  the  general  convention  of  the
Protestant  Kpisctipal  church. — His  grandson.  Ed-
ward Spragiie.  floriculturist,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
20  Oct.,  1h;{4.  wa.«  graduated  at  Harvard  in  lf<55,
and  at  the  law-school  in 1857,  and  subsequently


fornie<l  a  partnership  with  his  father.  He  de-
votes much  time  to  floriculture  and  literature  at
his  home  at  Dedham,  Ma.ss.  He  a>sisted  in  Flint's
e<lition  of  "  Harris  on  Ins«-cts  Injurious  to  Vegeta-
tion "  (B<»st  on,  1862).  edite<l  the  floral  defiartnient
of  "The  Homesteail,"  and  partially prcpar<Hl  a  new
edition  of  Dr.  Jacob  Higelow's  "  Florula  Ii<isto-
niensis."  He  has  published  "  Life  Memoirs,  and
other  Poeras  "  (Boston.  1850) ;  "  Flowers  for  the  Par-
lor and  (Jarden  "  (1863) ;  "  Garden  Flowers  "  (1  WMl) ;
"BuUw"  (186({);  ".Seventy-flve  Popular  Flowers,
and  How  to  cultivate  Them"(1870):  "The  Khcxlo-
dendron  and  American  Plants"  (1871):  "Window
Gardener  "  (1872);  and  "Complete  Manual  of  Or-
chid Culture"  (New  York,  1870).

RAND,  Isaac,  physician,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  27  April,  1743  ;'d.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  11  Dec,.
1822.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1761.  stud-
ie<l  me<licine  with  his  father,  of  the  same  name,  in
Charlestown,  and  in  1764  settled  in  Boston,  where
he  remained  during  the  siege,  and  ultimately  }te-
came  one  of  the  most  noted  jjractitioners  of  his
time.  From  171)8  till  1804  he  was  nresident  of  the
Massachusetts  mctlical  society,  and  he  was  also  a
corres|H)nding  member  of  the  L<jndon  medical  so-
ciety. Dr.  Rand  published  papers  on  "  Hydro-
cephalus Intemus"  (1785);  "Yellow  Fever"
(1*98);  and  on  "The  U.seof  Warm  Bath  and  Digi-
talis in  Pulmonan'  Consumption  "  (1804).

RAND,  Sila.H  I'ertlns,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.
in  Cornwallis,  Nova  Scotia,  17  May,  1810.  He  was
ortlained  tfj  the  I^ptist  ministrj'  in  IKM.  and  in
1846  became  a  missionary  among  the  Micmac  In-
dians. Acadia  college  gave  him  the  degree  of
I).  D.  in  1886,  and  Queen's  university  that  of
LL.  D.  in  the  same  year.  Dr.  Rand  is  a  fine  lin-
guist, and  R'ads  with  ease  thirteen  languages.  He
has  rescued  the  Micmac  tongue  from  oblivion,  and
has  translated  the  whole  of  the  New  Testament,
most  of  the  Old.  and  many  tracts  and  hymns,  into
that  language.  He  has  written  a  grammar,  and  a
dictionary  which  contains  thirty  thousand  Micmac
words,  and  has  in  his  study  12,000  itages  of  fools-
cap manuscript  giving  the  legends  of  the  trilje.  In
this  way  he  has  preserved  eighty-four  tales,  tradi-
tions, and  legends  of  the  Canadian  aborigines.
The  Dominion  government,  at  the  request  of  sev-
eral college  presidents,  recently  purchased  for  pres-
ervation the  manuscript  of  his  Micmac  dictionary
for  $1,000.  The  Smithsonian  institutitm  at  Wash-
ington obtained  from  Dr.  Rand  a  list  of  all  his  In-
dian works  for  publication  in  the  "North  Ameri-
can Linguistics  or  Bibliography."  "Algonquin
Legends,^'  by  Charles  G.  Iceland  (Boston,  1884),
contains  120  pages  of  Dr.  Rand's  material,  which
is  fully  acknowledged  hv  the  author.

RAND,  Theodore  Harding.  Canadian  educa-
tor, h.  in  Cornwallis,  Nova  S<-otia.  in  WVt.  His
father  was  first  cousin  to  Dr.  .Silas  T.  Rand.  The
son  was  graduated  at  Acadia  college  in  1860,  and
appointed  the  same  year  to  the  chair  of  classics  at
the  Provincial  normal  school,  Tniro,  N.  S.  He
travelle<l  in  Great  Britain  and  the  I'nitiHl  States
to  make  a  special  study  of  common-school  etluca-
tion,  and  has  lectured  and  written  on  the  subject.
In  1864  he  became  sujK?rintendent  of  e<lucation  for
Nova  Scotia,  and  in  1871  he  was  apiMtinted  to  the
same  post  in  New  Brunswick  to  estaVtlish  the  free-
school  system  in  that  province.  In  1883  he  be-
came professor  of  history  and  didactics  in  Acadia
collegt*,  in  1885  he  was  appointetl  professor  in  the
Baptist  college  at  Toronto,  and  in  1886  he  was
given  the  i)residency  of  the  Baptist  college  at
Woo<lstrK'k,  ( )nt.  I  le  recei veil  the  degree  of  D.  C.  L.
from  Acadia  college  in  1874.


170


RANDALL


RANDALL


^t^:?'^*:*-*,^^.^^^


RANDALL,  Alexander  Williams,  statesman,
b.  in  Ames,  Montgoinerv  i'0„  N.  Y.,  JU  Oct..  1H19;
d.  in  Kiinira,  N.  Y.,  25  July,  1«72.  His  father,
Phineas,  a  native  of  Massachusetts.  resi<leil  in  Mont-
gomery county,  N.  Y.,  from  1818  till  1831,  was  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  there  in  18:J7-'41,

and  removing  to
Waukesha,  Wis.,
died  there  in
1853.  Alexan-
der received  a
thorough  aca-
demic educa-
tion, studied
law,  was  julmit-
ted  to  the  bar,
and  began  to
practise  in  Wau-
kesha in  1840.
He  became  soon
afterward  post-
master of  that
place,  and  in
1847  was  chosen
a  member  of  the
convention  that
framed  the  state  constitution.  He  then  devoted
himself  to  his  profession  till  1855,  when  he  was
elected  to  the  state  assembly.  The  same  year  he
was  an  imsuccessful  candidate  for  the  attorney-
generalship,  and  was  appointed  judge  of  the  Mil-
waukee circuit  court  to  fill  an  unexpired  term.  In
1857.  and  again  in  1859,  he  was  elected  governor
of  Wisconsin,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  and  pending  the  convening  of  tne  legislature,
in  extra  session,  he  called  the  2d  regiment  into  ex-
istence, and  used  the  public  funds  in  advance  of
lawful  appropriation ;  but  he  was  fully  sustained  by
the  legislature  when  it  assembled.  At  the  close  of
his  gubernatorial  term,  1  Jan.,  1861,  he  was  dis-
suaded from  his  purpose  of  entering  the  army  by
President  Lincoln,  and  appointed  U.  S.  minister  to
Italy.  On  his  resignation  and  return  in  1862,  he
was  made  first  assistant  postmaster-general,  and  in
July,  1866.  postmaster-general,  and  served  in  that
capacity  till  March,  1869.

RANDALL,  David  Austin,  author,  b.  in  Col-
chester, Conn.,  14  Jan.,  1813;  d.  in  Columbus,  Ohio,
27  June,  1884.  He  was  educated  at  country  schools
and  at  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  academy,  and  became
a  IJaptist  clergyman.  He  was  chaplain  of  the  Ohio
asylum  for  the  insane  in  1854-66,  pastor  of  a
church  in  Columbus  in  1858-'66,  and  correspond-
ing secretary  of  the  Ohio  Baptist  conference  in
1850-'63.  Mr.  Randall  was  for  many  years  editor
of  the  "  Washingtonian."  the  first  temperance
paper  in  Ohio,  and  in  1845-'53  edited  the  "  Cross
and  Journal,"  a  Baptist  newspaper.  He  was  widely
known  as  a  lecturer,  and  wjis  also  a  memter  of  a
book-selling  firm  and  director  of  a  bank.  He
travelled  in  Egypt  and  Palestine  in  1861-2,  and
wrote  "God's  Handwriting  in  Egypt,  Sinai,  and
the  Holy  Land  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1862),  and
"  Ham-Mishkan.  the  Wonderful  Tent :  a  Study  of
the  Structure,  Significance,  and  Symbolism  of  the
Hebrew  Tabernacle  "  (Cincinnati,  1886).

RANDALL,  (ieorpe  Maxwell,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Warren,  R.  I..  23  Nov.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Denver,
Col.,  28  Sept.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown
in  1835,  and  at  the  Episcopal  general  theological
seminary.  New  York,  in  1838.  He  was  ordained
deacon  in  St.  Mark's  church,  Warren,  17  July,
1838.  by  Bishop  Griswold,  and  {)riest,  in  the  same
church,  2  Nov..  1839,  by  the  same  bishop.  His
first  parochial  charge  was  that  of  the  Church  of


the  Ascension,  Fall  River,  Mass.  In  1844  he  ac-
cepted the  rectorship  of  the  Church  of  the  Messiah,
Boston,  Mass.,  which  jiost  he  held  for  twenty-one
years.  He  receivwl  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown
In  1856.  He  was  a  clerical  deputy  from  the  diocese
of  Massachusetts  from  1850  tdl  1865,  inclusive,  and
was  chosen  secretary  to  the  house  of  clerical  and  lay
deputies  in  1862  and  1865.  He  was  appointed  by  the
general  convention  to  be  missionary  oishop  of  Colo-
rado, and  was  consecrated  in  Trinity  church,  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  28  Dec,  1865.  Bishop  Randall  published
numerous  sermons,  addresses,  and  lectures,  and
contributed  freely  to  church  literature,  chiefly
through  the  columns  of  "  The  Christian  Witness
and  Church  Advocate,"  of  which  he  was  editor  for
many  years.  He  also  published  a  tract  entitled
"  Why  I  am  a  Churchman."  which  has  had  a  very
large  circulation,  and  "  Observations  on  Confir-
mation "  (6th  ed.,  1868).

RANDALL,  James  Ryder,  song-writer,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  1  Jan.,  1839.  He  was  educated  at
Georgetown  college,  D.  C,  but  was  not  graduated,
and  afterward  travelled  in  South  America.  When
he  was  a  young  man  he  went  to  Louisiana  and
edited  a  newspaper  at  Point  Coupee,  and  after-
ward was  engaged  on  the  New  Orleans  "  Sunday
Delta."  His  delicate  constitution  prevented  him
from  entering  the  Confederate  army,  but  he  wrote
much  in  support  of  the  southern  cause.  His
"  Maryland,  my  Maryland,"  which  was  published
in  Baltimore  in  April,  1861,  was  set  to  music,  and
became  widely  popular.  It  has  been  called  "the
Marseillaise  of the Confederate cause." Other

r)oems  from  his  pen  were  "  The  Sole  Sentry,"  "  Ar-
ington,"  "  The  Cameo  Bracelet,"  "  There's  Life
in  the  Old  Land  Yet,"  and  "The  Battle-Cry  of  the
South."  After  the  war  he  went  to  Augusta,  Ga.,
where  he  became  associate  editor  of  "  The  Consti-
tutionalist," and  in  1866  its  editor-in-chief.

RANDALL,  John  Witt,  poet,  b.  in  Boston.
Mass.,  6  Nov.,  1813.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1834  and  at  the  medical  department  in  1839.
While  in  college  he  devoted  his  attention  to  scien-
tific studies,  especially  entomology,  and  also  culti-
vated his  taste  for  poetry.  His  attainments  as  a
naturalist  gained  for  him  the  honorary  appoint-
ment as  zoologist  in  the  department  of  inverte-
brate animals  to  the  South  sea  exploring  ex-
pedition sent  out  by  the  United  States  under
Commander  Charles  Wilkes.  But  the  delays  in
the  sailing  of  the  expedition  caused  him  to  resign
the  appointment,  and  he  then  turned  his  attention
to  his  .favorite  pursuits.  He  has  been  largely  ocpu-
pied  with  the  cultivation  of  an  ancestral  country-
seat  in  Stow,  Mass.,  and  has  accumulated  one  of  the
rarest  and  most  original  collections  of  engravings
in  the  United  States.  Dr.  Randall  has  contributed
a  paper  on  the  "  Crustacea "  to  the  "  Transactions
of  the  Philadelphia  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences,"
and  two  on  insects  to  the  "  Proceedings  of  the
Boston  Society  of  Natural  H  istory,"  and  he  pre-
pared a  volume  on  the  "Animals  and  Plants  of
Maine"  for  the  geological  survey  of  that  state,  but
the  manuscript  was  lost.  Besides  doing  other
literary  work,  ne  has  written  six  volumes  of  poems,
of  which  only  one  has  been  published,  "  Consola-
tions of  Solitude"  (Boston,  18o6).

RANDALL,  Robert  Ricliard,  philanthropist,
b.  in  New  Jersey  alx)ut  1740;  d.  in  New  York  city,
5  June,  1801.  lie  was  a  son  of  Thomas  Randall,
who  was  one  of  the  committee  of  100  chosen  to  con-
trol the  affairs  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1775.  In
early  life  Robert  appears  to  have  followed  the  sea,
and  he  became  a  merchant  and  shipmaster,  in  con-
sequence of  which  he  is  generally  styled  captain.


RANDALL


RANDOLPH


171


Capt.  KHiidall  became  a  ineinl»er  in  1771  of  the
Marine  Hoeiety  of  New  York  for  the  ri'lief  of  in-
dif^ent  and  distn»sse<l  tna-sten*  of  vessels,  their  wid-
ows and  oqkhan  c'hildn>n,  and  in  1780  was  elected
A  meinlHT  of  the  eliamWr  of  commerce.  In  171M)
he  pun-ha-sed  from  Itaron  PcK'lnitz  the  property
known  as  the  Mintofann,  or  M int home,  consist inj;
of  more  than  twenty-one  acres  of  land  in  what  is
now  the  15ih  wan!  of  New  York  city,  the  southern
boundary  of  which  was  then  the  up{)er  end  of  Hroail-
way.  This,  tojf ether  with  four  lots  in  the  1st  ward
of  New  York,  and  stocks  valued  at  f  10,000,-  he  lx>-
nueathed  to  found  the  home  called  the  Sailors'
isnufj  Harltor,  "  for  the  purj>oseof  maintaining age<l,
decrepit,  and  worn-out  sad<»rs."  It  was  his  inten-
tion to  have  the  home  erected  on  the  family  estate,
but,  in  consequence  of  suits  by  allep'd  heirs,  the
control  of  the  projKTty  was  not  absolutely  obtaine<i
until  1H31.  MeanwJiilo  the  growth  of  the  city  made
it  more  wivantagwius  to  rent  the  farm  and  pur-
cha.se  a  site  elsewhen»,  and  180  acres  were  bought
on  Staten  island  near  New  Brighton.  In  Octol)er,
1831,  the  corner-stone  was  laid,  and  the  dedication
ceremonies  t<M)k  place  two  years  later.  In  1834
Capt.  Randall's  remains  were  removed  to  Staten
island,  and  in  1884  a  heroic  statue  of  him,  in
bronze,  by  Augustus  St.  Gaudens,  was  unveiled,
with  appropriate  ceremonies,  on  the  lawn  adjoin-
ing the  buildings.  At  present  (1888)  the  property
has  increased  by  purchase  to  180  acres,  on  which
there  are  eight  large  dormitory  buildings  capable
of  accommodating  1,000  men,  besides  numerous
other  buildings,  thirty-eight  in  all,  including  a
hospital,  church,  and  residences  for  the  officers.

KANUALL,  Samuel  JaokHon,  statesman,  b.  in
PliiliKhlphia,  Pa.,  10  Oct..  1828;  d.  in  Washington,

D.  C,  12  April,
1890.  He  was
the  son  of  a  well-
known  lawyer  of
Philadelphia,  was
educated  as  a  mer-
chant, and,  after
U'ing  four  times
fleeted  to  the  city
council  and  once
to  the  state  sen-
ate, was  sent  to
congress,  taking
his  seat  on  7  Dec.,
186:3.  He  after-
ward represented
without  intermis-
i-~/' o^->^  f ti sion the only

^"^ 'J'r?^c ^cM^ Democratic dii

trict  in  Philadel-
phia. He  served  on  the  committees  on  banking,
rules,  and  elections,  distinguished  himself  by  his
speeches  against  the  force  bill  in  1875,  was  a  can-
didate for  s|)eaker  in  the  next  year,  and  wa.s  ai>-
pointeti  chairman  of  the  committee  on  appropria-
tions. He  gained  credit  by  his  success  in  curtailing
exi)enditure8  by  enforcing  a  system  of  proixirtional
reauction  in  the  appropriations,  and,  on  the  death
of  Michael  C.  Kerr,  was  elected  siHjaker,  4  Dec,
1876.  He  was  re-elected  sjH'aker  in  the  two  follow-
ing congresses,  serving  in  that  cajmcity  till  3  March,
IfiSl.  Mr.  Randall  Ijore  a  conspicuous  part  in  the
debates  on  the  tariff  as  the  leader  of  the  protec-
tionist wing  of  the  I)enuK?ratic  i)arty.  His  widow
is  a  ilaiiL'hicr  of  Aaron  Ward,  of  New  York.

RANDALIi,  Samuel  S.,  author,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, N.  Y.,  27  May,  1H09;  d.  in  New  York  city,
8  June,  1881.  lie  was  educatetl  at  Oxford  academy
and  at  Hamilton  college,  and  in  1830-'6  practised


law  in  Chenango  county.  In  1836-'7  he  was  deputy
clerk  <»f  the  state  as»embly,  in  May,  1N:{7,  he  was
ap|tointe<l  clerk  in  the  deimrtmeiit  of  common
scluK»Is,  and  in  1838  he  liecame  general  deputy
suiK-rintcndent  of  common  «ch<K»ls,  which  office  ha
held  till  1H54.  After  S4>rving  for  a  short  timeaa
sujH'rinlendent  of  Hr»x)klyn  public  s4-hools,  he  was
ap|M)inte<l  to  a  similar  jK>st  in  New  York  city,  and
serv«Ml  till  June,  1870,  when  he  resigned.  From
1845  till  1^52  he  e«lite<l  the  "  District  School  Jour-
nal," and  he  was  the  ass<H-iate  editor  of  the  "  Amer-
ican Journal  of  >xlucation  and  College  Review,"
and  of  the  "  Northern  Light."  publishwl  at  Alltany.
Among  other  works  he  publislie<l  "  Digest  of  the
('ommon-S<-hooI  System  of  the  .State  of  New  York  "
(Trov,  1844);  "Incentives  to  the  Cultivation  of
(Jeolog)' "  (New  York,  1840);  "Mental  and  -Moral
Culture  and  Popular  Education"  (1850);  "First
Principles  of  Popular  Education  (1868);  and
"  History  of  the  State  of  New  York  "  (1870i.— His
cousin,  Ifrnry  Stephens,  anther,  b.  in  Madison
county,  N.  Y.,  in  1811;  d.  in  Cortland,  N.  Y.,  14
Aug.,  1870,  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in
1830,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  l>ar,  but
never  practised.  He  lxK;ame  secretary  of  state  and
superintendent  of  public  instruction  of  New  York
state  in  1851,  and  was  the  author  of  the  bill  that
created  the  separate  department  of  public  instnic-
tion  and  the  office  of  sui)erintendent.  In  1871  Mr.
Randall  wa.s  elected  to  the  a.sscmbly,  and  an()ointed
chairman  of  the  committee  on  public  eauc^ition.
He  was  one  of  the  editors  of  "  Moore's  Rural  New
Yorker,"  contributed  to  agricultural,  scientific,
and  literary  periodicals,  and  publishe<l  "  Sheep
Husbandry^'  (Philadel|)hia,  1849);  "The  Life  of
Thomas  Jefferson "  (New  York,  1858) ;  "  Fine-
Wool  Sheep  Husbandry "(1863):  "Practical  Shep-
herd" (Rochester,  1804) :  and  "  First  Principles  of
Popular  E<lucation  and  Public  Instruction  "  (1808).
RANDOLPH,  Alfred  Magill.  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Winchester,  Va.,  31  Aug.,  ISiJO.  He  is  the
fourth  child  of  Robert  Lee  l^ndolph,  who,  after
studying  law,  devoted  himself  to  farming  on  his  in-
herited estate.  Eastern  View,  Fau«iuier  co.,  Va.
After  graduation  at  William  and  Mary  in  1855,
the  son  studied  at  Virginia  theological  seminary,
Alexandria,  where  he  was  graduatetl  in  1858.  Tn
the  autumn  of  the  same  year  he  was  appointed
rector  of  St  George's  church.  Fredericksburg,  Va.
After  the  bombartunent  of  the  town,  in  DiH-ember,
1802,  by  which  the  church  edifice  was  much  in-
jured, the  congregation  dispersetl.  Dr.  liandolph
left,  and  from  1803  until  the  close  of  the  civil
war  served  as  -  ^.  ,-

a  chaplain  in
the  Confeder-
ate army,  in
hospitals,  and
in  the  field.  He
was  ap|M)inted
rector  of  Christ
church,  Alex-
andria (erected


in  1772,  see  il- ^X
lustration), in  i3^\
1865, and in  "
1867 became
the  pastor

of  Emmanuel
church,  Bal-
timore, where
he  n>mained
until  he  was
elected,  in  1883,  assistant  bishop  of  Vir^nia.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  William  and


172


RANDOLPH


RANDOLPH


Mary  college  in  1875,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from
Wa.s"hington  and  Lee  universitv  in  1884.  Dur-
ing his  ministry  in  Maryland  I)r.  Randolph  was
the  chief  opponent  of  tractarianism  and  ritual-
ism, and  leauer  in  a  successful  resistance  to  the
assumption  of  episcopal  powers  that  he  believed
to  l)e  unconstitutional.  The  conflict  was  one  of
much  interest  to  his  church  throughout  the  ctnin-
try,  and  the  qualities  that  Dr.  Itandolph  displayed
secured  him  the  confidence  of  his  win^  of  the
church.  Bishop  Randolph's  published  discourses
and  periodical  contributions  show  him  to  be  in
churclimanship  and  religious  philosophy  largely  in
sympathy  with  the  views  of  Dr.  Thomas  Arnold,
of  llugby.

RANDOLPH,  Beverley,  governor  of  Virginia,
b.  in  C'hatsworth,  Henrico  co,,  Va.,  in  1755;  d.  at
Green  Creek,  his  home,  in  Cumberland,  Va.,  in
1797.  He  was  a  graduate  of  William  and  Mary
college,  of  which  ho  was  appointed  a  visitor  in  1784.
He  was  a  member  of  the  assembly  of  Virginia  dur-
ing the  Revolutionary  war  and  actively  supported
all  measures  for  securing  American  independence.
He  was  chosen  in  1787  president  of  the  executive
council  of  Virginia,  and.  at  the  close  of  1788,  suc-
ceeded his  relative,  Edmund  Randolph,  as  gov-
ernor of  the  state.  After  two  years  of  service  he
became  unpopular  with  a  part  of  the  legislature,
which  at  that  time  elected  the  governor.  The  mal-
contents had  resolved  to  surprise  the  legislature  by
the  nomination  of  ex-Gov.  Benjamin  Harrison,  but
Harrison  discovered  the  scheme  and  defeated  it,
requesting  his  son  to  vote  for  Gov.  Randolph,  who
thus  was  chosen  for  a  third  term.

RANDOLPH,  Edward,  British  agent,  b.  in
England  alxnit  1620 ;  d.  in  the  West  Indies  after
1694.  The  British  government  sent  him  to  the
New  England  colonies  in  1675  to  ascertain  their
condition.  He  arrived  in  June,  1676.  with  a  letter
from  Charles  H.,  and  with  complaints  from  Ferdi-
nando  Gorges,  the  lord  proprietary  of  Maine,  and
from  Robert  T.  Mason,  who  laid  claim  to  New
Hampshire.  Randolph  at  once  began  to  menace
the  trade  and  the  charter  of  Massachusetts,  demand-
ing of  Gov.  Leverett  that  the  letter  he  bore  from
the  king  should  "be  read  with  all  convenient
speed  to  the  magistrates."  Leverett,  however,  pro-
fessed ignorance  of  the  signature  of  the  secretary
of  state,  whose  name  was  affixed  to  the  letter,  and
denied  the  right  of  parliament  or  king  to  bind  the
colony  with  laws  adverse  to  its  interest,  receiving
Randolph  only  as  an  agent  of  Mason.  Randolph
returned  to  England  after  six  weeks'  stay  in  the  col-
onies, and.  by  exaggerating  their  population  four-
fold, and  their  wealth  to  a  still  greater  extent,  in-
duced the  English  government  to  retain  him  in  its
employment.  In  the  course  of  nine  years  he  made
eignt  voyages  to  this  country,  each  time  taking
back  false  reports  of  its  condition  and  presenting
stronger  reasons  for  the  taxation  and  oppression  of
the  colonies.  He  was  enrolled  as  collector  of  cus-
toms in  December,  1679,  rnd  twice  within  the  next
three  years  visited  Flngland  to  assist  in  directing
measures  against  Massachusetts.  A  writ  of  quo
warranto  was  issued  in  July,  1683,  Massachusetts
was  arraigned  before  an  English  tribunal,  and  in
October  Randolph  arrived  in  Boston  with  the  writ.
In  June,  1684,  the  charter  was  adjudged  to  be  con-
ditionally forfeited.  He  met  Gov.  Edmund  Andros
on  20  Dec,  1686,  when  the  latter  landed  in  Boston,
and  at  once  attached  himself  to  the  governor's  staff.
"  His  excellency."  said  Randolph,  "  has  to  do  with
a  perverse  people."  He  became  secretary  of  New
England  the  same  year,  and  a  member  of  the  gov-
ernor's council,  and  in  1688  carried  off  to  Boston,


from  the  secretary's  office  in  New  York,  the  archives
of  the  Dutch  governors,  where  they  remained  till
1691.  In  response  to  the  complaints  of  the  people
Randolph  replied :  "  It  is  not  to  his  majesty's  in-
terest tnat  you  should  thrive."  The  taxes  were  for
public  purposes,  and  Randolph  persuaded  the  colo-
nists to  talte  out  new  grants  for  their  lands,  with
the  intention  that  when  they  should  possess  them
in  fee  simple  they  should  be  subjected  to  extortion-
ate taxation.  But  when  the  news  of  the  accession
of  William  and  Mary  reached  Boston,  4  April,
1689,  there  was  a  "  grand  buzzing  among  the  people
in  great  expectation  of  their  old  charter,"  On  the
morning  of  the  18th  Andros  and  Randolph  were
marched  to  prison.  When  the  latter  was  released
he  went  to  tne  West  Indies,  where  he  died.

RANDOLPH,  Jacob,  physician,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, 25  Nov.,  1796 ;  d.  there,  12  April,  1836.  His
ancestor,  Edward  Fitz-Rand^lph,  emigrated  to
this  country  from  England  in  1630.  His  father
was  an  officer  in  the  4th  Pennsylvania  regiment
during  the  Revolution,  but  subsequently  became  a
member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  dropped
the  prefix  from  his  family  name.  Jacob  studied
at  the  Friends'  school,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1817,  and  became  sur-
geon on  an  American  ship  that  was  bound  for
Canton,  China.  Afterward  he  returned  to  Phila-
delphia and  settled  in  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion in  that  city  in  1822,  in  which  year  he  married
the  daughter  of  Dr.  Philip  Syng  Physick.  He  was
appointed  surgeon  to  the  Almshouse  infirmary  and
lecturer  on  surgery  in  the  Philadelphia  school  of
medicine  in  1830.  From  1835  until  his  death  he
was  a  surgeon  to  the  Pennsylvania  hospital.  He
was  in  Europe  in  1840-'42,  spending  most  of  his
time  in  the  surgical  departments  of  the  Paris  hos-
pitals. During  his  absence  he  declined  the  chair
of  surgery  in  Jefferson  medical  college.  Dr.  Ran-
dolph became  lecturer  on  clinical  surgery  in  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1843,  and  professor
of  that  branch  in  1847.  Meanwhile  he  had  acquired
a  wide  reputation  as  a  surgeon,  and  in  1831  intro-
duced in  the  United  States  the  operation  of  litho-
tripsy. He  was  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  of  the  Philadelphia  college  of
physicians,  and  of  the  Philadelphia  medical  soci-
ety, and  was  consulting  surgeon  to  the  Philadel-
phia dispensary.  He  published  several  reports  of
successful  operations  for  stone  in  the  bladder  by
lithotripsy,  "History  of  a  Case  of  Femoral  Aneu-
rism in  which  the  Femoral  Artery  was  tied  for  the
Second  Time  in  the  Medical  His'torj'  of  Philadel-
phia," in  the  "  North  American  Medical  and  Surgi-
cal Journal  "(1829).  and  a  "  Memoir  of  Philip  Syng
Physick  "  (Philadelphia,  1839).  See  a  memoir  of
him  by  George  W.  Norris  (1848). — His  great-nepliew,
Nathaniel  Archer,  physician,  b.  in  Chadd's  Ford,
Pa,  7  Nov.,  1858  ;  d.  in  Longport,  N.  J.,  22  Aug.,
1887,  was  educated  at  Swathniore  college.  Pa,  and
at  Cornell,  and  was  graduated  at  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1882.
The  same  year  he  was  appointed  assistant  demon-
strator and  lecturer  op  anatomy  there,  liccoming
Srofessor  of  hygiene  in  1886.  Dr.  Randolph's  early
eiith  by  drowning  cut  short  a  brilliant  career.  He
was  a  member  of  many  scientific  societies,  a  con-
tributor to  scientific  periodicals,  and,  with  Samuel
G.  Dixon,  published  "  Notes  from  the  Physiologi-
cal Laboratory  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  "
(Philadelphia."  1885).

RANDOLPH,  James  Fitz,  congressman,  b.  in
Middlesex  county,  N.  J..  26  June,  1791 :  d.  in  Jersey
City,  N.  J..  19  March.  1871.  He  was  tfee  descendant
of  lEdward  Fitz-Randolph,  who  emigrated  to  this


RANDOLPH


RANDOLPH


173


oountrv  in  16S0.  After  nwci ving  a  common-flchool
cslucutiHii,  Juiiies  onti'n*<l  a  |>rintinK-<inie«>,  hiuI  in
1H12  liccaiiic  fo-wlitor  of  the  "  KrtHlonia,"  a  we<'kly
iu<W8{itt|K>r,  ill  wliic'h  ho  coiitiiuic«l  for  thirty  ywirs.
Ho  was  U.  S.  c-ollwtor  of  internal  rfvi-niic  in
1815-'4ti,  and  was  sulMvquontly  clerk  of  coinnion

()leas  for  Middlesex  c'uunty.  and  a  iiiomber  of  the
egislaturo  for  two  years.  IIo  was  elci'tcHl  t^j  con-
grt'ss  as  a  Democrat  in  182M  to  fill  the  vac-ancy
caused  by  the  death  of  George  Holeonibe,  served
till  183a,  and  sul)s««qii(>ntly  investetl  lurfjelrin  coal
lands.— His  stni,  Theodore  FreHiighiiyHeii,  sena-
tor, b.  in  New  Brunswick,  N,  .1.,  24  June.  1810;  d.
in  Morristown,  N.  J..  7  Nov..  188:1,  was  oducatiMJ  at
Rutgers  gram  mar-school,  and  entertni  mercantile
life  at  sixteen  years  of  age.  He  settled  in  V'icks-
burg.  Mis.s.,  alxait  1840.  where  he  married  a  grand-
daughter of  Chief-Justice  Marshall,  and  on  his  re-
turn to  New  Jersey  in  1850  resided  first  in  Hud-
son county  and  subsi«quently  in  Morristown,  N.  J.
He  was  a  memU'r  of  the  legislature  in  1859-'(K),
declined  the  sj)eakership  of  that  botly.  was  chair-
man of  the  siKfial  committee  on  the  peace  con-
frress  in  1861,  and  was  the  author  of  the  measure
or  relief  of  the  families  of  soldiers  that  should  en-
gage in  the  civil  war.  He  became  state  senator
the  same  year,  served  bv  re-election  till  1805.  and
was  ap|xtinte<l  commissioner  of  draft  for  Hudson
county  in  1802.  He  was  president  of  the  Mor-
ris and  Essi'x  railroad  in  1807,  doubled  its  gross
tonnage  in  eighteen  months,  and  negotiated  the
existing  lease  of  that  road  to  the  Delaware,  Lacka-
wanna, and  Western  railroad  by  which  the  bond-
holders wen?  guaranteed  seven  ner  cent,  in  perpe-
tuity. He  became  governor  of  New  Jersey  in  1808,
during  his  tenure  of  office  caused  a  rei>eal  of  the
Camden  and  Amboy  monojwlv  tax,  established  a
general  railway  law,  mmle  the  state-jjrison  sys-
tem self-sup{X)rting,  and  suggested  the  plan  of  the
present  State  lunatic  asylum  at  Morris  Plains,
which  is  the  largfest  in  the  world.  On  11  July,
1871,  the  day  preceding  the  Orange  riot  in  New
York  city,  he  issued  a  pnx-lamation  insuring  the
right  of  parade  to  the  Orangemen  of  New  Jersey.
To  secure  the  speedy  transmission  of  this  procla-
mation throughout  the  state  and  in  New  York
city,  where  it  was  alleged  rioters  were  arranging  to
invade  New  Jersey,  he  went  in  person  to  the  tele-
graph-offices and  took  "constructive"  possession
of  several  of  them.  He  also  onleretl  out  the  mi-
litia, and  by  these  measures  prevented  disturbance.
He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  in  1874,  served  one
term,  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  military
affairs,  and  a  meml)er  of  the  special  committee  to
investigate  election  frauds  in  South  Carolina.  He
procured  patents  for  several  inventions,  includ-
ing a  "  ditcher,"  and  an  application  of  steam  to
type-writing  machines.

RANDOLPH,  Thomas  Mann,  patriot,  b.  at
Tuckiihoe,  his  father's  homesteml,  in  Virginia,  in
1741 ;  d.  there.  19  Nov.,  1793.  He  was  the  son  of
"William  of  Tuckahoe."  who,  at  his  death  (1745),
confitled  his  infant  and  only  child  to  Peter  Jeflfer-
son,  father  of  Thomas,  who  thereupon  removed  to
the  child's  estate  (Tuckahoe)  in  (toochland  (now
All)emarle)  countv,  Va.  The  young  man  was
gnuluat<Hl  at  William  and  Mary  college,  and  in
1701  married  Anne,  daughter  of  Col.  Archibald
Cary  (b.  1745 ;  d.  1789),  widely  known  bv  her  chari-
ties. He  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  house  of
burgesses,  and  of  the  convention  of  1770.  He  was
also  a  memlKT  of  the  Colonial  committee  of  safety
from  the  first. — His  s<^>n.  Thomas  .Mann,  governor
of  Virginia,  b.  at  Tuckahoe.  on  James  river,  Va.,  1
Oct,  1708;  d.  in  Monticeilo,  Charlottesville,  Va.,


20  June,  1828.  In  17^  Randolph  was  sent  with  a
vounger  bmther  to  Kdinburgh  university,  where
lie  wjis  very  studious,  and  formed  the  friendship
of  Sir  John  Ix'-slie.  who  n'tuniwl  with  the  brothers
ami  was  for  two  years  tutor  in  their  Virginia  home.
While  at  hklinburgh  he  formed  a  sc-ientiflc  jwx-iety,
of  which  Thomas  JelTerson  was  eh'cteil  ftn  honorary
member.  Jefferson  ackiiowledginl  the  dipKmia  with
conlialitv ;  he  also  wrote  s«>veral  letters  of  advice  to
the  youth,  with  whose  father  he  had  been  brought
up  almost  as  a  bnUher.  In  the  summer  of  17MH  he
visited  the  Jeffersons  in  Paris,  and  there  first  met
Martha  Jefferson  (<j.  v.),  whom  he  inarriM,  23  Feb.,
17iM).  at  Monticeilo.  This  marriage  of  his  daughter
gratified  Jefferson,  who  descriU'd  the  youth  as  "a
man  of  science,  sense,  virtue,  and  competence."
The  event  also  put  an  end  to  his  daughter's  desire
for  a  c<mveiitual  life,  which  had  «listresse4  him.
Randolph,  at  the  entreaty  of  Jefferson,  resided  at
Monticeilo  for  a  time,  and  gave  much  attention  to
study.  Among  his  frequent  visitors  was  the  Abb^
Corea,  a  Uitaiiist.  In  1803  he  was  elected  to  the
house  of  representatives,  where  he  sharply  resented
remarks  of  John  liandolph  of  Roanoke,  and  a  duel
nearly  resulted.  He  contiiiue<l  in  congress  until
1807.  While  in  Washington  the  family  reside<l  in
the  executive  mansion.  In  1812  he  enlisted  in  the
military  service,  and  on  3  Jan.  liecame  lieutenant  of
light  artillery.  He  man-hcd  to  Canada  as  captain
of  the  20th  infantry,  but  resigned  on  0  Feb.,  1815,
on  account  of  a  misunderstanding  with  Gen.  Arm-
strong. He  was  governor  of  Virginia  in  1819-'21.
His  death  was  caused  by  exposure  while  riding,
after  giving  his  cloak  to  an  aged  and  thinlv  clad
man  whom  he  passed  on  the  high-road. — His  son,
Thomas  Jefferson,  b.  at  Monticeilo,  Va..  12  Sept.,
1792;  d.  at  Edge  Hill.  Allx'inarle  co„  Va.,  8  Oct..
1875.  was  Thomas  Jefferson's  oldest  grandson,  and
was  descTil)ed  by  his
grandfather  as  "the
staff  of  his  old  age."
When  six  years  of
age  he  used  to  walk
five  miles  to  an
"old-field  school,"  so
called,  and  used  to
say  that  he  had  a
watch  in  his  pocket
before  he  had  shoes
on  his  feet.  He  went
to  school  in  Phila-
delphia at  fifteen,
and  afterward  in
Charlottesville.  Va.

In  1824  he  married  ,

J  ane  H  ol  1  i  ns,  daugh- <^^  '\^  ^

Sr/i-rsJ"?;;  ^=^^^-^-^

ter  the  sale  of  Jef-
ferson's property,  debts  to  the  extent  of  $40,000
remainetl,  and  these  were  paid  bv  Randolph  out
of  regard  for  his  grandfather's  honor.  lie  also
supported  and  educate<l  his  brothers  and  sis-
ters. He  had  been  ap|Hiinte<l  literary  executor
of  Jefferson,  and  in  1829  published  the  "  Life  and
CorresfKjndence  of  Thomas  Jefferson "  (4  vols.,
Boston).  Being  in  the  Virginia  legislature  at  the
time  of  the  S<nithampton  negro  insurrection  in
1832,  he  introduced  a  bill  for  emancipation  on
what  was  called  the  "  post-natal"  plan,  originally
suggested  bv  Jefferson.  This  was  necessarily  |K>st-
poned  to  the  following  session,  and  then  failed
through  the  resentment  excite<l  by  the  harangues
of  George  Thompson,  who  was  regarded  as  an
"abolition  emissary"  from  Qreat  Britain. Ran-


174


RANDOLPH


RANDOLPH


dolph  was  an  eminent  financier,  and  secured  the

[)assage  of  a  tax-hill  through  the  Virginia  legis-
ature  in  1842  which  placed  the  state  finances  on
a  soun<l  bju«is.  He  wrote  an  able  pamphlet,  en-
titled "Sixty  Years'  Reminiscences  of  the  Cur-
rency of  the  United  Stjites,"  a  copy  of  which
was  presented  to  every  member  of  the  legislature.
It  is  still  a  document  of  historical  interest.  In
18r)l-'2  he  was  in  the  convention  that  revised  the
Virginia  constitution.  After  the  fall  of  the  Con-
federacy, which  he  supported,  lie  devoted  himself
to  restoration  of  the  prosperity  of  his  state.  He
was  for  seven  years  rector  of  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia, and  for  thirtv-one  years  on  its  board  of  vis-
itors. In  his  last  illness  he  had  his  bed  removed
to  a  room  from  which  he  could  look  on  Monticello,
where  he  was  buried.  In  taking  the  chair  at  the
Baltimore  Democratic  convention  of  1872  he  was
described  as  "  six  feet  six  inches  high,  as  straight
as  an  arrow,  and  stood  before  the  convention  like
one  of  the  big  trees  of  California." — Another
son,  George  Wythe,  b.  at  Monticello,  10  March,
1818;  d.  at  Edge  Hill,  near  Charlottesville,  Va.,
10  April,  1878,  at  the  death  of  his  grandfather.
Thomas  Jefferson,  was  placed  under  the  «are  of
his  brother-in-law,  Joseph  Coolidge,  of  Boston,  by
whom  he  was  sent  to  school  at  Cambridge,  Mass.
At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  received  from  President
Jackson  a  midshipman's  warrant,  and  he  was  at
sea  almost  continuously  until  his  nineteenth  year,
when  he  entered  the  University  of  Virginia.  After
two  years  of  study  he  resigned  his  naval  commis-
sion, studied  law,  and  gained  high  rank  at  the
Richmond  bar.  At  the  time  of  the  John  Brown
raid  at  Harper's  Ferry  he  raised  a  company  of  ar-
tillery, which  continued  its  organization,  and  was
the  main  Confederate  force  against  Gen,  Butler  at
the  battle  of  Bethel.  He  was  then  given  a  large
command,  with  the  commission  of  brigadier-gen-
eral, which  he  held  imtil  he  was  appointed  secre-
tary of  war  of  the  Confederate  stales.  He  after-
ward resigned  and  reported  for  service  in  the  field.
He  was  one  of  the  commissioners  sent  by  Virginia
to  consult  President  Lincoln,  after  his  election,
concerning  his  intended  policy,  with  the  hope  of
maintaining  peace.  A  pulmonary  affection  hav-
ing developed  during  the  war,  he  ran  the  blockade
to  seek  health  in  a  warmer  region,  and  remained
abroad  for  several  years  after  the  fall  of  the  Con-
federacy.— Thomas  Jefferson's  daughter,  Sarah
Nicholas,  author,  b.  at  Edge  Hill,  near  Charlottes-
ville, Va.,  12  Oct.,  1839,  has  become  widely  known
in  Virginia  by  her  school  at  Edge  Hill  and  as  prin-
cipal of  Patapsco  institute.  She  has  now  (1888)  a
school  in  Baltimore.  She  has  published  "  Domes-
tic Life  of  Thomas  Jefferson  "  (New  York,  1871);
a  story  for  the  young,  "  The  Lord  will  Provide  "
(1872) ;  a  paper  on  Alartha  Jefferson  Randolph  in
Mrs.  Wister's  "  Famous  Women  of  the  Revolu-
tion" (Philadelphia,  1876);  and  "Life  of  Stone-
wall Jackson  "  (1876).  In  addition.  Miss  Randolph
has  written  various  contributions  to  current  litera-
ture, among  which  is  an  article  of  historical  value
entitled  "The  Kentucky  Resolutions  in  a  New
Light,"  founded  on  her  family  papers,  printed  in
the  "  Nation."  5  May,  1887.

RANDOLPH,  nHUam,  colonist,  b.  at  Morton
Morrell,  Warwickshire,  England,  in  1650;  d.  on
Turkey  island,  Va.,  11  April,  1711.  He  Ijclonged
to  a  family  line  of  which  were  Thomas  Randolfe,
mentioned  in  "  Domesday  Book "  as  ordered  to
do  duty  in  person  against  the  king  of  France
(1294):  John  Randolph,  an  eminent  judge,  and
connected  with  the  exchequer  (1385) ;  Avery  Ran-
dolph, principal of Pembroke college, Oxford


(1590);  Thomas  Randolph,  ambassador  of  Queen
Fllizabeth ;  and  Thomas  Randolph  the  poet
(1604-'34).  Col.  William  was  a  son  of  Richard  (of
Morton  Morrell.  Warwickshire),  a  half-brother  of
the  poet.  Col.  William  was  preceded  in  Virginia
by  his  uncle  Henry,  who  came  in  1643,  and  died
there  in 1673. lie  also  founded  a  family;  his


widow  married  Peter  Field,  an  ancestor  of  Presi-
dent Jefferson.  Col.  William  arrived  in  the  year
1674  in  Virginia,  and  became  owner  of  large  planta-
tions on  James  river.  He  fixed  his  abode  on  Turkey
island  (not  now  an  island),  about  twenty  miles  be-
low the  city  of  Richmond,where  as  yet  there  was  no
settlement.  He  built,  with  bricks  imported  on  his
ship  which  plied  regularly  l)etween  Bristol  and  Tur-
key island,  a  mansion  with  lofty  dome,  whose  pic-
turesque ruin  remains.  Col.  William  Byrd's  letters
written  at  the  time  show  Randolph  to  have  been  a
man  of  high  character  as  well  as  of  much  influ-
ence. He  was  a  member  of  the  house  of  bur-
gesses in  1684.  and  either  he  or  his  eldest  son  was
the  William  Randolph  mentioned  as  clerk  of  the
house  in  1705.  Tradition  says  that  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  governor's  council.  He  was  active  in
the  work  of  civilizing  the  Indians,  was  a  founder
and  trustee  of  William  and  Mary  college,  and  on
its  first  board  of  visitors  appears  "  William  lian-
dolph.  Gentleman."  as  he  is  also  described  in  the
college  charter.  He  married  Mary  Isham,  by  whom
he  had  ten  children.  The  family  and  the  family
names  so  multiplied  that  the  seven  sons  of  Will-
iam were  conveniently  distinguished  by  the  estates
he  bequeathed  them  :  William  of  Turkey  island,
Thomas  of  Tuckahoe.  Isham  of  Dungeness,  Richard
of  Curies,  Henry  of  Chatsworth,  Sir  John  of  Taze-
well Hall  (see  illustration),  and  Edward  of  Breno.
Six  of  these  sons  begin  the  list  of  forty  graduates
of  the  Randolph  name  to  be  gathered  from  the
catalogues  of  William  and  Mary  college.  The  sons
all  appear  to  have  entered  with  energy  on  the  work
of  colonial  civilization,  save  Edward,  who  married
and  resided  in  England. — His  eldest  son.  WiUiam,
b.  1681,  was  visitor  of  William  and  Mary  college,  a
burgess  in  1718, 1723,  and  1726,  a  councillor  of  state,
and  treasurer  of  the  colon v  of  Virginia  in  1737. —
The  third  son,  Isham,  b.  24  Feb.  1687;  d.  2  Nov.,
1742.  resided  in  London  in  early  life,  where  he  mar-
ried in  1717.  On  his  teturn  to  Virginia  he  built
himself  a  grand  mansion  at  Dungeness.  where  a
baronial  hospitality  was  dispensed.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  house  of  burgesses  for  Goochland  (now
All)emarle)  county  in  1740.  and  adjutant-general
of  the  colony.  He  was  a  man  of  scientific  culture,
and  is  honorably  mentioned  in  the  memoirs  of
Bartram  the  naturalist. — The  fifth  son.  Richard,
b.  1691 ;  d.  1  Dec.  1748,  was  a  member  of  the  house
of  burgesses  for  Henrico  county  in  1740,  and  suc-
ceeded his  brother  William  as  treasurer  of  the
colony. — The  sixth  son,  Sir  John,  lawyer,  b.  on


RANDOLPH


RANDOLPH


175


Turkey  island,  Va.,  In  1698;  d.  in  Williamnbiirgr.
Va.,  UMartrh.  17a7,  was  );i^i"Mti>4l  at  Williain  and
Mary  collfp*.  and  stmliwi  law  tit  (Jmy's  Inn,  Lon-
don. At  an  wirly  ajfe  he  was  np|M>int*'«l  kinjj's  at-
torney for  Virjriiiia.  lie  re|ir»>s«'nttHl  William  and
Mary  pollejje  in  the  hoUM?of  l»urj;exH«>(*.  and  in  17S0.
while  visitinfc  England  to  obtain  a  renewal  nf  the
oollef^e  charter,  he  was  kni^hteii.  In  ITJ^fl  ho  waj<
choM'n  sneaker  of  the  Vir^finia  house  of  hurjfeiwes,
and  in  tno  same  year  was  a|i|M>inte4l  recorder  of  the
citv  of  Norfolk.  '  Sir  John  is  said  by  his  nephew,
William  Stith.  to  have  intende<l  to  write  a  preface
to  the  laws  of  Virginia,  "and  therein  to  pive  an
historical  account  of  our  const  it  utifin  and  govern-
ment, but  was  prevented  from  pn>sccuting  it  to
effect  by  his  many  and  weighty  public  em^)loy-
nients.  and  by  the  vast  burden  of  i)rivate  business
from  his  clients."  The  materials  he  had  collected
were  used  l)y  Stith  in  his  history  of  Virginia.  His
library  is  Itelieved  to  have  In'en  the  finest  in  Vir-
ginia. His  mural  tablet  in  William  and  Mary  col-
lege was  ilestroytnl  by  fire,  but  its  Latin  epitaph  is
{)re«erved  in  President  Kwell's  history  of  the  col-
ege.  See  a  notice  of  him  in  the  "Virginia  Ijjiw
Journal"  for  April,  1877. — Sir  John's  son,  Peyton,
patriot,  b.  in  Tazewell  Hall,  Williamsburg,  Va.,  in
1721;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22  Oct.,  1775,  after
graduation  at  William  and  Slary,  studied  law  at
the  Inner  Temple,  Lond<m,  and  was  appointe<l
king's  attorney  for  Virginia  in  174H,  Sir  William
Gooch  being  governor.  He  was  also  chosen  re{)re-
sentative  of  \N  illiamsburg  in  the  house  of  burgesses
in  the  same  year.  At  the  opening  of  his  career  as
law  officer  he  was  brought  in  op[)osition  to  the
apostle  of  Presbyterianism,  the  Rev.  Samuel  Davies
(q.  v.).  The  attorney  having  tjuestioned  whether  the
toleration  act  extended  to  Virginia,  Davies  replied

that  if  not  neither
did  the  act  of  uni-
formity, which  posi-
tion was  sustained
by  the  attorney-
general  in  England.
In  1751  the  newly
app<^)inte<l  govern-
or, Dinwiddie,  and
his  family,  were
guests  of  Peyton
Randolph,  but  the
latter  {)resently  re-
sisteil  the  royal  de-
mand of  a  pistole
fee  on  every  land-
patent.  In  1754
the  burgesses  com-
missioned the  king's  attorney  to  repair  to  London
to  impress  on  the  English  ministry  the  unconstitu-
tionality of  the  exaction.  He  there  encountere<l
the  cmwn  lawyers,  t'ainpl)ell  and  Murray  (after-
ward I^rd  Mansfield),  with  marked  ability.  The
pistole  fee  was  removwl  from  all  lands  less  in  ex-
tent than  one  hundred  acres,  and  presently  ceased
altogether.  (Jov.  Dinwiddie  was  naturally  angry
that  the  king's  attorney  should  have  left  the  cf>lony
withcmt  his  consent,  and  on  a  mission  hostile  Ut  his
demaiul.  A  i)etition  of  the  burgesses  that  the  t>lfice
of  attorney  snould  remain  o[»en  until  Peyton  lian-
dolph's  n'turn  m)int«l  the  governor  to  his  revenge  ;
he  8usj)ende<l  the  al>s4>nt  attorney,  and  in  his  place
appointe<l (uH)rge Wythe. Wythe  accepte<I  the

Slace,  onlv  to  retain  it  until  I'lis  friend's  return,
landolph's  pnjinised  com|)ensation  for  the  London
mission,  £2.500,  caused  a  long  struggle  U'tween
the  governor  and  the  burgesses,  who  made  the
sfim  a  rider  to  one  of  £20,000  voted  for  the  In-


yy-eA^Jo'yv  yCcLnrLc^Kr-^j^


dian  war.  The  conflict  led  to  a  nromgation  of  the
house.  Meanwhile  the  lonls  of  tnwle  orderwl  re-
duction of  the  iiistole  fe*',  and  nHjuet«te«l  the  re-
instateinent  of  ttandolph.  "  You  must  think  r't
s<^mie  w't  absurd,"  answenMl  Dinwiddie  (%\  (M.,
1754),  "from  the  l>a«l  Treatm't  I  have  met  with.
However,  if  he  answers  pro|M>rlv  w't  I  have  to  say  to
him,  I  am  not  inflexible :  and  he  must  c-onfen.  be-
f«»re  this  happened  he  hml  greater  sharp  of  my
Favs.  antl  ('oiinten'ce  than  any  other  in  the
(•ov't."  The  attorney  acknowle<lgi'd  the  irn-gu-
larities  and  wa«  reinstate<l.  There  was  a  c<iin-
promise  with  the  new  house  alK)Ut  the  money.
When  tidings  of  lirmld(x;k's  defeat  n>ache«l  Will-
iamsburg, an  a.ss<K'iation  of  lawyers  was  fornu-d
by  the  king's  attorney,  which  was  ioin«>d  by  other
gentlemen,  altogether  one  hun<lred,  who  inarched
under  Randolph  to  the  front  and  place<l  themselves
under  command  of  Col,  William  liynl.  They  were
led  against  the  Indians,  who  retreate<l  to  Fort  Du-

auesne.  During  the  next  few  years  Peyton  Ran-
olph  was  occupie<l  with  a  revision  of  the  laws,
being  chairman  of  a  committee  for  that  purpose.
He  also  gave  attention  to  the  affairs  of  william
and  Mary  college,  of  which  he  was  apiK)inte<l  a
visitor  in"  1758.  In  1760  he  and  his  brotner  John,
being  law-examiners,  signe<l  the  license  of  Patrick
Henry.  Wvthe  and  Pendleton  having  refused.
"The  two  Itandolphs,"  says  Jefferson,  " acknowl-
e<lge<l  he  wa-s  very  ignorant  of  law,  but  that  thev
{)erceived  that  he  was  a  man  of  genius,  and  did
not  doubt  he  would  soon  qualify  himself."  Pey-
ton Randolph  was  one  of  the  few  intimate  friends
of  Washington.  Jefferson,  in  a  letter  to  his  grand-
son, declares  that  in  early  life,  amid  difficulties  and
temptations,  he  used  to  ask  himself  how  Peyton
Randolph  would  act  in  such  situation,  and  what
course  would  meet  with  hisapprolwtion.  Randolph
drew  up  the  remonstrance  of  the  burgesses  against
the  threatenetl  stami^act  in  17G4,  but  when  it  was
passed,  and  Patrick  Henry,  then  a  burgess,  had
carried,  by  the  smallest  majority,  his  "  treasonable  "
resolutions,  the  attorney  was  alarmed:  Jefferson
heard  him  say  in  g«>ing  out,  "  By  God,  I  would
have  given  five  hundred  guineas  for  a  single  vote  ! "
When  he  was  appointetl  s|>eaker  in  176().  Randolph
resigned  his  office  as  king's  attornev  and  devotetl
his  attention  to  the  increasing  troubles  of  the  coun-
try. The  burgesses  n-cogni/ed  in  his  legal  knowl-
e<fge  and  judicial  calmness  ballast  for  the  some-
times tempestuous  patriotism  of  Patrick  Henry,
and  he  was  placeil  at  the  head  of  all  imtK>rtant
committees.  He  was  chairman  of  the  committee
of  c«irres|X)ndence  l)etween  the  colonies  in  May,
1773,  presideil  over  the  Virginia  convention  of  1
Aug.,  1774.  and  was  first  of  the  seven  deputies
apjtointetl  by  it  to  the  projwsed  congress  at  Phila-
delphia On  10  Aug.  he  summoned  the  citizens
of  vVilliamsburg  to  assemble  at  their  court-house,
where  the  proceedings  of  the  State  convention
were  ratified,  instructions  to  their  delepites  given,
dec-laring  the  unconstitutionality  of  binding  Ameri-
can colonies  by  British  statutes, and  aid  sul)scril>e«l
I  f«)r  the  lioston  sufferers.  For  his  presidency  at
I  this  meeting  his  name  was  plainnl  on  the  mil  of
I  those  to  lie  attainted  by  (tarliament,  but  the  bill
j  was  never  jiassed.  He'  was  unanimously  elected
I  first  president  of  congre.s.s.  5  S»^pt..  1774.  He  was
but  fifty-three  years  of  age.  but  is  described  br
a  fellow-member  as  "a  venerable  man,"  to  which
is  added  "  an  honest  man  :  luu*  knowlwlge,  tem|>er,
exjK'rience.  judgment.  al>ove  all,  integrity — a  true
Roman  sjdnt."  His  noble  presence,  gracious  man-
ners, and  im|>erturl>able  self-pos-session  won  the  con-
fidence of  all. He  was  constantly  relied  on  for


176


RANDOLPH


RANDOLPH


his  parliamentary  experience  and  judicial  wisdom.
On  20  Jan.,  1775,  he  issued  a  calf  to  the  counties
and  corporations  of  Virginia,  requesting  them  to
elect  delegates  to  a  convention  to  be  held  at  Rich-
mond, 21  March,  the  call  being  signetl  "  Peyton
Randolph,  motlerator."  He  was  elected  to  that
convention  on  4  Feb.  On  the  night  of  20  April,
1773,  the  gunpowder  was  clandestinely  removed
from  the  public  magazine  at  Williumsburg  by
order  of  Lord  Dunmore,  governor  of  Virginia.
Randolph  persuaded  the  enraged  citizens  not  to
assault  the  governor's  residence.  To  700  armed
men  assembled  at  Fredericksburg,  who  offered  their
services,  he  wrote  a  reply  assuring  them  that  the
wrong  would  be  redressed  if  menace  did  not  com-
jwl  Dunmore  to  obstinacy.  Through  his  negotia-
tions with  Lord  Dunmore,  assisted  by  the  approach
of  Henry's  men,  £300  were  paid  for  the  powder,
and  hostilities  were  delayed.  Randolph  resumed
his  duties  as  speaker  of  the  burgesses  in  ^lay,  1775,
aiul  after  their  adjournment  he  returned  to  the
congress  at  Philadelphia,  where  he  died  of  apo-
plexy. His  death  is  alluded  to  with  sorrow  in  one
of  Washington's  despatches  to  congress.  He  mar-
ried a  sister  of  Benjamin  Harrison,  governor  of  Vir-
ginia, but  left  no  issue.  IHs  l)ody  was  conveyed
from  Philadelphia  in  the  following  year  by  his
nephew,  Edmund  Randolph,  and  buried  in  the
chapel  of  William  and  Mary  college. — Another  son
of  Sir  John,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Tazewell  Hall,
Williamsburg,  Va.,  in  1727 ;  d.  in  Brompton,  Lon-
don, 31  Jan.,  1784,  after  graduation  at  William  and
Mary,  studied  law,  and  soon  attained  high  rank  at
the  bar.  His  home  at  Williamsburg  was  the  cen-
tre of  literary  society  as  well  as  of  fashion.  He  was
a  man  of  fine  literary  culture,  an  accomplished
violinist,  and  in  religion  a  freethinker.  For  inter-
esting anecdotes  concerning  him  see  Wirt's  "  Life
of  Patrick  Henry,"  and  Randall's  "  Jefferson."  In
1766  John  Randolph  was  appointed  king's  attorney
under  Gov.  Fauquier,  to  succeed  his  brother  Pey-
ton. When,  during  the  excitement  that  followed
the  removal  of  the  gunpowder  from  Williamsburg,
Lord  Dunmore,  fearing  assassination,  took  up  his
alxide  on  a  man-of-war  at  York  (8  June,  1775),  John
Randolph  was  the  medium  of  communication  be-
tween him  and  the  burgesses.  When  hostilities  be-
came inevitable,  he  regarded  it  as  inconsistent  with
his  oath  of  office  to  assist  a  rebellion,  as  it  then  ap-
peared, and  in  August  he  sailed  for  England  with  his
wife  and  two  daughters,  leaving  his  only  son,  Ed-
mund, on  the  shore.  His  subsequent  correspondence
with  his  constant  friend,  Thomas  Jefferson,  proves
that  he  was  regarded  by  that  statesman  as  in  sym-

githy  with  the  American  cause.  For  a  time  Lord
unmore  gave  him  a  home  at  his  house  in  Scot-
land, and  there  one  of  the  daughters,  Ariana,  was
married  to  James  Wormeley,  of  Virginia,  When  the
newly  married  pair  sailed  for  Virginia,  on  the  first
ship  bound  thither  after  the  peace,  they  bore  the
dead  body  of  John  Rimdolph,  whose  dying  request
was  to  be  buried  in  his  native  country.  He  was
laid  in  the  chapel  of  William  and  Mary  college.
— John's  son,  Edmund  Jenning'S,  statesman,  b.
in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  10  Aug.,  1753;  d.  in  Clarke
county,  Va.,  13  Sent.,  1813.  He  was  distinguished
for  scholarship  anu  eloquence  at  William  and  Mary
college,  and  at  eighteen  years  of  age  was  orator  to
commemorate  the  royal  founders,  the  oration  being

Erinted  by  the  faculty.  After  studying  law  with
is  father"  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  a
favorite  of  Lord  Dunmore,  and  when  his  parents
left  for  England  was  only  withheld  from  sailing
with  them  by  enthusiasm  for  the  American  cause.
Washington  took  him  into  his  family  as  aide-de-


camp, 15  Aug.,  1775,  and  Randolph  received  the
guests  at  headquarters ;  but  on  the  8ud<len  death
of  his  uncle  Peyton  he  returned  to  Williamsburg.
In  the  Virginia  convention  of  1776  he  assisted  in
franung  the  con-
stitution and  pass-
ing the  bill  of
rights.  He  op-
posed the  demand
of  Patrick  Henry
that  the  governor
should  have  pow-
er of  veto.  At
the  close  of  the
convention  he
was  elected  mayor
of  Williamsburg,
and  he  was  also
the  first  attorney-
general  of  Vir-
ginia under the ^

new  constitution. ^ .  Jp  ^x j

In  1779  he  was  u^Z^'f^  /Z^«Jt--»t--<:«i^<rZ^^6>C
elected  to  con-
gress, but  soon  resigned.  In  1780  he  was  re-elected,
and  remained  in  congress  two  years.  There  he  was
occupied  with  foreign  affairs.  He  resigned  his  seat
in  1782,  and  after  his  father's  death  in  1783  suc-
ceeded to  the  property  of  his  uncle  Peyton,  which
had  become  encumbered  with  claims  against  his
father.  These  he  might  have  met  by  selling,  the
negroes,  but,  being  conscientiously  opposed  to
this,  he  had  to  work  hard  at  his  profession.  He
was  one  of  the  commissioners  at  the  Annapolis
convention  which  induced  congress  to  summon
the  Constitutional  convention  of  1787.  Being  gov-
ernor of  Virginia  (1786-'88),  he  largely  influenced
the  choice  of  delegates,  and  it  was  due  to  his  per-
suasion that  Washington's  resolution  not  to  at-
tend was  overcome.  As  leader  of  the  Virginia
delegation  he  introduced  the  general  plan  of  a  con-
stitution that  had  been  agreed  on  among  them  as
a  basis  for  opening  the  convention.  He  also  drafted
a  detailed  scheme  of  his  own,  which  was  discovered
in  1887  among  the  pajiers  of  George  Mason.  His
career  in  the  convention  was  brilliant,  and  elicited
admiration  from  Benjamin  Franklin,  who  generally
voted  with  him.  He  earnestly  opposed  the  single
executive,  the  presidential  re-eligibility  and  pardon-
ing power,  the  vice-presidential  office,  and  senato-
rial equality  of  states.  He  desired  an  executive
commission  chosen  by  the  national  legislature,  and
resembling  that  of  the  present  Swiss  repulilic.  He
favored  a  strong  Federal  government  which  was  to
have  power  of  directly  negativing  state  laws  that
should  be  decided  to  be  unconstitutional  by  the  su-
preme court.  On  his  motion  the  word  "  slavery  "
was  eliminated  from  the  constitution.  He  refused  to
sign  the  document  except  on  condition  that  a  sec-
ond National  convention  should  be  called  after  its
provisions  had  been  discussed  in  the  country ;  but
\\\  the  Virginia  convention  of  1788  he  advocated
its  ratification  on  the  ^ground  that  a  ninth  state
was  needed  to  secure  the  Union,  and  that  within
the  Union  amendments  might  be  passed.  The  op-
position, led  by  Patrick  Henry,  was  powerful,  and
the  ratification,  even  by  a  small  majority  (ten),  was
mainly  due  to  Gov.  Randolph,  whose  inflexible  in-
dejxjndence  of  party  was  then  and  after  described
as  vacillation.  He  urged  amendments;  owing  to
his  vigilance  the  clause  of  Art.  VI.,  on  religious
tests  for  office,  implying  power  over  the  general
suliiect,  was  supplemented  by  the  firs^  article  added
to  the  constitution.  He  resigned  the  governorship
in  1788,  and  secured  a  seat  in  the  assembly  for  the


RANDOLPH


RANDOLPn


177


purpoM  of  working  on  the  comniittoe  for  making
a  <H>diflcation  of  tlio  state  laws.  The  crKlo  pub-
lishttl  itt  KicliinoiKi  in  fnlio,  17U4,  w-im  inainlv  his
work.  Whili'  swi  owupiwi  h«  was  upiKtiiitctl  by
the  nrpsiilent  (27  Sept.,  ITHDf  attornoy-gt-nfral  of
the  United  State*.  In  re!«jM>ns««  to  a  rc<|ue«t  of
the  house  of  repres«»ntativt>s  he  wrote  an  extende«l
report  (1790)  on  the  jiuiiciary  system.  Anions  the
many  imfntrtant  ea.s«',s  arisinf;  under  the  first  a<l-
ministration  of  the  foiistilutiorj  was  Chisholm  vm.
Ge<)r;:ia,  invnlvinj;  the  right  of  nn  alien  .to  sue
a  state.  To  tiie  dismay  of  his  southern  friends,
liandolph  proved  that  right  to  the  satisfaction
of  the  eoiirt.  His  «pe«>ch  whs  widely  eireulated
as  a  pamohh't,  and  wa.H  reprinted  by  legislative
onler  in  MassaehusettB,  while  the  alarm  of  debtors
to  England  UhI  to  the  11th  amendment.  Kar-
ly  in  nwS  Randolph  issued,  un<U'r  the  name  of
"Oermanicns,"  an  effective  tuimphlet  against  the
"  IVmocralic  s<K-ieties."  whion  were  eharge<l  with
fomenting  the  whiskey  rel>ellion  at  Pittsburg,  and
exciting  an  American  .Jacobinism.  Randolph  trie<l
to  pursue,  as  usual,  a  non-partisan  course  in  foreign
affairs  with  a  leaning  toward  France,  Washington
doing  the  like.  Jefferson  having  retired,  Randolph
accepte<l,  very  reluctantly,  2  Jan.,  1794,  the  office  of
secretary  of  state.  His  advice  that  an  envoy  should
go  to  Kngland,  but  not  negotiate,  was  overruled.  He
advised  the  pn'si«lent  to  sign  the  Jay  treat v  only  on
condition  that  the  "  provision  order  "  for  the  search
of  neutral  ships  were  revoked.  The  Republicans
were  furious  that  the  president  and  Randolnh
should  think  of  signing  the  treaty  a[)art  from  tne
"provision  order";  but  Washington,  after  the  ob-
jectionable 12th  article  had  been  eliminated,  was
willing  to  ovc'rl«K)k  its  other  faults,  but  for  the
ortler  issued  to  search  American  ships  and  seize  the
provisions  on  them.  Meanwhile  France  wjus  so  en-
rage«l  about  the  treatpr  that  Monroe  could  hardly
remain  in  Paris.  During  Jay's  secret  negotiations,
the  French  minister,  Fauchet,  left  Philadelnhia  in
anger.  The  president  had  carried  on  througn  Itan-
dolnh  soothing  diplomac-y  with  France,  and  espe-
cially flattered  the  vanity  of  F'auchet,  the  French
minister  in  Philadelphia,  with  an  affectation  of
confidence.  The  Frenchman  did  not  fail  in  de-
s|)utches  to  his  employers  to  make  the  most  of  this.
.\lso,  being  impecunious,  he  hinte<l  to  his  govern-
ment that  with  "  several  thousand  dollars  "  he  could
favorably  influence  American  affairs,  allecfing  a
suggestion  by  Randolph  to  that  effect.  Tnis  de-
sfHitch  was  itjtercepted  by  a  British  ship  and  for-
warded to  the  F]nglish  minister  in  Philadelphia
(Flammond)  just  in  time  to  determine  the  re-
sult of  the  struggle  concerning  the  treaty.  Wash-
ington had  matie  up  his  mind  not  to  sign  the
treaty  until  the"  provision  order"  was  revoked,  and
so  informwi  the  secretary  of  state  in  a  letter  from
Mount  Vernon,  22  Julv,  1705.  The  intercepted
despatch  of  Fauchet  alteretl  this  determination,
ami  the  treaty  was  signe<i  without  the  condition.
Theonlv  altemativesof  the  administration  were  to
acknowledge  the  assurances  diplomatically  given
to  Fauchet.  as  egregii>usly  falsified  by  him,  or,
now  that  they  might  l)e  publishe<l,  accept  Ran-
dolph as  scapegoat.  It  is  diflicult  to  see  how
Washington  couhi  have  saved  his  friend,  even  if
really  to  share  his  fate.  Randolph,  having  indig-
nantly resigned  his  ofllce,  pursuc-d  Fauchet  (now
recalled!)  to  Xew|M)rt,  an«l  obtainiil  fn>m  him  a  full
n'trm'tation  and  excul|>ation.  He  then  prcimred
his  "Vindication."  After  the  intercepted  letter
WHS  shown  him.  but  withheld  from  tne  do«inie<l
st-iretary,  Washington  tn-atetl  Randolph  with  ex-
ceptional affii-tion,  visiting  his  house,  and  twice
TOU  T. — 12


(dvjng  htm  the  place  of  honor  at  hia  tiible.  It
IS  maintained  by  Randolph's  biographer  (.M.  D.
Conway)  that  this  conduct,  and  his  failure  to  wnd
for  the  other  despatches  alluded  t4»,  indicate  Wash-
ington's entire  «lisU'lief  of  thea-ssertionsof  Fauchet,
whose  intrigues  he  well  knew  (despatch  to  Monroe,
20  July.  1795).  liandolph  \\w\  attendeil  to  Wash-
ington's law-businexs  in  Virginia,  always  heavy,
steiidily  refusing  payment,  and  could  hardly  have
l)een  susix-ctcd  of  venality.  The  main  charge
against  Randolph  was  based  on  Fauchet's  alle-
gation of  "  pnVieuses  conf«*ssions"  made  to  him
by  the  secretary.  Hut  that  despatch  wa.s  closely
followed  bv  another,  discovered  in  1888,  at  Paris,
in  which  f-'auchet  announccfl  that  he  had  found
them  "fausses  confidences."  The  charge  of  in-
trigue and  revealing  secret.s  is  thus  finally  dia-
nose<i  of.  In  addition  to  the  "Vindication  of
Mr.  Randolph's  Resignation"  (Philadelphia,  1795),
the  ex-secretary  wrote  a  ri'tnarkable  pamphlet,  pub-
lishcil  the  following  year.  "  Political  Truth,  or  Ani-
madversions on  the  Past  and  Pn-s^nit  State  of
Public  Affairs."  After  his  n'signation,  Randolph
was  receive<l  with  public  demonstrations  of  ad-
miration in  Richmond,  where  he  resumed  the  prac-
tice of  law.  The  ruin  of  his  fortunes  was  com-
pleted by  an  account  made  up  against  him  of
f49,000  for  "moneys  i)lace<l  in  his  hands  to  de-
fray the  expenses  of  foreign  intercourse."  Under
the  system  of  that  pericKl  the  st>cretary  of  state  per-
sonally disbursed  the  funds  provided  for  all  foreign
service,  and  if  any  monev  were  lost  through  the  ac-
cidents of  war,  or  the  failure  of  l)anks,  he  was  held
responsible.  After  repeated  suits  in  which  juries
could  not  agree,  Randolph,  confident  in  the  jus-
tice of  his  case,  challenged  an  arbitration  by  the
comptroller  of  the  treasury,  Gabriel  Duval,  who
decided  against  him.  Then-ufKin  his  lands,  and
the  negroes  so  c<mscientiously  kept  from  sale  and
dispersion,  were  made  over  to  Hon.  Wilson  Cary
Nicholas,  by  whom  the  debt  was  paid  in  bonds,
from  which  the  eovemment  gainwl  $7,000  more
than  the  debt  and  interi'st.  Meanwhile  Randolph
had  again  taken  his  place  at  the  head  of  the  Vir-
ginia i)ar.  He  was  one  of  the  counsel  of  Aaron
Burr  on  his  trial  for  treason  at  Richmond.  He
also  wrote  an  important  "  History  of  Virginia,"
the  greater  part  of  which  is  now  in  rjossession  of
the  Historical  society  of  Virginia.  Tnough  much
used  by  historians,  it  has  never  been  published.  In
it  there  is  an  admirable  sketch  of  the  life  and  char-
acter of  Washington,  concerning  whom  no  bitter-
ness survived  in  his  breast.  For  the  fullest  ac-
count of  Edmund  Randolph,  and  of  his  ancestors,
see  "Omitted  Chapters  of  History,  disclosed  in  the
Life  and  PajHTs  of  K<lmiind  Randolph,"  by  Mon-
cure  D.  Conway  (New  York,  1888).  —  Kdmund's
son,  Peyton,  b.  at  Williamsburg,  Va.,  1779;  d.  at
Richmond,  Va.,  1828,  was,  from  an  early  period  of
his  life  to  its  close,  clerk  of  the  supreme  court  of
Virginia,  and  was  the  author  of  "  RefK)rts  of  Caaes
in  that  Court,  1821-'8"(«)  vols..  Richmond,  1828-82).
In  180«  he  married  Maria  Ward  (concerning  whom
see  John  Ksten  Co<ike's  "  Stories  of  the  <  Hd  I>oniin-
ion").— Peyton's  son.  Kdiniind.  jurist,  b.  in  Rich-
mond, Va..'9  June,  1820 ;  d.  in  San  PVancisc-o,  CaL,
8  Sept.,  1801.  was  the  youngest  of  ten  children  of
Peyton  and  Maria  Ward  Randolph.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  William  and  .Mary  college,  studieti  law  at
the  University  of  Virginia,  and  Itepin  practice  in
New  Orleans.  He  was  for  s«'vend  vears  clerk  of
the  U.  S.  circuit  court  for  liouisiana.  l>ut  in  1840  he
remove*!  to  Califoniia.  He  was  an  active  member
of  the  legislature  that  met  at  San  Jose,  15  Dec,
1849,  to  organize  a  state  government,  but  he  was


178


RANDOLPH


RANDOLPH


never  afterward  a  candidate  for  office,  though  he
took  an  active  part  in  California  iiolitics,  and  was
a  popular  orator.  William  Walker  fixed  on  Ran-
dolpn  as  the  chancellor  of  his  proposed  Nicaraguan
empire.  To  what  extent  Ranaolj)h  participated  in
that  enterprise  is  not  known,  but  his  absence  from
California  was  brief.  In  the  great  Almaden  mine
case  the  advocacy  of  the  claim  of  the  United  States
devolved  mainly  on  Randolph.  Of  this  case  Jere-
miah Black  says:  "In  the  bulk  of  the  record  and
the  magnitude  of  the  interest  at  stake,  this  is  prob-
ably the  heaviest  case  ever  heard  before  a  judicial
tribunal."  On  Randolph's  argument,  submitted
after  his  death,  the  United  States  won  the  case.
He  was  for  four  years  engaged  chiefly  on  this  case,
and  his  life  was  shortened  by  it.  The  government
paid  his  widow  $12,000  in  addition  to  the  $5,000
fee  which  her  husband  had  received.  Randolph
was  the  author  of  "An  Address  on  the  History  of
California  from  the  Discovery  of  the  Country  to
the  Year  1849,"  which  was  delivered  before  the  So-
cietv  of  California  pioneers,  at  San  Francisco,  on
10  Sept.,  18G0  (San  Francisco,  1860).  His  argument
in  the  Almaden  mine  case  has  also  been  printed.
— William's  great-grandson  John,  "  of  Roanoke,"
statesman,  b.  at  Cawsons,  Va.,  2  June,  1773;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  24  June,  1833,  was  seventh  in
descent  from  Pocahontas  by  her  marriage  with
John  Rolfe.  Richard  Randolph  of  Curies,  father
of  John  Randolph  of  Roanoke,  died  in  1775. In

1788  his  mother
married  St.  George
Tucker,  who  was  a
father  to  her  four
children,  among
whom  were  divided
the  large  possessions
of  their  father,  in-
cluding more  than
40,000,  acres.  Ac-
cording to  an  unpub-
lished manuscript  of
his  nephew,  by  mar-
riage, John  Ran-
dolph Bryan,  "  his
advantages  of  edu-
cation were  neces-
sarily limited  by  the
[Revolutionary]  exi-
gencies of  the  times.
Such  as  he  had  were  furnished  by  his  step-father.
His  mother  was  a  lady  of  rare  intelligence,  and  '  lit-
tle Jack,'  as  he  was  always  called,  found  in  her  a
Earent  and  guide  such  as  few  children  have.  For
er  his  love  and  admiration  were  unbounded.  She
was  a  beautiful  woman,  with  a  charm  of  manner  and
grace  of  person  most  captivating.  In  addition,  she
possessed  a  voice  which  had  rare  power.  Jack  was
a  beautiful  boy,  and  the  picture  of  the  child  and  his
mother  was  greatly  admired.  Randolph  never  spoke
of  her  in  after-life  but  with  peculiar  tenderness.
From  his  mother  he  learned  the  power  of  tone  in
reciting,  of  which  he  made  use  in  manhood."  In
his  great  speech  in  congress  (1811)  Randolph  said  :
"  Bred  up  in  the  principles  of  the  Revolution,  I  can
never  palliate,  much  less  defend  [the  outrages  and
injuries  of  England].  I  well  remember  flying  with
ray  mother  and  her  new-born  child  from  Arnold  and
Phillips ;  and  they  had  been  driven  by  Tarleton
and  other  British  pandours  from  pillar  to  post
while  her  husband  was  fighting  the  battles  of  his
country."  Although  Randolph  was  argumenta-
tivelv  pugnacious,  he  would  appear  to  nave  im-
bibea  a  hatred  of  war,  which  animated  his  dia-
tribes against  Napoleon  and  his  resolute  opposition


yfe^J^-'^^Ck^U^^ty^^L^


to  the  war  policy  of  Madison.  The  Randolph-
Tucker  library  was  well  supplied  with  history  and
romance,  of  w'hich  the  child  made  ^ood  use.  After
attending  Walker  Maury's  school  in  Orange  coun-
ty for  a  time  he  waS  sent,  in  his  twelfth  year,  to
the  grammar-school  connected  with  William  and
Mary  college.  He  did  not  mingle  easily  with
other  boys,  but  attached  himself  vehemently  to
one  or  two.  In  1784  he  went  with  his  parents
to  the  island  of  Bermuda,  remaining  eighteen
months.  In  the  autumn  of  1787  he  was  sent  to
Princeton,  but  in  1788  his  mother  died,  and  in
June  of  that  year  he  went  to  Columbia  college,
New  York,  where  he  studied  for  a  short  time.  On
30  April,  1789,  he  witnessed  the  first  president's
inauguration.  "  I  saw  Washington,  but  could  not
hear  him  take  the  oath  to  support  the  Federal
constitution.  I  saw  what  Washington  did  not
see ;  but  two  other  men  in  Virginia  saw  it — George
Mason  and  Patrick  Henry — the  poison  under  its
wings."  When  Edmund  Randolph,  a  year  later,
entered  on  his  duties  as  attorney-general,  John,
his  second  cousin,  was  sent  to  Philatlelphia  and
studied  law  with  him.  Among  his  unpublished
letters  are  several  that  indicate  a  temporary  lapse
into  gambling  and  other  dissipation  about  tnis
time,  and  suggest  an  entanglement,  if  not  indeerl  a
marriage,  in  rhiladelphia,  as  the  explanation  of  the
rupture  of  his  engagement  with  the  famous  beauty,
Maria  Ward,  whose  marriage  (to  Peyton,  only  son
of  Edmund  Randolph)  completed  the  tragedy  ol
his  private  life.  While  in  Philadelphia  he  does
not  apjiear  to  have  studied  law  exclusively,  but
availed  himself  of  opportunities  for  hearing  po-
litical debates,  and  attended  lectures  in  anatomy
and  physiology.  He  had  been  a  precocious  skep-
tic, but  passed  into  a  state  of  emotional  religion,
under  the  influence  of  which  he  writes  to  a  friend
(24  Feb.,  1791) :  "  I  prefer  a  private  to  a  public  life,
and  domestic  pleasure  to  the  dazzling  (the  delusive)
honors  of  popular  esteem."  At  the  beginning  of
the  French  revolution  he  was  filled  with  enthusi-
asm, and  at  the  same  time  his  idols  were  Jefferson
and  Burke.  A  strange  combination  of  opposite
natures  was  always  visible  in  him.  As  his  father
before  him  had  sold  slaves  to  supply  the  cause  of
freedom  with  powder,  so  the  son  was  at  once  aris-
tocrat and  democrat — offending  President  Adams
by  addressing  him  without  adding  anjr  title,  and
signing  "  Your  Fellow-citizen."  He  built  up  a  dis-
tinctively pro-slavery  party,  and  wrote  a  will  liber-
ating his  slaves  on  tne  ground  that  they  were
equally  entitled  to  freedom  with  himself.  In  1795
Randolph  returned  to  Virginia  and  lived  in  the
family  of  his  brother  Richard,  to  whom  he  was  de-
voted. The  death  of  this  brother  (1796),  under  the
shadow  of  a  painful  scandal,  was  a  heavy  blow.
At  "  Bizarre,"  the  family  mansion,  Randolph  now
dwelt  as  head  of  a  large  household.  In  1797  he
writes  to  his  friend,  Henry  Rutle<lge,  of  another
calamity :  "  I  have  been  deprived  by  the  Federal
court  of  more  than  half  my  fortune.  'Tis  an
iniquitous  affair,  and  too  lengthy  to  be  related
here.  The  loss  affects  me  very  little,  since  I  have
as  yet  a  competence,  but  I  am  highly  chagrined  at
being  robbed  in  so  villainous  a  manner.  I  have
but  little  thought  of  practising  law."  Randolph's
first  speech  was  made  in  1799.  in  answer  to  Patrick
Henry.  The  power  of  expelling  foreigners  from
the  country  without  trial,  conferred  on  the  presi-
dent by  the  alien  and  sedition  acts,  had  l^een  an-
swered in  Virginia  by  legislative  denunciation  of
the  acts  as  infractions  of  the  constitution.  The
issue  had  arisen  in  Virginia  as  to  the  reversal  of
those  resolutions. When  Randolptf  stepped  forth


RANDOLPH


RANG EL


179


to  defend  the  resolutions,  he  enrounteml  Patrick
Henry.  TIhto  is  little  tlmiht  that  the  ixiwerful
<«|MM><'h  A.scrilN><l  to  Haiiiliilpli  in  Muffh  darlnnd's
"  Life  "  was  ItaMnloii  n'|>ortjj  fmin  lu-arers,  and  the
lantniH>^  i*  characteristic.  Randolph  wh»  now
eitH'twl  to  conifress.  His  first  s|K«fch  in  that  Imdy
(lU  Jan..  18()0)  had  ominous  result.s.  Advocating
a  n^solution  to  diminish  the  army,  he  use<l  the
phra.He  "  standing  or  mercenary  armies,"  contend-
ing that  all  who  made  war  a  profession  or  trade
wen'  literally  "  mercenary."  The  etymology  was
insufTlcient  ^or  certain  oftlcers,  who  t<M)k  (K-casion
to  insult  him  in  the  theatre.  Randolph  wrote  to
President  Adams,  improving  the  (x-casion  to  let
him  and  the  P\Mleralist  narty  kn«)w  his  opinion  of
the  executive  office.  He  addressetl  Mr.  Adams
with  no  other  title  than  *•  President  of  the  United
States,"  and  signed  himself.  "  With  Re«|)ect,  Your
Fellow-i'itizen,  John  Ramlolph."  Mr.  Adams  sent
the  complaint  to  the  house,  where  the  (juestion  of
dealing  with  the  affair  as  a  breach  of  re|)resenta-
tive  "  privilege  "endetl  in  a  demllwk.  (Quickly  In-
coming Republican  leader  of  the  house,  chairman
of  the  ways  and  means  committee,  Randolph  be-
came the  pride  of  Virginia.  He  commanded  the
heart  of  the  nation  by  nis  |Kx>tic  ehKjuence.  his  ab-
solute honesty,  and  the  scathing  wit  with  which  he
exjK>stKl  every  corrupt  scheme.  In  his  slight  boy-
ish form  was  sheathed  a  courage  that  often  fougfit
single-handed,  and  generally  won  a  moral  if  not  a
technical  victory,  as  in  the  great  Yazoo  fraud
which,  after  repeated  defeats,  could  only  l)e  passed
in  his  absence;  also  in  the  impeachment  of  Judge
Chase,  who  wjis  saved  only  because  the  constitu-
tional apparatus  was  inmlequate  to  carry  out  the
verdict  of  a  large  majority.  President  Jefferson
admired  his  young  relative,  and  gained  much  by
his  8upp<irt ;  but  it  speetlily  became  evident  that
their  connection  was  unreal.  Jefferson  idealized
Napoleon,  Randolph  abhorred  him.  John  had
leametl  from  Edmund  Randolph  a  knowledge  of
the  English  constitution  rare  at  that  time,  and
some  of  the  most  impressive  passages  of  his
speeches  were  those  in  which  he  pointed  out  the
reactionary  character  of  certain  events  and  tenden-
cies of  the  time.  The  ap[)earance  of  a  jwstmaster-
general  as  agent  of  two  land  C(jmpanies  to  urge  the
Yazoo  claims  on  congress  in  1805  pointed  one  of
Randolph's  finest  speeches.  At  this  time  he  was
so  national  in  his  pK^litical  ideas  that  in  defending
the  purchase  of  Louisiana  he  maintained  the  con-
stitutionality of  the  transaction.  It  was  of  im-
portance to  the  president  that  his  act  should  lie
regardtnl  as  extra-constitutional.  Owing  to  Ran-
dolph's course,  tlie  constitutional  amendment  that
the  president  asked  was  never  gained,  and  any
further  development  of  executive  authority  con-
tinued extra-constitutional.  It  was  inevitable  that
there  should  Ix*  a  steady  alienation  between  the
administration  and  Randolph.  In  the  heat  of  a
moment,  as  when  the  outrage  on  the  ship  "Chesa-
peake" occurre<l,  the  revolutionary  element  in  him
might  api)ear ;  in  the  case  alluded  to  he  a<lv«x-ate<l
an  eniliargo;  but  when  the  embargo  came  from
the  senate,  and  he  saw  his  momentary  wrath  sys-
tematized into  a  (x;rmanent  war-measure,  under
which  England  and  New  England  would  suffer  to
the  advantag<>  of  "that  cowanl  Napoleon"  (his
favorite  phra.s«').  he  voted  against  it.  It  seems  iin-
{M)ssible  to  juscriln?  this  a|)i)arent  inconsistency  to
anything  exc«»nt  It^indolph  s  moral  courage.  This
is  not  the  only  instaiu-e  in  which  he  confronted
the  taunt  of  admitting  himself  to  have  Wen  in
the  wrong.  He  never  tlesired  office;  his  ambition
was  to  be  a  repreaeatative  of  Virginia  and  to  fight


down  every  public  wrong.  This  involved  quar-
rels, alienations,  and  a  gradual  lapse  into  a  {xtuii-
mistic  state  of  mind.foslcn-d.  unfortunatelv.  by  do-
mestic distresses  an<l  physical  ailments.  After  his
gn-at  struggle  to  iirevcnt  the  war  of  1HI2,  and  his
conflict  with  Madison,  he  was  left  out  of  c*ongress
for  two  years,  and  during  that  time  lived  at  Ito-
anoke.  \\'hen  he  returinMl  to  congress  in  1816
the  as|x>ct  «if  affairs  fille<l  him  with  horror,  and  he
•levotetl  himself  to  the  formation  of  a  "State-
Rights"  party.  He  vaguely  dreaniwl  of  the  resto-
ration of  the  "Old  Dominion."  His  ideal  country
was  now  England.  Although  in  his  state-rights
agitation  he  ap|>eal(>d  to  the  fears  of  southeniere
for  their  i>ro|M>rty,  that  reactionary  attitude  tNiMied
away.  Hatre<l  of  slavery  was  jwrt'  both  of  his  Vir-
ginian and  his  English  inheritance;  only  the  legal
restrictions  on  emancijmtion,  and  the  injustice  to
his  creditors  that  would  Ir^  involved,  prevented
manumission  of  his  slaves  l»eforo  his  death.  At
the  same  time  he  vote<l  against  the  Missouri  com-
promis«.\  and  originate<l  the  term  "dough-faces"
which  he  applied  to  its  northern  sup|X)rter8.  He
hatl  no  dream  of  a  southern  confetleracy ;  none
would  have  more  abhorred  a  nationality  base<l  on
slavery.  He  had  no  respe<'t  for  Calhoun,  or  for
Clay,  who  challenged  Randolph  for  using  insulting
language  in  a  si)eec-h.  and  shot  at  him,  but  was
snared  by  the  Virginian.  He  had  l)een  electe<l  to
tne  U.  S.  s<>nate  in  Decemlier,  18*24,  to  fill  a  vacancy,
and  serxed  in  1825-'7,  Iwing  defeated  at  the  next
election.  Though  he  accepted  the  Russian  mission
in  1830  from  Jackson,  whom  he  had  sup{X)rted  in
1828,  he  soon  returned  and  joined  issue  with  the

|)resident  on  the  nullification  question.  In  1829
le  was  a  meml)er  of  the  Constitutional  conven-
tion of  Virginia,  and,  though  he  was  very  infirm,
his  elo<|uence  enchained  the  assembly.  He  died  of
consumption  in  a  hotel  in  Philadelphia  a.s  he  was
preparing  for  another  trip  abroad.  His  last  will
was  set  aside  on  the  ground  that  it  was  written
with  unsound  mind.  By  the  earlier  will,  which
was  sustained,  his  numerous  slaves  were  lilx>rated
and  they  were  colonized  by  Jud|re  William  I^igh
in  the  west.  Although  eccentric  and  sometimes
morose,  Randolph  was  warm-hearteil.  He  was  fond
of  children.  "  His  fondness  for  young  jK'ople,*'
says  the  Bryan  MS.,  "was  jxirticularly  shown  in
a  correspondence  with  his  niece,  during  which  he
wrote  her  more  than  200  letters."  Randolph's  per-
.sonal  appearance  w»us  striking.  He  was  six  feet  in
height  and  very  slender,  with  long,  skinny  fingers,
which  he  pointiKl  and  shook  at  those  against  whom
he  spoke.  His  "  Ijetters  to  a  Young  Relative  "  ap-
iieared  in  1834.  See  "  Life  of  John  Randolph,"  by
Hugh  A.  Oarland  (2  vols.,  New  York,  18.50);  also
"John  Randolph,"  by  Henry  Adams  (Boston.  1882).
KAN(«KL,  Ignaoio  (ran-gel),  .Sjmnish  mission-
ary, b.  late  in  the  loth  century;  d.  at  sea  in  1549.
He  Iwlonged  to  the  order  of  St.  Francis  and  came
to  Mexico  in  152(1,  where  he  learneil  the  Aztec  and
Otomi  languages,  and.  l)eing  transferred  to  the
province  of  St.  Evangile,  was  the  first  to  preach
to  the  Otomi  Indians  of  Tula  and  Jilote|H»c  in
their  own  dialect.  He  converted  them,  notwith-
standing that  the  heathen  priests  triwl  to  sacrifice
him  in  Te|H>titlan,  and  he  founde<l  many  missions
in  their  midst,  st>  that  he  gained  the  name  of  the
Otomi  ajxjstle.  He  built  the  l>eautiful  chun-h  of
Tula,  was  elected  provincial  in  1540.  and  in  1540  sent
to  the  genend  chapter  of  the  onler  in  Rome,  but
died  on  the  voyage.  He  wrote  "Arte  de  la  lengua
Mexicana "  and  "  Arte  y  catwismo  de  la  lengua
Otomi."  which  are  in  manuscript  in  the  archiepis-
copal  library  of  Mexico.


180


RANKIN


RANNEY


RANKIN,  David  Nevin,  physician,  b,  in  Ship-
pcnsburg,  Cumberlttiid  co..  Pa.,  27  Oct.,  1834.
After  gratluation  at  Jeflferson  medit-al  college  in
1854,  he  pratrtised  with  his  father  in  his  native
town  until  the  l>eginningof  the  civil  war,  in  which
he  served  as  atrting  a.ssistant  surgeon,  and  aided  in
opening  many  of  the  largest  U.  S.  army  hospitals
during  the  war,  among  which  were  the  Mansion-
house  hospital  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  and  the  Douglas
hospital  in  Washington,  I).  C.  Afterward  he  was
niaue  one  of  tlie  thirty  surgeons  in  the  volunteer
aid  corps  of  surgeons  of  Pennsylvania,  which  ren-
dered efficient  service.  In  1804-'6  he  was  medical
examiner  of  the  U.  S.  |)ension  bureau,  and  since
1865  he  has  lx;on  chief  physician  of  the  penitentiary
of  western  Pennsylvania.  Dr.  Hankin  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  British  medical  associati<m  in  1884,  a
delegate  to  the  8th  and  Oth  International  medical
congresses,  and  is  a  member  of  various  medical
societies.  He  hjis  contributed  numerous  articles
to  medical  iounuils.

RANKIN,  Jeremiah  Eames,  clergyman,  b.  in
Thornton,  N.  H.,  2  Jan.,  1828.  After  graduation
at  Middlebury  college  in  1848,  and  at  Anuover  theo-
logical seminary  in  1854.  he  was  pastor  of  Presby-
terian and  Congregational  churches  in  Potsdam,
N.  .Y.,  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  Lowell  and  Charlestown,
Mass.,  and  Washington,  D.  C.  Since  1884  he  has
been  pastor  of  the  Valley  church  in  Orange.  N.  J.
He  was  a  trustee  of  Howard  university  in  1870-'8,
and  professor  of  homiletics  and  pastoral  theology
there  in  1878-'84.  He  has  been  twice  a  delegate  to
the  general  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church,  and-in  1884  was  a  delegate  to  the  Congre-
gational union  of  England  and  Wales.  Middlebury
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1869.  He  has  con-
tributed to  religious  periodicals,  edited  the  "  Pil-
grim Press  "  and  the  "  Congregational  Keview,"  has
written  several  national  hymns,  including  "'For
God  and  Home  and  Native  Land  "  and  •'  Keep  your
Colors  Flying,"  and  is  the  author  of  the  "  iJridal
Ring  "  (Boston,  1866) ;  "Auld  Scotch  Mither"  (1873);
"Subduing  Kingdoms  "(Washington,  1881);  "The
Hotel  of  (Jod  "  (Boston,  1883) ;  "  Atheism  of  the
Heart"  (1884);  "Christ  His  Own  Interpreter"
(1884) ;  and  "  Ingleside  Rhaims"  (New  York,  1887).

RANKIN,  Joiin,  clergyman,  b.  near  Dandridge,
Jefferson  co.,  Tenn.,  4  Feb.,  1793;  d.  in  Ironton,
Ohio,  18  March,  1886. From  1817  till  1821  he  was

Kastor  of  two  Presbyterian  churches  in  Carlisle,
^y.,  and  about  1818  founded  an  anti-slavery  so-
ciety. Removing  to  Ripley,  Ohio,  he  was  pastor
of  the  1st  and  2d  Presbyterian  churches  for
forty-four  years.  He  joined  the  Garri.son  anti-
slavery  movement,  and  was  mobbed  for  his  views
more  than  twenty  times.  Al)out  1824  he  addressed
letters  to  his  brother  in  Middlebrook,  Va.,  dissuad-
ing him  from  slave-holding,  which  were  published
in  Ripley,  in  the  "  Liberator,"  in  1832,  and  after-
ward in  book-form  in  Boston  and  Newburyport,
and  ran  through  many  editions.  He  assisted  Eliza
and  her  child,  the  originals  of  those  characters  in
"  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,  to  escape.  He  founded  the
American  reform  book  and  tract  society  of  Cin-
cinnati, and  was  the  author  of  several  'books,  in-
cluding "The  Covenant  of  Grace"  (Pittsburg,
1869).  See  his  life  entitled  "The  Soldier,  the  Bat-
tle, and  the  Victory,"  by  Rev.  Andrew  Ritchie
(Cincinnati.  1876).

RANKIN,  Jolin  Ciiambers,  clergyman,  b.  in
Guilford  county,  N.  C,  18  Mav,  1816.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Chapel  Hill,  studied  at  Princeton  theo-
logical seminary  in  1836-'9,  and  was  ordaine<l  and
appointed  missionary  to  India,  where  he  remained
from  1840  till  1848,  and  there  wrote  and  published


in  the  Urdic  lang^ua^  a  reply  to  a  Mohammedan
book  against  Christianity.  Owing  to  impaired
health,  he  returned  to  the  United  States,  and  in
1851  iMJcame  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in
Baskingridge,  N.  J.,  which  charge  he  now  (1888)
holds.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1867.  He  is  the  author  of  "The  Coming  of  the
Lord  "(New  York,  1885).

RANKIN,  Tliuinas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dunbar,
Scotland,  about  1738;  d.  in  London,  England,  17
May,  1810.  He  joined  the  Metho<list  Episcopal
conference,  began  to  preach  in  1761,  and  was  ap-
pointed to  the  Sussex,  Sheffield,  Devonshire,  and
other  circuits  by  John  Wesley,  with  whom  he  also
travelled  on  a  preaching  tour  in  that  year.  He
was  the  first  in  authority  under  Wesley,  was  ap-
pointed superintendent,  and  came  to  this  couniir
as  a  missionary,  arriving  in  Philadelphia,  with
George  Shadford,  on  3  June,  1773.  Soon  after  his
arrival  he  called  a  conference,  which  met  in  Phila-
delphia in  July,  1773,  and  was  the  first  of  that
denomination  ever  held  in  this  country.  After
preaching  in  New  Jersey  and  elsewhere,  he  was
stationed  in  New  York,  and  while  officiating  at  a
quarterly  meeting  in  1776  he  was  told  that  he
would  be  seized  by  a  body  of  militia.  He  contin-
ued preaching,  but,  although  many  soldiers  were  in
the  congregation,  he  was  not  molested.  In  Sep-
tember. 1777,  he  fled  from  his  post  and  entered
the  British  lines.  On  reaching  Philadelphia,  which
was  in  their  possession,  he  declared  from  the  pul-
pit his  belief  "  that  God  would  not  revive  his  worlc
in  America  until  they  submitted  to  their  rightful
sovereign,  George  III."  He  endeavored  to  get  the
British  preachers  back  to  England.  "  It  appeared
to  me,"  said  Asbury,  "  that  his  object  was  to  sweep
the  continent  of  every  preacher  that  Mr.  Wesley
sent  to  it,  and  of  eyery  respectable  travelling
preacher  from  Europe  who  had  gratluated  among
us.  whether  English  or  Irish."  After  his  return  to
England  in  1778  he  was  supernumerary  for  Lon-
don until  a  few  months  before  his  death.

RANNEY,  Ambrose  Arnold,  lawyer,  b.  in
Townshend,  Vt.,  16  April,  1821.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1844,  taught  for  two  years
in  Chester,  Vt.,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1848.  He  established  himself  in  practice
in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  attained  a  high  reputation.
He  was  corporation  counsel  for  the  city  in  1855-'6,
and  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1857,  and  again
in  18(53  and  the  subsequent  session.  He  was  elected
a  representative  in  congress  by  the  Republicans
for  three  successive  terms,  serving  from  5  Dec.,
1881,  till  3  March,  1887,  and  was  an  active  member
of  the  judiciary  committee.

RANNEY,  Rnfus  Percival,  jurist,  b.  in  Bland-
ford,  Mass.,  13  Oct.,  1813.  When  he  was  fourteen
years  old  his  father  removed  to  a  farm  in  Free-
dom, Portage  co.,  Ohio,  where  Rufus  was  brought
up  with  small  educational  advantages,  yet  by
manual  work  and  teaching  he  obtained  the  means
to  fit  himself  for  college.  He  studied  for  a  short
time  at  Western  Reserve  college,  which  he  left  to
study  law  in  Jefferson,  Ohio.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  18Ji8,  aiid  was  taken  into  partnership
by  Benjamin  P.  Wade.  In  1845  he  opened  an
office  in  Warren,  Trumbull  co.  He  was  tne  Demo-
cratic candidate  for  congress  in  1846  and  1848,
and  in  1850  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the
discussions.  He  was  chosen  by  the  legislature,
about  the  same  time,  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,
and  in  1851  was  elected  by  the  people,  under  the
new  constitution,  to  the  same  office,  which  he  held
till  1857. In  that  year  he  was  appointed  United


RANNEY


RANSOM


181


Stntps  flUtrirt  attorney  for  Ohio,  and  in  18S0  was

(lff<'ntf<l  a.s  thi'  DemotTtttio  candidate  forjfovemor.
Ill  IMfi'J  lit*  wiks  u)(Hiti  t'U'ctod  u  jiidp'  of  the  mu-
|)ri>mi'  court,  hut  in  1804  rvsiguitl.  and  rvsunied
prailnr  in  I'lt-vfland.

KANNEY.  William,  artist,  b.  in  Middlctown,
Conn.,  tf  May.  18i:{;  d.  in  Wert  lIolx)ken.  N.  J..  18
Nov.,  \H!)7.  '  Tiie  nuniu  that  wa.s  (inven  liiui  at  ba|>-
tisni  was  William  Tylee,  but  he  never  used  the
lattor.  At  the  a^«  of  thirtwn  he  was  taken  to  Fay-
otteville,  N.  ('.,  by  hi.s  unele,  where  he  was  appren-
ticed to  a  tinsmith,  but  S4-ven  years  later  lie  was
studying;  drawing  in  lirooklyn.  When  the  Texan
stnigK'^*  Im'K'i".  Kanney  enlisted,  and  duriuf;  tlio
cam|wi^n  Itceame  ac(|uainte<l  with  many  trapfiers
and  f^uitles  of  the  west.  After  his  return  home  he
devoted  himself  mainly  to  jiortravinj;  their  life  and
habits.  Among  his  works  are  "  lioone's  First  View
of  Kentucky."  "On  the  Winj;."  "  Washington  on
his  Mission  to  the  Indians"  (1847).  "  Duck-Shoot-
ing," which  is  in  the  Corcoran  gallery,  Washing-
ton, '•  The  Sieigh-Kide,"  and  "  The  Trap|)er's  Ijast
Shot."  Many  of  these  have  been  engraved.  He
was  a  frequent  exhibitor  at  the  National  acade-
my, of  which  he  was  elected  an  asstx-iate  in  1850.

K.4NSIER,  Alonzo  Jacob,  iK)litician,  b.  in
('harleston.  S.  ('..  3  Jan.,  1836;  d.  there.  17  Aug..
1882.  He  was  the  son  of  free  colored  [wople.  and.
having  obtained  by  himself  some  e«lucation,  was
employcil,  when  sixteen  years  of  ago,  as  a  shipping-
clerk  by  a  merchant  of  Charleston.  In  Octo-
ber, 18tt5,  he  took  part  in  a  convention  of  the
friends  of  equal  rights  in  Charleston,  and  was  de-
pute<l  to  present  to  congress  the  memorial  that  was
atloptefl.  He  waselecte<l  a  memln'r  of  the  Consti-
tutional convention  trf  1808.  was  an  elector  on  the
Grant  and  Colfax  presidential  ticket,  and  was  sent
to  the  legislature  in  the  following  vear.  He  was  also
chosen  chairman  of  the  Kepulillcan  state  central
committee,  filling  that  office  till  1872.  and  in  1870
was  elwte<l  lieutenant-governor  of  South  Carolina
by  a  large  majority.  He  was  jiresident  of  the  con-
vention from  the  southern  states  that  was  held  at
Columbia.  S.  C.  in  1871.  and  was  a  vice-president
of  the  Kepublican  national  conventicm  at  Phila-
delphia in  1872.  In  that  year  he  was  electeil  a
representative  in  congress,  an<l  serve<l  from  1  Dec..
1873,  till  3  March.  1875. When  the  Democratic

Krty  reached  power  in  South  Carolina  in  1877.  he
*t  his  official  posts,  and  afterwanl  suffered  great
Soverty.  l)eing  employed  fniin  that  time  tifi  his
eath  as  a  street-lalK)rer.

RANSOM,  (ieorgc  Maroellu^,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Spriiigfieltl.  Otsego  co..  N.  Y..  18  Jan..  1820.  He
was  educate<l  in  the  common  scIkkiIs  of  New  York
and  Ohio,  entennl  the  navy  as  a  midshipman  on  25
July,  18;J9,  .studied  at  the  naval  school  in  Phila-
delphia, l>ecame  a  iMissed  midshipman  on  2  July.
1845.  a  master  on  28  June.  185^},  and  a  lieutenant
on  21  Feb.,  1854.  He  served  on  the  coast  of  Africa
in  1850-'7.  was  commissioned  lieutenant  -  com-
mander on  10  Julv.  18(52.  and.  in  command  of  the
steam  gun-lx>at "  kineo."  of  the  Western  Gulf  bUx-k-
adiiig  squadron,  had  several  engagements  with  the
enemy  in  March  and  Anril,  18(i2.  He  passed  the
forts  Jackson  and  St.  Philip  in  Farragut's  fleet,
engaged  the  ram  "  Manassas."  and  in  May.  18(52.  a
field-battery  at  (irand  Gulf.  He  |H'rforme<l  effective  |
service  in  shelling  Gen.  John  C.  Breckinridge's  1
army  at  Baton  Houge.  5  Aug..  18(52.  and  engag('<l
a  i)attery  and  a  force  of  guerillas  on  4  Oct.  He  |
was  promoted  commander  on  2  Jan..  1S(C{.  and
»erve<l  with  the  North  Atlantic  bUx-kadini;  scpiad-
ron  in  command  of  the  steamer  "(irand  (iulf  "  in
1864,  and  captured  three  steamers  off  Wilmington.


lie  wu  commissioned  captain  on  2  March,  1870.
and  comnuHlore  on  28  March.  1877,  and  was  r»>
tired.  18  June,  1882.

HANSOM,  Matt  Whitaker,  senator,  b.  in
Warren  county,  N.  ('., 8  Oct.,  1820.  He  was  gradu-
atwi  at  the  University  of  North  Cariilina  in  1847,
and  a<lmitted  to  the  bar  the  same  vear,  and  was

Iiresidential  elector  on  the  Whig  ticket  in  1852.
•'or  the  subse4juent  three  years  he  was  state  at-
torney-gi'iieral.  and  then,  joining  the  I>emocratic
party',  was  a  meml>erof  the  legislature  in  1858,  and
in  1801  one  of  the  three  North  Carolina  commis-
sioners to  tile  Confe«lerate  congn'ss  in  Montgom-
ery, Ala.  He  did  his  utmost  U>  avert  the  war,
but,  on  the  secession  of  his  state,  volunteered  as
a  private  in  the  Confederate  service,  and  was  at
once  ap|K>inted  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st  North
Carolina  infantry,  with  which  he  man-he<l  to  the
seat  of  war  in  Virginia.  He  was  chosen  colonel  of
the  35th  North  Carolina  infantry  in  18(52.  partici-
pated with  his  regiment  in  all  the  im[M>rtant  battles
of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  was  wverely
wounded  in  the  seven  days'  fight  around  Rich-
mond, and  was  promoted  brigadier -general  in
1803  and  major-general  in  1805,  but  the  fall  of  the
Confe<leracy  prevented  the  receipt  of  the  latter
commission.  He  resumed  his  profession  in  1806,
exerted  a  pacific  influence  in  the  j)olitic*s  of  his
state,  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Demo-
crat in  1872.  and  has  served  since  by  re-election.
His  present  term  will  end  in  1889.

RANSOM,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  North  Caro-
lina about  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  and  assigned  to  the  1st  dragoons.
He  was  promoted  1st  lieutenant  in  the  1st  cavalry,
3  March.  1855,  and  captain,  31  Jan..  1801.  but  re-
signtnl.  24  May,  18(51.  and  was  ap[>ointed  cajitain  of
cavalry  in  the  Confederate  army  in  June.  He  was
made  colonel  of  the  9th  North  Carolina  cavalry
st)on  afterward,  became  brigadier-general.  0  .March.
1802.  and  major-general.  20  May.  18t)3.  He  com-
manded a  brigade  and  the  defences  near  Kinston,
N.  C,  in  1802,  and  the  Department  of  Richmond
from  25  April  till  13  June,  1804.  He  also  com-
manded the  sub-district.  No.  2.  of  the  de|)artment
that  included  S<nith  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Florida
in  November,  1804.

RANSOM.  Trnmnn  Bishop,  soldier,  b.  in  Wood-
stock. Vt.,  in  1802;  d.  near  the  city  of  Mexico,  13
Sept.,  1847.  He  was  early  left  an  orphan,  entered
Capt.  Alden  Partridge's  military  academy  s<x)n
after  its  opening,  taught  in  several  of  the  schools
that  Capt.  Partridge  "establishetl  suljsequently,  and
on  the  incorfxiration  of  Norwich  university  in  lKi5
Ix'came  vice-president  an<l  professor  of'  natural
philosophy  and  engineering.  He  was  also  instruc-
tor in  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  did  much  to
reorganize  the  Vermont  militia,  in  which  he  was
major-general  in  1837-'44.  and  in  1844  succee<led
Capt.  Partridge  as  president  of  the  univei-sily.  He
was  an  unsuccessful  Denux-ratic  caiulidate  for  con-
gn-ss  in  1840.  and  for  lieutenant-governor  in  1846.
Gen.  Hansom  volunteered  for  the  Mexican  war.  was
aj»iK)intcHl  majoi  .^f  the  9th  I'.  S.  infaiitrv  on  10
Feb.,  1847,  and  colonel  on  1(5  March.  He  fell  at
the  head  of  his  regiment  while  storming  the  works
at  Chapulte|iec. — His  son. Thomas  Kdnard  <i!re<>n-
field,  soldier,  b.  in  Norwich.  Vt..  29  Nov.,  18:i4:  d.
near  Home.  29  Oct..  1804.  was  educate«l  at  Norwich
university.  learniHl  civil  engineering,  and  in  1851
removed  to  Illinois,  where  he  engaged  in  business.
He  was  eUfted  major  and  then  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  11th  Illinois,  an<l  was  wountl(><l  while  lead-
ing a  charge  at  Charlcstown.  Mo..  20  Aug..  1861.
He  participated  in  the  capture  of  Fort  Henry,  and


182


RANSONNIER


RANTOUL


r-cf^/d^


led  his  regiment  in  the  assault  upon  Fort  Donel-
soii,  where  he  was  again  severely  wounded,  yet
would  not  leave  the  field  till  the  battle  was  ended.
He  was  promoted  colonel  for  his  bravery  and  skill.

At  Shdoh  he  was
in  the  hot  test  part
of  the  battle,  and,
though  wounded
in  the  head  ear-
ly in  the  action,
remained  with
his  command
through  the  day.
He  served  aschief
of  staff  to  Gen.
John  A.  McCler-
nand  and  inspec-
tor-general of  the
Army  of  the  Ten-
nessee, and  sub-
sequently on  the
staff  of  Gen.
Grant,  and  in
January,  1863,
was  made  a  brigadier-general,  his  commission  dat-
ing from  29  Nov.,  1862.  lie  distinguished  himself
at  Vicksbiirg,  and  was  at  the  head  of  a  division  in
the  Red  River  campaign,  taking  command  of  the
corps  when  Gen.  McClernand  fell  ill.  In  the  battle
of  Sabine  Cross-Roads  he  received  a  wound  in  the
knee,  from  which  he  never  recovered.  He  com-
manded a  division,  and  later  the  17th  corps,  in  the
operations  about  Atlanta,  and,  though  attacked
with  sickness,  directed  the  movements  of  his  troops
in  the  pursuit  of  Gen.  John  B.  Hood's  army  until
he  sank  under  the  disease.  Gen.  Ransom  was  buried
in  Rose  Hill  cemetery,  Chicago.  He  was  brevetted
major-general  on  1  Sept.,  1864.  Both  Grant  and
Sherman  pronounced  Ransom  to  be  among  the
ablest  volunteer  generals  in  their  commands.  A
Grand  army  post  in  St.  Louis  was  named  in  his
honor,  and  a  tribute  to  his  memory  was  delivered
at  Chicago  on  Decoration-day,  1886,  by  Gen.  Will-
iam T.  Sherman.  See  "Sketches  of  Illinois  Offi-
cers," by  James  Grant  Wilson  (Chicago,  1862).

RANSONNIER,  Jean  Jacqnes  (ran-son-yay),
clergyman,  b.  in  the  county  of  Burgundy  in  1600;
d.  in  1640.  He  finished  his  studies  in  Malines,  en-
tered the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1619,  and  at  his  own
request  was  sent  to  Paraguay  in  1625.  After  la-
boring successfully  among  the  Indians  for  several
years,  he  visited  the  tribe  of  the  Itatines  in  1632,
converted  them,  and  became  their  legislator  as
well  as  their  apostle.  He  spent  the  remainder  of
his  life  among  them.  His  letters  were  published
under  the  title  "  Litterae  Annuae  1626  et  1627,
provinciae  Paraguariie,  Societatis  Jesu  "  (Antwerp,
1836).  Pinelo  asserts  that  Ransonnier's  letters
were  merely  translations  from  the  manuscript  of
an  Italian  missionary.

RANTOUL,  Robert,  reformer,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  23  Nov.,  1778;  d.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  24  Oct.,
1858.  His  father,  Robert,  a  native  of  Kinross-
shire,  Scotland,  was  descended  from  an  ancient
family  prominent  in  the  ecclesiastical  and  literary
annals  of  Scotland,  came  to  America  at  the  age  of
sixteen,  and  settled  in  Salem.  The  son  became  a
dniggist  at  Beverly  in  1796.  He  sat  in  the  legisla-
ture from  1809  till  1820,  in  the  state  senate  from
1821  till  1823,  and  in  the  house  of  representatives
again  till  1833.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State
constitutional  conventions  of  1820  and  1853.  After
taking  part  in  the  militia  and  coast-guard  service
of  1812-'15,  he  became  a  member  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts peace  society. He  enlisted,  as  early  as


1803,  in  movements  to  suppress  the  common  use  of
ardent  spirits,  and  became  a  life  member  of  the
Massachusetts  state  temperance  society  at  its  in-
ception in  1812.  While  in  the  legislature  he  raised
a  question  as  to  the  expediency  of  capital  punish-
ments, prompted  by  the  hanging  for  arson  on  Sa-
lem necK.  in  1821,  of  a  lad  of  seventeen,  and  the
continued  agitation  of  this  question  by  himself  and
his  son  has  done  much  to  ameliorate  the  criminal
legislation  of  the  country.  He  was  a  pioneer  in
the  liberal  religious  movements  of  the  first  years
of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  when  these  took
form,  in  1819,  in  Dr.  William  E.  Channing's  Balti-
more sermon  he  became  a  pronounced  Unitarian,
and  soon  after  conducted  a  correspondence  on  the
subject  of  popular  beliefs  with  Rammohun  Roy,  of
Calcutta.  In  1810  he  took  part  in  establishing  at
Beverly  a  charity-school  which  was  the  first  Sun-
day-school in  America.  His  sister,  Polly,  was  the
mother  of  Dr.  Andrew  P.  Peabody.  He  was  an  ac-
tive member  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society.
— His  son,  Robert,  statesman,  b.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,
13  Aug.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  7  Aug.,
1852,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1826,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1829,  and  began
practice  in  Salem,  but  transferred  his  practice  in
1830  to  South  Reading,  Mass.  In  1832  he  removed
to  Gloucester.  Pie  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in
1834,  serving  four  years,  and  assuming  at  once  a
position  as  a  leader  of  the  Jacksonian  Democracy,
in  which  interest  he  established  at  Gloucester  a
weekly  journal.  In  the  legislature  he  formed  a
friendship  with  John  G.  Whittier,  who  wrote  a
poem  in  his  memory.  He  sat  upon  the  first  com-
mission to  revise  tlie  laws  of  Massachusetts,  and
was  an  active  member  of  the  judiciary  committee.
He  interested  himself  in  the  establishment  of  lyce-
ums.  In  1836-'8  he  represented  the  state  in  the
first  board  of  directors  of  the  Western  railroad,
and  in  1837  became  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
board  of  education.
In  1839  he  estab-
lished himself  in
Boston,  and  in  1840
he  appeared  in  de-
fence of  the  Jour-
neymen bootma-
kers' organization,
indicted  for  a  con-
spiracy to  raise  wa-
ges, and  procured
their  discharge  on
the  ground  that  a
combination  of  in-
dividuals to  effect,
by  means  not  un-
lawful, that  which

each might legal-

ly  do,  was  not  a  Z^^^^^;^?^  —^e~~  y»  o
criminal  conspira-  i^^^^'^^t/'-t^'^T-t.xC  <5^.
cy. He defended

in  Rhode  Island  two  persons  indicted  for  complicity
in  the  Dorr  rebellion  of  1842,  Daniel  Webster  being
the  opposing  counsel.  '  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  dis-
trict attorney  for  Massachusetts  in  1845,  and  held
that  office  till  1849.  when  he  resigned.  He  de-
livered in  April,  1850.  at  Concord  the  address  in
commemoration  of  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution.
In  1850  he  was  the  organizer  and  a  corporator  of
the  Illinois  Central  railroad.  Daniel  Webster
having  withdrawn  from  the  senate  in  1850,  on
being  appointed  secretary  of  state,  and  having
been  succeeded  by  Robert  C.  Winthrop,  Mr.  Ran-
toul  was  elected,  serving  nine  days,  ^e  was  chosen
as  an  opponent  of  the  extension  of  slavery  by  a


RAPAELJK


RAPP


183


coalition  of  Democrats  un<l  Free-soilers  to  the  Na-
tional house  of  repressentalives,  and  served  from  1
Dec.,  1851,  till  his  death.  In  1852  he  was  refuseti
a  seat  in  the  National  Den>ocratic  convention  on
the  ground  that  he  and  his  constituents  were  dis-
franchisetl  by  their  attitude  toward  slavery.  He
was  an  advocate  of  various  reforms,  and  delivered
lectun's  and  si)eechos  on  the  subject  of  educational
aiivancement,  several  of  which  were  published,  and
while  a  memln'r  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature

Srepared  a  report  in  favor  of  the  alxjlition-  of  the
eath-penalty  that  was  long  quoted  bv  the  oppo-
nents of  capital  punishment.  He  toolt  a  promi-
nent part  in  the  agitation  against  the  fugitive-
slave  law.  As  counsel  in  1851  for  Thomas  Simnis,
the  first  escaped  slave  delivered  up  by  Massachu-
setts, he  took  the  ground  that  slavery  was  a  state
institution,  and  that  the  general  government  had
no  power  to  return  fugitives  from  justice,  or  run-
away apprentices  or  slaves,  but  that  such  extradi-
tion was  a  matter  for  arrangement  between  the
states.  He  lent  his  voice  and  pen  to  the  movement
against  the  use  of  stimulants,  but  protested  against
prohibitory  legislation  as  an  invasion  of  private
rights.  After  leaving  the  legislature,  where  the
varietv  of  his  learning,  the  power  of  his  eloquence,
and  his  ardent  convictions  against  the  protection
of  native  industry  and  other  enlargements  of  the
sphere  of  government,  and  in  favor  of  educational
and  moral  reforms  had  attracted  attention,  he
became  a  favorite  lecturer  and  political  speaker
throughout  New  England,  New  York,  Pennsyl-
vania, and  Ohio.  He  edited  a  "  Workingmen's  Li-
brary,"' that  was  issued  by  the  lyceums  and  two
series  of  a  "Common  School  Library"  that  was
published  under  the  sanction  of  the  Massachusetts
Doard  of  education.  See  his  "  Memoirs,  Speeches,
and  Writings,"  edited  by  Luther  Hamilton  (Boston,
1854). — The  second  Robert's  son,  Robert  Samuel,
antiquarian,  b.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  2  June,  1832,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1853  and  at  the  Harvard
law-school  in  1856.  On  being  atlmitted  to  the  bar,
he  settled  in  Beverly,  which  he  represented  in  the
legislature  in  1858,  and  afterward  removed  to  Sa-
lem, Mass.  He  was  collector  of  Salem  in  1865-'9,
and  representative  from  that  town  in  1884-'5.  Be-
sides an  oration  on  the  "  Centennial  of  American
Independence,"  delivered  in  Stuttgart.  Germany,
4  July,  1876,  and  one  delivered  in  Salem  on  the
"Two'  Hundred  and  Fiftieth  Anniversary  of  the
Landing  of  John  Winthrop,"  in  1880,  he  has
published  many  historical  and  genealogical  pa-
pers in  the  "  Collections "  of  the  Essex  institute,
of  which  he  is  a  vice-president.

RAPAELJE,  Sarah  de,  b.  in  Fort  Orange.
N.  Y.,  9  June,  1G25;  d.  on  Long  Island  in  1685.
She  was  the  daughter  of  Jan  J  oris  Kapaelje.  and
was  the  first  white  girl  bom  in  New  Netherlands.
There  have  been  various  statements  regarding  the
residence  of  Jan  Rapaelje  at  the  time  of  her  birth,
for,  after  settling  at  Fort  Orange,  he  removed  to
Manhattan,  and  thence  to  Waleboght  on  Long
Island.  The  depositions  of  his  wife,  Catalina
Trico,  made  in  >«ew  York  before  Gov.  Thomas
Dongan  in  1688.  the  year  before  her  death,  estab-
lish the  time  of  her  arrival  and  her  first  residence.
She  came  to  this  country  in  the  first  ship  that  was
sent  to  the  New  Netherlands  by  the  West  India
company.  Some  travellers  in  167*9  mentioned  Cata-
lina Trico  as  "  worldly-minded  "  and  as  living  "  by
herself,  a  little  apart  from  the  others,  having  her
little  garden  and  other  conveniences,  with  which
she  helj)ed  herself."  and  evidently  regarded  her  as
an  historical  jK»rsonage.  Sarah  was  the  ancestor  of
several  well-known  families  in  Kings  county,  N.  Y.


She  married  Hans  Hansen  Ikrgen,  and,  after  his
death  in  1654,  married  Theunis  dysbert  Bf>gacrt.

RAPALLO,  Charles  Anthuiiy,  jurist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  15  Si'i)t.,  1H23;  d.  there.  28  Dec,
1887.  His  mother  was  a  daughter  of  Benjamin
Gould.  He  was  educated  exclusively  by  his  father,
Anthony,  who  was  eminent  for  his  accomplish-
ments Imth  as  a  lawyer  and  as  a  linguist,  and  from
whom  the  son  learned  to  sjicak  English,  French,
Spanish,  and  Italian,  and  receivinl  seven  vears*  in-
struction in  law,  obtaining  wlmission  to  tfje  bar  on
completing  his  twenty-first  year.  He  became  a
successful  practitioner,  and  was  elected  a  judge  of
the  New  York  court  of  ai)f>eals,  taking  his  seat  on
the  bench  on  1  Jan.,  1870.  and  in  1884  he  wa.s  elected
for  a  second  term  of  fourteen  vears  by  the  united
vote  of  both  political  parties.  lie  was  made  LL.  D.
by  Columbia  at  its  centennial  celebration  in  1887.

RAPHALL,  Morris  Jacoh,  clergyman,  b.  in
Stockholm,  Sweden,  in  Septeml)er,  1798;  d.  in  New
York  city,  23  June.  1868.  He  was  educated  for
the  Jewish  ministry  in  the  college  of  his  faith  in
Copenhagen,  in  England,  where  he  went  in  1812,
and  afterward  in  the  University  of  Giessen,  where
he  studie<l  in  1821-'4.  He  returned  to  England  in
1825,  married  there,  and  made  that  countrv  his
home.  In  1832  he  began  to  lecture  on  biblical
Hebrew  poetry,  attaining  a  high  reputation,  and
in  18534  he  established  the  "  Hebrew  Review."  the
first  Jewish  periodical  in  England.  He  went  to
Syria  in  1840  to  aid  in  investigating  persecutions
of  the  Jews  there,  and  became  rabbi  of  the  Bir-
mingham synagogue  in  1841.  He  was  an  active
advocate  of  the  removal  of  the  civil  disabilities  of
the  Jews,  aided  in  the  foundation  of  the  Hebrew
national  school,  and  was  an>  earnest  defender  of  his
religion  with  voice  and  pen.  In  1849  he  accepted
a  call  from  the  first  Anglo-German  Jewish  syna-
gogue in  New  York  city,  in  Greene  street,  and  sev-
eral years  later  he  became  pastor  of  the  congre-
gation B'nai  Jeshurun,  with  which  he  remained
till  his  death.  On  leaving  Birmingham  for  this
country  he  was  presented  with  a  purse  of  100
sovereigns  by  the  mayor  and  citizens,  and  an  ad-
dress thanking  him  for  his  labors  in  the  cause  of
education.  Dr.  Raphall  was  a  voluminous  writer,
and  also  translated  many  works  into  English  from
Hebrew,  German,  and  French.  The  University  of
Giessen  gave  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  after  the
publication  of  his  translation  of  the  "  Mishna,"
which  he  issued  jointly  with  Rev.  D.  A.  de  Sola,  of
London  (1840).  His  principal  work  was  a  "  Post-
Biblical  History  of  the  Jews,"  a  collection  of  his
lectures  on  that  subject  (2  vols..  New  York,  1855 ;
new  ed.,  1866).  His  other  books  include  "  Festi-
vals of  the  Lord."  essays  (London.  1839) ;  "  Devo-
tional Exercises  for  the  Daughters  of  Israel "  (New
York,  1852);  "The  Path  to  Immortality  "  (1859);
and  "Bible  View  of  Slavery,"  a  discourse  (1861).
He  also  undertook,  with  otfier  scholars,  an  anno-
tated translation  of  the  Scriptures,  of  which  the
volume  on  "Genesis  "  was  issued  in  1844.

RAPP,  George,  founder  of  the  sect  of  Har-
monists, or  Harmonites.  b.  in  Wllrlemberg,  Ger-
many, in  1770;  d,  in  Economv,  Pa.,  7  Aug.,  1847.
He  early  conceived  the  idea  of  reforming  mo«lem
society  by  the  literal  realization  of  the  precepts  in
the  New  Testament,  and  collected  a  Imnd  of  be-
lievers who  were  anxious- to  revive  the  practices  of
the  primitive  church  ;  but  the  civil  authorities  in-
terfered. Kanp  and  his  followers  therefore  emi-
grat<Hl  in  1803  to  Pennsylvania,  and  on  Conneoue-
nessing  creek,  in  Butler  county,  organizeil  a  relig-
ious society  in  which  all  things  were  held  in  com-
mon, and  members of both  sexes  adopted  the


184


RAPPE


RASLE


Frart  ice  of  celibacy.  Their  settlement  was  named
lnrnu)iiy.  Hy  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  and  by
wcaviii^and  other  industries,  they  acquired  wealth.
In  1815  the  community  removed  to  a  tract  of
27,0()0  acres,  lying  along  the  Wal>ash  river  in  In-
diana. In  their  new  settlement,  which  they  called
New  Harmony,  they  attaine<l  a  much  higher  state
of  prosperity.  In  1824,  however,  they  sold  the
land  and  improvements  to  Rol)ert  Owen  for  the
purpose  of  establishing  a  socialistic  colony,  and
settled  in  Beaver  county.  Pa.,  on  the  right  bank  of
the  Ohio  river,  seventeen  miles  northwest  of  Pitts-
burg, where  they  built  the  village  of  Economy,
containing  a  church,  a  school,  a  museum,  a  hun-
dred dwellings,  and  mills  for  the  manufacture  of
woollen  cloth,  flannels,  cotton  goods,  carpets,  and
flour.  Proselytes  are  received  into  the  st)Giety,  and
admitted  to  full  membership  after  a  probation  of
six  months.  Those  who  sever  their  connection
with  the  community  receive  back,  without  inter-
est, the  trejisure  that  they  put  into  the  common
store.  Offences  are  punished  by  temporary  sus-
pension or  expulsion.  In  1833,  300  Harmonists
were  induced  to  leave  the  community  by  Bernhard
Miillcr,  an  impostor,  who  had  been  admitted  under
the  name  of  Proli,  and  who  persuaded  his  dupes
that  he  was  the  Lord's  anointed,  sent  to  establish
the  millennial  kingdom.  After  founding  New
Jerusalem,  near  Pittsburg,  MUller  absconded  with
the  greater  part  of  $105,000,  belonging  to  his  fol-
lowers, that  had  been  paid  out  of  the  chest  of  the
Harmonist  community.  The  Harmonv  society  in-
creased iu  numbers  by  the  accession  of  other  con-
verts. Rapp  was  the  spiritual  head  and  dictator
of  the  community,  and  when  he  died  his  place  was
taken  by  the  merchant  Becker.  On  their  farm,
which  embraces  3,500  acres,  the  Harmonists  raise
live-stock,  pursue  silk  -  culture,  make  wine,  and
cultivate  flax,  grain,  fruits,  and  vegetal)les.  In
1851  the  village  of  Harmony  was  set  off  from  the
towiisliip  of  Economy.

RAPrE,  Louis  Ainadeiis,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Andrehem,  France,  2  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  St.  Alban's,
Vt.,  9  Sept.,  1877.  His  parents  were  peasants,  and
up  to  his  twentieth  year  he  labored  m  the  fields.
Believing  that  he  was  called  to  the  priesthood,  he
applied  for  admission  to  the  college  at  Boulogne,
and,  after  a  classical  course,  entered  the  seminary
of  Arras,  and  was  ordained  a  priest,  14  March,  1829.
He  wjis  appointed  pastor  of  Wisme,  and  subse-
(piently  chaplain  of  the  Ursuline  convent  in  Bou-
logne. With  the  permission  of  his  superiors,  he
sailed  for  the  United  States  in  1840.  and  in  1841
was  api)ointed  to  minister  to  the  laborers  on  the
Miami  and  Erie  canal  and  the  settlers  along  Mau-
mee  river.  He  established  a  branch  of  the  Sisters
of  Notre  Dame  in  Toledo,  and  prepared  a  convent
and  school  for  them.  In  1847  the  northern  part  of
Ohio  was  erected  into  the  see  of  Cleveland,  and
Father  Rappe  was  nominated  its  first  bishop,  and
consecrated  at  Cincinnati  by  Bishop  Purcell  on  10
Oct.,  1847.  He  set  about  building  a  cathedral  in
Cleveland  in  the  following  year,  and  consecrated  it
in  1852.  In  1851  he  opened  St.  Mary's  orphan
asylum  for  girls,  and  founded  the  order  of  Sisters
of  Charity  of  St.  Augustine,  gave  them  charge  of  St.
Vincent's  asylum  for  boys  in  1853,  and  introduced
many  other  religious  organizations.  The  want  of  a
hospital  was  felt  severely  in  Cleveland  during  the
civil  war.  Bishop  Rappe  offered  to  build  one  in
1863  and  provide  nurses,  on  condition  that  the
public  would  aid  him.  His  offer  was  accepted,  and
the  hospital  was  completed  in  1805  at  a  cost  of
$75,000,  and  placed  in  charge  of  the  Sisters  of
Charity. He  attended  the  Vatican  council  in  18(59,


although  in  feeble  health.  He  had  met  with  bitter
opposition  from  .some  memljers  of  his  flock,  who
made  unwarranted  attacks  on  his  character,  and
he  tendered  his  resignation,  which  was  accepted,  on
22  Aug.,  1870.  lie  was  offered  another  diocese
several  years  afterwartl.  but  declined  it,  and  spent
the  remainder  of  his  life  in  the  diocese  of  Burling-
ton, engaged  in  the  duties  of  a  missionary  priest.
When  Bishop  Rappe  took  possession  of  the  diocese
of  Cleveland  it  contained  al)out  25.000  Roman
Catholics,  with  28  priests  and  34  churches.  He  left
it  with  more  than  100,000  Roman  Catholics,  107
priests,  1(50  churches,  and  90  schools.

RAREY.  John  S.,  horse-tamer,  b.  in  Franklin
county,  Ohio,  in  1828;  d.  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  4  Oct,
1866.  At  an  early  age  he  displayed  tact  in  man-
aging horses,  and  by  degrees  he  worked  out  a
system  of  training  that  was  founded  on  his  own
observations.  He  went  to  Texas  in  1856.  and,  after
experimenting  there,  gave  public  exhibitions  in
Ohio,  and  from  that  time  was  almost  continuously
before  the  public.  About  1860  he  went  to  Europe
and  surprised  his  audiences  everywhere  by  his  com-
plete mastery  of  horses  that  had  been  considered
unmanageable.  In  England  particularly  the  most
vicious  were  brought  to  him,  and  he  never  failed  to
control  them.  One  of  the  greatest  triumphs  of  his
skill  was  the  taming  of  the  racing-colt  '•  Cruiser,"
which  was  so  vicious  that  he  had  killed  one  or  two
grooms,  and  was  kept  under  control  by  an  iron
muzzle.  Under  Mr.  Rarey's  treatment  he  became
perfectly  gentle  and  submissive,  and  was  brought  by
Rarey  to  this  country.  In  1863  Mr.  Rarey  was  em-
ployed by  the  government  to  inspect  and  report
upon  the  horses  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He
was  the  author  of  a,"  Treatise  on  Horse-Taming,"
of  which  15,(X)0  copies  were  sold  in  France  in  one
year  (London,  1858;  new  ed.,  1864).

RASLE,  S^bastien,  French  missionary,  b.  in
Dole,  France,  in  1658 ;  d.  in  Norridgewock.  Me.,  12
Aug.,  1724.  His  name  is  often  improperly  spelled
Raale,  Rale,  and  Itiile.  His  family  was  aistinguished
in  the  province  of  Franche-Comte.  and,  after  com-
pleting his  studies  in  Dijon,  he  became  a  Jesuit,
much  against  the  wish  of  his  parents,  and  taught
Greek  for  a  time  in  the  college  of  the  society  at
Nimes.  At  his  request  he  was  attached  in  1689  to
the  missions  of  Canada,  and,  sailing  from  La
Rochelle,  23  July,  he  landed  at  Quebec  on  13  Oct.
After  having  charge  of  various  missions  he  was

K laced  in  charge  of  the  station  of  Norridgewock.  on
lennebec  river,  about  1695.  Here  he  made  a
thorough  study  of  the  Abenaki  language,  and,  by
sharing  the  dangers  and  hardships  of  the  Indians,
he  acouired  such  an  influence  among  them  that  the
Frencn  authorities  at  t^ueliec  thought  advisable  to
utilize  it  in  the  struggle  against  England.  A  cor-
respondence was  carried  on  Ijetween  Rasle  and
Gov.  Vaudreuil,  and  the  latter  induced  him  to  pro-
mote a  hostile  sentiment  among  the  Indians  against
the  English  settlers.  Rasle  readily  accepted  the
suggestion,  as  it  not  only  agreed  with  his  patriotic
feelings,  but  was  also  a  means  of  cheeking  Prot-
estantism, which  the  E;iglish  represented.  But  it
has  been  incorrectly  stated  that  liasle  instigated
also  the  attacks  of  the  Indians  on  the  English
settlements  along  the  coast,  as  he  only  endeavored
to  prevent  the  Abenakis  from  having  dealings  with
the  English.  Public  opinion  in  New  England  be-
came aroused  against  him,  especially  after  the
failure  of  the  conference  between  Gov.  Dudley,  of
Boston,  and  the  Abenaki  chiefs  in  1702,  at  which
Rasle  was  present,  and  in  which  the  Indians  de-
clined the  English  alliance  and  affiriyed  their  reso-
lution to  stand  by  the  French.  Several  settlements


RATH BONK


RAUCH


180


hiul  mminwhiln  hc<>n  humcd.  in«IiiniAt>'>n  increased,
ami  tlip  common  council  of  Htwton  fm-HsocI  a  rrsolu-
tion  inviting  the  governor  to  put  ii  prico  on  Itiislr's
hfjMl.  which  wii-s  done.  In  the  winter  of  17(W  Cnpt.
Hilton,  with  a  fmrty  of  37U  men.  including;  forty-
five  New  Kntrlanders,  surprisc«l  NorridKew«x;k  an«l
bum(Hl  the  church,  but  Rasle  escaped  Ut  the  woinIs
with  his  [)a(M>rs.  When  peace  was  restored  in  1718
he  M't  alxHit  buildinf;  a  new  church  at  Norriiljfe-
w«n'k.  and,  aide«l  by  the  French  ptvemor.  ereotwl
one  which,  in  his  own  words,  "  would  excite  mlmi-
ration  in  Kuro|H>."  It  wii.s  supplie<l  with  all  the
apparatus  of  Roman  Catholic  worship,  and  the  ser-
vices were  conductetl  with  ureal  jioinp,  forty  Indian
boys,  tniininl  by  hims(>lf,  acting;  as  acolytes.  Sliute,
of  Massaohuseits,  enpajjeil  afterward  in  a  corre-
spondence with  Kasle;  but  failing;  in  the  attempt
to  dect>y  him  t«»  Hoston.  wnt  |mrties  to  seize  him.
In  January,  I7'2ii,  a  ImuhI  of  ;5(K)  men  under  ('ol.
Thomas  West  brook  succecnbHl  in  rem-hinj;  the  mis-
sion, burneil  the  church,  and  pillaged  liasle's  cabin.
There  they  found  an  iron  Ixix  which  containe<l,
besides  his  corresjwndcnce  with  the  authorities  of
Quel)ec.  a  valuable  dictionary  of  the  Al)enaki  lan-
guage in  three  volumes.  This  is  now  nreserved  in
the  library  of  Harvard  college,  and  has  been  printed
in  the  "  Memoirs  of  the  Acatlemy  of  Arts  and  Sci-
ences," with  an  intro<lucti<m  and  notes  by  John
Pickering  (Cambridge,  18JWK  In  1724  a  party  of
208  men  fnun  Fort  Richmond  surprise*!  Xorridge-
wock  in  the  night,  killed  several  Indians,  and  shot
Kasle,  who  was  in  the  act  of  escaping,  at  the  foot
of  the  mission  cross,  seven  chiefs,  who  endeavored
to  protect  him,  sharing  his  fate.  His  body  was
afterward  mutilated  by  the  incensed  soldiery  and
left  without  burial ;  but  when  the  Abenakis  returned
a  few  days  later,  they  buried  his  remains.  The
French  authorities  vainly  asked  re|)aration  for  the
outraee,  but  in  18JW  the  citizens  of  Norridgewock
raiseu  a  subscription,  bought  an  acre  of  land  on  the
spot  where  Rasle  fell,  and  erected  there  a  monument
to  his  memory,  which  Bishop  Fenwick,  of  Boston,
de<licate<l  <»n  29  Aug.  Vols,  xxiii.  to  xxvii.  of  the
*•  Lett  res  edifiantes  et  curieuses,  ocritesdes  missions
^trangeres  "( Paris,  172W)  contain  several  interest-
ing letters  of  Rasle  describing  his  laliors  among  the
Indians.  His  life  has  been  written  by  Rev.  Convers
Francis.  1).  1).,  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biography."
RATHBONE,  John  Finley,  manufacturer,  b.
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  18  Oct.,  1821.  He  was  e<lucated
at  Albany  academy  and  the  Collegiate  institute  at
Brockjwrt,  N.  Y.  In  1845  he  built  a  foundry  in
Albany  that  is  now  one  of  the  largest  establish-
ments of  the  kind  in  the  world.  In  1H(51  he  was
apiK>inte<l  brigadier-general  t»f  the  {)th  brigade  of
the  Xutional  guartl  of  New  York,  and  at  the  Ix?-
giiming  of  the  civil  war  he  was  made  conuiumdant
of  the  AUiany  dejHit  of  volunteers.  From  this
de|H)t  ho  sent  to  the  front  thirty-five  regiments.
In  1867  he  resigne<l  his  office  as  commander  of  the
9th  brigade.  Under  the  a<lminist ration  of  Gov.
John  A.  Dix  he  was  appointed  adjutant-general  of
the  state,  with  the  rank  of  major-general.  As  a
private  citizen  Gen.  Rathl)one  has  been  conspicuous
for  his  zeal  in  promoting  works  of  philanthropy.
He  is  one  of  the  founders  of  the  All>any  orphan
asylum,  and  for  many  years  has  Ijeen  president  of
its  l>oard  of  trustc<>8.  lie  is  a  trustee  of  the  Uni-
versity of  RfK'hester.  in  c^onnection  with  which  he
established,  by  his  contribution  of  :(i4(l.(M)(l,  the
Rathbone  library. — His  C4>usin,  Henry  Reed,  sol-
dier, b.  in  AUwiny,  N.  Y..  1  July,  l.S;{7,  wjis  apiM>int-
ed  major  of  U.  S.  volunteers  on  29  Nov..  1862,  and
resigne<l  on  8  July,  1867.  He  receivtMl  a  wound
front  the  assassiu  s  dirk  in  the  theatre-box  with


President  Lincoln  on  the  evening  of  his  murder.—
Henrv  Ree<rs  brother.  Jored  Lawrf  ore,  vildier.  b.
in  Alljany.  N.  Y.,  29  Spt.,  1K44.  wan  gnuluatctl  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1N65.  was  assignwl  to
the  12th  infantry,  in  1860-^*70  was  aide  to  Gen.  John
M.  S<'h«>fleld.  and  wa«  tran>ferre<l  to  the  artillery
in  1M69.  Resigning  in  1H72,  he  engaged  in  Kttyck-
raising  and  mining  in  California.  Ho  wan  appoint-
ed U.  S.  consul-general  in  Paris  on  18  Mav.  1887.

RATTRAY.  UiHium  Jordan.  Canadian  au-
thor, b.  in  lA>ndon,  Kngland,  in  iKlTt;  d.  in  To-
rontf>,  Canada.  26  .'^•pt.,  \HKi.  His  father,  a  .S<.«)t<h-
man,  came  to  Canada  in  1848,  and  M'tlled  with  his
family  in  Toronto.  The  son  was  gnuluate*!  at  the
University  of  Toronto  in  1H,58,  and  afterwanl  was
a  journalist  in  that  city.  Among  his  wrilingf*  was
a  scries  of  articles  on  the  conflict  of  agnosti<-ism
and  revealed  religion,  which  pres«'nt«><l  the  ortho-
dox side  of  the  question  with  gn-at  force.  He  was
for  many  years  connect »nl  with  the  Toronto  "  Mail,"
wrote  for  the  "Canadian  Monthly"  an<l  other  i»eri-
odicals,  and  publisluHl  "The  Scot  in  British  North
America  "  (4  vols.,  Toronto,  1H83).

RAL\  CharleH,  archanilogist.  b.  in  Vervien,  Bel-
gium, in  1826;  d.  in  Phila<lelphia,  Pa.,  25  July,
1887.  He  was  educated  in  Germany,  came  to  the
United  States  in  1K48,  and  taught  in  the  west  and
afterwanl  in  New  York  city.  From  1875  until  his
death  he  was  curator  in  the  department  of  antiqui-
ties in  the  U.  S.  national  museum  in  Washington,
D.  C.  Devoting  his  attention  to  arclurology.  he  lie-
gan  to  write  on  American  anti<|uities  for  "  Die
Natur."  His  contributions  to  the  publications  of
the  Smithsonian  institution  first  apfK»are<l  in  1863,
and  subse(|uently  his  articles  were  published  in
nearly  every  annual  ri'port  of  that  institution,
gaining  for  him  a  high  reputation  as  an  authority
on  American  archa'ology-.  The  University  of  Frei-
burg, Baden,  gave  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  li.  in  1882.
He  was  a  memljer  of  the  princiiial  archaeological
and  anthro|)ological  Mx-ietiesof  Kurojie  and  Amer-
ica, and  published  more  than  fifty  papers,  among
which  was  a  series  on  the  "  Stone  Age  in  Kuro[»e, '
originally  contributed  to  "Harf)ers  Magazine,"
and  afterward  issue<l  in  lKX)k-form  a<  "  Karly  Man
in  Europe"  (New  York,  1876).  His  other  publica-
tions were  "  The  Archa-oloeical  Collection  of  the
United  States  National  ^luseum"  (Washington,
1876);  "The  Palenque  Tablet  in  the  Unite<l  States
National  Museum"  (1879);  "Articles  on  Anthro-
{wlogiml  Subjects"  1853-87  (1882);  two  jwrtly
|)ublished  works  on  the  ty|)es  of  North  American
mipleraents;  and  one  that  was  designed  to  be  a
coujprehensive  treat nient  of  archa-ology  in  Anier-
ica.  Dr.  Rau  l>e(jueathtHl  his  lii»rary  and  collec-
tion to  the  U.  S.  national  museum  in  Washington.

RATCH,  Friedrich  Augnst,  educator,  b.  in
Hesse- Darmstadt,  Germany,  27  Julv,  1806;  d.  in
Mercersburg,  Pa.,  2  March.  1841.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  L'niversity  of  Marburg,  afterward  stud-
ied at  Giessen  and  lleidell)erg,  and  Ixn-ame  ex-
traordinary professor  at  the  University  of  tiiesst'u.
He  fletl  from  the  country  on  account  of  a  public
utterance  on  S4>me  political  subject,  and  lanueil  in
the  United  States  in  IKil.  learniHl  Knglish  in
Easton,  Pa.,  where  he  gave  les.sons  on  the  piano-
forte, was  professor  of  (lennan  in  I^fayette  c»)llege
for  a  short  time,  was  then  chosen  a?:  ])rinci|ml  of  a
classical  strhool  that  had  bet»n  establishinl  by  the
authorities  of  the  GiTinan  Reformed  church  at
York.  Pa.,  and  a  few  niontli><  later  was  onlained  to
the  ministry  and  ai>|>ointe<l  pn>fessor  of  biblical
literature  in  the  theological  seminary  at  York,
while  retaining  charge  of  the  academy,  which,  in
1835,  was  removed  to  Mercersburg. Under  bis


186


RAUCH


RAUMER


management  the  school  flourished,  and  in  1836  was
transformed  into  Marshall  college,  of  which  he
became  the  first  president.  He  [inblished  *'  Psy-
chology, or  a  View  of  the  Human  .Soul "  (New  York,
1840),  and  left  in  an  unfinished  state  works  on
"Christian  Ethics"  and  "Esthetics."  A  volume
of  his  sermons,  edited  by  Emanuel  V.  Gerhart,  was
published  under  the  title  of  "  The  Inner  Life  of  the
Christian  "  (Philadelphia.  1856),

RAUCH,  John  Henry,  physician,  b.  in  Leba-
non, Pa.,  4  Sept.,  1828.  lie  was  graduated  in  medi-
cine at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1849.  In
the  following  year  he  settled  in  Burlington,  Iowa.
In  1850,  on  the  organization  of  the  State  medical
society,  he  was  appointed  to  report  on  the  "  Medical
and  Economic  Botany  of  Iowa,"  and  this  report  was
afterward  published  (1851).  He  was  an  active  mem-
ber of  the  Iowa  historical  and  geological  institute,
and  made  a  collection  of  material  —  especially
ichthyologic — from  the  upper  Mississippi  and  Mis-
souri rivers  for  Prof.  Agassiz,  a  description  of  which
was  published  in  "  Siliiman's  Journal  "  (1855).  In
1857  he  was  appointed  professor  of  materia  medica
and  medical  botany  in  Rush  medical  college,  Chi-
cago, which  chair  he  filled  for  the  next  three  years.
In  1859  ho  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  Chicago
college  of  pharmacy  and  filled  its  chair  of  materia
medica  and  medical  botany.  During  the  civil  war
he  served  as  assistant  medical  director  of  the  Army
of  Virginia,  and  then  in  Louisiana  till  1864.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colo-
nel. On  his  return  to  Chicago,  Dr.  Rauch  pub-
lished a  paper  on  "  Intramural  Interments  and
their  Influence  on  Health  and  Epidemics "  (Chi-
cago, 1866).  He  aided  in  reorganizing  the  health
service  of  the  city,  and  in  1867  was  appointed
member  of  the  newly  created  board  of  health  and
sanitary  superintendent,  which  office  he  filled  un-
til 1873.  During  his  incumbency  the  great  fire  of
1871  occurred,  and  the  task  of  organizing  and  en-
forcing the  sanitary  measures  for  the  welfare  of
112,000  houseless  men,  women,  and  children  was
suddenly  thrown  upon  his  department.  In  1876
he  was  elected  president  of  the  American  public
health  association,  and  delivered  the  annual  ad-
dress on  the  "  Sanitary  Problems  of  Chicago  "  at
the  1877  meeting  of  the  association.  In  1877,  when
the  Illinois  state  board  of  health  was  created,  Dr.
Rauch  was  appointed  one  of  its  members,  and
elected  its  first  president.  He  was  elected  secre-
tary, to  which  office  he  has  been  re-elected  annual-
ly ever  since.  In  1878-'9  the  yellow-fever  epidem-
ics in  the  southwest  engaged  his  attention,  result-
ing in  the  formation  of  the  sanitary  council  of  the
Mississippi  valley  and  the  establishment  of  the
river-inspection  service  of  the  National  board  of
health,  inaugurated  by  Dr.  Rauch  in  1879.  His
investigations  on  the  relation  of  small-pox  to
foreign  immigration  are  embodied  in  an  address
before  the  National  conference  of  state  boards  of
health  at  St.  Louis,  13  Oct.,  1884,  entitled  "  Prac-
tical Recommendations  for  the  Exclusion  and  Pre-
vention of  Asiatic  Cholera  in  North  America"
(Springfield,  1884).  In  1887  he  published  the  pre-
liminary results  of  his  investigations  into  the  char-
acter of  the  water-supplies  of  Illinois.  Dr.  Rauch
is  a  member  of  many  scientific  bodies  and  the
author  of  monographs,  chiefly  in  the  domain  of
sanitary  science  and  preventive  medicine.  His  chief
work  as  a  writer  is  embodied  in  the  reports  of  the
Illinois  state  board  of  health  in  eight  volumes.

RAUE,  Charles  Godlove,  physician,  b.  in  Nie-
der-Kunnersdorf,  Saxony,  11  May,  1820.  He  was
graduated  at  the  College  of  teachers  in  Bautzen,
Saxony,  in  1841,  and  at  Philadelphia  medical  col-


lege in  1850.  From  1864  till  1871  he  was  professor
of  pathology  and  practice  at  the  Homoeopathic  col-
lege of  Pennsvlvania,  and  at  Hahnemann  medical
college  in  Philadelphia.  He  is  the  author  of  '•  Die
neue  Seelenlehre  I)r.  Beneke's,  nach  methodischen
Grundsjltzen  fUr  Lehrer  bearbeitet"  (Bautzen,
1847) ;  "  Special  Pathology  and  Diagnostics  with
Therapeutic  Hints"  (Philadelphia,  1868);  and
"Annual  Record  of  Ilomceopathic  Literature"
(New  York,  1870).

RAL'M,  Green  Berry,  commissioner  of  internal
revenue,  b.  in  Golconda,  Pope  co..  111.,  3  Dec.,  1829.
He  received  a  common-school  education,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1853.  In  1856
he  removed  with  his  family  to  Kansas,  and  at  once
affiliated  with  the  Free-state  party.  Becomingob-
noxious  to  the  pro-slavery  faction,  he  returned  the
following  year  to  Illinois  and  settled  at  Harris-
burg.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war  he  made
his  first  speech  as  a  "  war  "  Democrat  while  he  was
attending  court  at  Metropolis,  111.  Subsequently
he  entered  the  army  as  major  of  the  56th  Illinois
regiment,  and  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel,
colonel,  and  brevet  brigadier-general.  He  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  15  Feb.,
1865,  which  commission  he  resigned  on  6  May.
He  served  under  Gen.  William  S.  Rosecrans  in
the  Mississippi  campaign  of  1862.  At  the  battle
of  Corinth  he  ordered  and  led  the  charge  that
broke  the  Confederate  left  and  captured  a  battery.
He  was  with  Gen.  Grant  at  Vicksburg,  and  was
wounded  at  the  battle  of  Missionary  Ridge  in  No-
vember, 1863.  During  the  Atlanta  campaign  he
held  the  line  of  communication  from  Dalton  to
Acworth  and  froip  Kingston  to  Rome,  Ga.  In
October,  1864,  he  re-enforced  Resaca,  Ga.,  and  held
it  against  Gen.  John  B.  Hood.  In  1866  he  ob-
tained a  charter  for  the  Cairo  and  Vincennes  rail-
road company,  aided  in  securing  its  construction,
and  became  its  first  president.  He  was  then  elected
to  congress,  and  served  from  4  March,  1867,  till  3
March,  1869.  In  1876  he  was  president  of  the
Illinois  Republican  convention,  and  in  the  same
year  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  convention
of  that  party  in  Cincinnati.  He  was  appointed
commissioner  of  internal  revenue,  2  Aug.,  1876,
and  retained  the  office  till  31  May,  1883.  During
this  period  he  collected  $850,000,000  and  disbursed
$30,000,000  without  loss.  He  wrote  "Reports"
of  his  bureau  for  seven  successive  years.  He  is
also  the  author  of  "  The  Existing  Conflict  between
Rej)ublican  Government  and  Southern  Oligarchy  "
(Washington,  1884).  He  is  at  present  (1888)  prac-
tising law  in  Washington,  D.  C.

RAUMER,  Friedrich  Lndwig  Geor?  von
(row'-mer),  German  historian,  b.  in  Woerlitz,  near
Dessau,  14  May,  1781;  d.  in  Berlin.  14  May,  1873.
He  studied  in  the  universities  of  Halle  and  GOt-
tingen,  was  a  civil  magistrate  in  1801,  became  in
1809  councillor  to  the  state  chancellor.  Count  von
Hardenberg,  was  professor  of  history  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Breslau  in  1811-'16,  and  in  1819  became
{)rofessor  of  political  economy  in  the  University  of
ierlin.  He  was  elected  to  the  parliament  of  Frank-
fort by  the  latter  city  in  1848,  and  appointed  by
the  Archduke  John  of  Austria,  vicar  of  the  Ger-
man empire,  his  ambassador  to  Paris  in  1848.
From  1851  up  to  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  a
memljer  of  the  house  of  lords  of  Prussia.  After
1816  Raumer  undertook  several  iournevs  through
France,  Italy,  Switzerland,  and  the  United  States,
which  he  visited  in  1841-'3  and  again  in  1853-'5.
He  is  justly  considered  as  one  of  the  great  histo-
rians of  the  19th  century.  His  works  include
"  Geschichte  der  Hohenstaufen  und  ihrer  Zeit "


RAUSCHENBUSCH


RAVENSCROPT


187


I


(0  Tols.,  Ijeipsic  1888-*4S),  which  is  the  Atandanl  hin-
tory  of  th«"  imperial  house  of  Swabia :  "  (Jewhit-hte
Eu'ni|)Hs  Ht'it  (Ic'iii  Kiide  ties  xv"»  Jnhrhiimlerts"
(8  vols.,  1k:«-'50)  ;  "  Ik'itrat'e  ziir  rn'iien  (»i'seliifhU> "
(S  vols.,  IHJJG-'U);  and  "  Uic  Wri'iniffti'n  Staaten
von  N'ortlamfrika"  (2  vols.,  184.'»),  which  was  trans-
lated into  French  (184«),  ami  English  (Ijondon,
1847).  It  treats  of  the  constitution  of  the  United
States,  which  Rjiumer  c«»in|)are8  with  those  of  F^u-
rope,  of  the  relijjious  nuneinents  in  the  w)untry,
of  the  |M)litical  j)artii's.  and  of  its  foreign  p<ilicv.

RArSCHEMUSCH,  AiifruMtiiM,  clergyman,
b.  in  Altcna,  Wi'stplialiH,  Germany,  13  Feb.,  181(1.
He  was  graduate<l  at  the  gymnasium  at  EllH>rfeId,
and  *cnt  in  his  nineteentTi  year  to  the  University
of  Ik'Hin  to  study  for  the  Lutheran  ministry.  Sub-
sequently he  spent  some  time  at  the  University  of
IJonn  in  the  stuily  of  natural  science  and  theology.
On  the  death  of  his  father,  who  was  a  Lutheran
pastor  in  Altena,  the  son  was  chosen  in  1841  as  his
successor.  His  ministry  here,  while  fruitful  in
spiritual  results,  excitetf  so  much  op{K)sition,  and
wait  so  ham|H'red  by  his  ecclesiastical  ri'Iations,
that  he  resolved  to  emigrate  to  the  Uniteil  States.
He  came  to  this  country  in  1840,  and  preached
for  some  time  to  the  (Jermans  in  Misscjuri. In

1847  he  removed  to  New  York,  where  he  edited
the  German  tracts  nublished  by  the  American
tract  society.  While  he  was  residmg  in  New  York
his  views  on  the  question  of  baptism  underwent  a
change,  and  in  1850  he  entennl  the  Baptist  com-
munion, though  retaining  his  connection  with  the
Tract  society  until  18.W.  In  1858  he  was  called  to
take  charge  of  the  German  detmrtment  of  Roches-
ter theological  seminarj',  whicli  place  he  continues
to  fill  (1888).  He  received  the  honorary  degree  of
D.  I).  fn)m  the  University  of  Ilt)chester  in  ISGii.

RAVEL  FAMILY,  a  company  of  French  actors,
of  whom  Gabkikl,  b.  in  Toulouse,  France,  in  1810,
was  the  most  noted.  The  family  consisted  of  ten
principals,  who  for  many  years  played  in  the  cities
of  France.  They  were  in  Paris  in  1825.  and  a  year
or  two  later  in  London,  at  the  Strand  theatre  and
Vauxhall  ganlen.  They  were  remarkable  for  their
rope-<lancing,  ballets,  pantomimes,  and  tricks  that
were  produced  with  the  aid  of  stage-machinery.
In  18;i2  the  troupe  arrived  in  this  country,  and  on
1(5  Julv  of  that  year  mmle  their  debut  at  the  New
York  t*ark  theatre.  This  was  followe«l  by  renewed
engagements  at  the  same  place,  and  performances
in  other  cities.  In  1834  the  companv  went  to  Eu-
rope on  a  vacation.  A  year  later  tfiey  performed
in  the  French  cities,  and  in  1836  they  opened  at
Drury  Lane  theatre  in  London. From  1837  until

1848  the  original  Ravels  gave  entertainments  in
this  country,  that  were  interrupted  by  occasional
visits  to  Canatla,  a  tour  to  the  West  Indies  and
South  America,  and  brief  vacations  in  their  native
land.  In  the  autumn  of  1848  they  retired  from
the  stage.  In  186(5  the  remains  of  the  old  troupe,
combined  with  new  auxiliaries,  again  appeared  here
for  a  short  season,  but  met  with  an  unfavorable  re-
ception. The  representatives  of  the  original  Ravel
family  gave  a  variety  of  performances  that  were
largely  unique.  Among  tncir  harlequinH<les  were
"  >iazulm,"  "The  Green  Monster,'  "The  Red
Gnome."  "  AsjihfKlel,"  and  "The  (Jolden  Pills."

RAVENEL,  Henry  William,  botanist,  b.  in
St,  John's  parish.  B«-rkeley,  S.  f.,  19  May,  1814;  d.
in  Aiken,  S.  (".,  17  July.  1887.  He  was  graduate<l
at  South  Carolina  college  in  1832,  and  settle<l  in
St.  Johns,  where  he  Ivcame  a  planter.  In  1853  he
removc<l  to  Aiken,  S.  ('.,  and  there  he  spent  the  re-
mainder of  his  life.  As  a  young  man  he  evinced  a
fondness  for  natural  histofv,  and  he  pursued  stud-


ies in  botany  with  enthusiasm  throughout  his  long
life.  He  not  only  studie<l  critically  the  pha'no-
gams  of  South  Carolina,  but  als«>  extende<l  his  re-
s«'arches  among  the  nio.s.m'.s.  lichens,  alga',  and
fungi.  Mr.  Itiivenel  <li.scovere<l  a  large  numlN-r  of
new  »|x«cies  of  cryptogams,  Ijesides  a  few  new  phs-
nogams.  With  the  exception  of  the  Rev.  Moses
A.  Curtis,  he  was  the  only  American  that  knew
8|H'ciflcally  the  fungi  of  the  United  States,  and  it
is  doubtful  whether  any  other  botanist  has  ever
coveretl  so  wide  a  range  of  plants.  In  1869  he
was  ap|)ointed  botanist  of  the  goveniment  com-
mission that  was  sent  to  Texa.«  to  investigate  the
cattle-<liseaiM»,  and  ut  the  time  of  his  death  he
was  botanist  to  the  dei>artment  of  agriculture  of
South  Carolina.  The  degree  of  LL.  1).  was  con-
ferred on  him  bv  the  University  of  North  Caro-
lina in  1886.  ana  he  was  a  memwr  of  various  sci-
entific societies  in  the  United  States  and  F'uroite.
His  name  is  [>erpetuated  in  the  genus  Itavenelia
of  the  Uredinea\  a  genus  so  peculiar  in  its  charac-
ter that  it  is  not  prolwhle  that  it  will  ever  Ix;  re-
duced to  a  synonym,  al.stt  by  many  s()ecie8  of  crypto-
gams that  have  been  named  in  his  honor  as  tlieir
discoverer.  Mr.  Ravenel  was  agricultural  editor  of
the  "  Weekly  News  and  Courier,"  and,  in  addition
to  his  botanical  pa{)ers.  he  published  "  Fungi  Caro-
liniani  Exsiccati"  (5  vols.,  Charleston,  l853-'60),
and.  with  Monlecai  C.  Cooke,  of  Ijondon,  "  Fungi
Americani  Exsiccati  "  (8  vols.,  1878-*82).

RAVENEL,  St  Jnlien,  chemist,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C.  15  Dec,  1819;  d.  there,  16  March.  1882.
He  was  etlucated  in  Charleston  and  grmluated  at
the  Medical  college  of  the  state  of  South  Camlina
in  1840.  Subsequently  he  completed  his  studies  in
Philadelphia  and  in  f*aris.  and  on  his  return  set-
tled in  practice  in  Charleston,  and  became  demon-
strator of  anatomy.  Dr.  Ravenel  spent  the  years
1849-50  in  studying  natural  history  and  physiolo-
gy under  Louis  Agassiz,  also  acquiring  consider-
able skill  as  a  microscopist.  In  1852  he  retired
from  practice  and  devoted  his  attention  chiefiv  to
chemistry  as  applied  to  agriculture.  He  visited
the  marl-bluffs  on  Cooper  river  in  1856,  and  ascer-
tained that  this  rock  could  be  converted  into  lime.
In  conseouence.  he  establishe<l  with  Clement  H.
Stevens  the  lime-works  at  Stoney  I^anding,  which
furnished  most  of  the  lime  that  was  use<l  in  the
Confederate  states.  At  the  lieginning  of  the  civil
war  he  enliste<l  as  surgeon  in  the  Confederate
army.  While  in  Charleston  he  designed  the  torpe-
do cigar-lx>at,  the  "  Little  David,"  which  was  built
on  Cooper  river  and  did  effective  service  during  the
investment  of  Charleston  in  18(J3  bv  Admiral  Du
Pont.  He  was  surgeon-in-chief  of  the  Confederate-
ho.spital  in  Columbia,  and  was  director  of  the  Con-
federate lalxiratory  in  that  city  for  the  pre]>aration
of  medical  supplies.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he
returned  to  Charleston,  and  in  1866  he  discovered
the  value  of  the  j)hosphate  deposits  in  the  vicini-
ty of  that  city  for  agricultural  purposes.  Dr.  Ra-
venel then  foundeti  the  Wando  phosphate  company
for  the  manufacture  of  fertilizers,  and  established
lime- works  in  WcnxlsttK-k.  The  last  work  of  his
life  was  the  study  of  means  of  utilizing  the  rich
lands  that  are  employeil  for  rice-culture  along  the
sea-coast,  which  would  l)e  thrf)wn  out  of  cultiva-
tion and  rendered  useless  when  the  import  duty
on  that  article  should  l>e  remove«l.

RAVENSCROFT,  Joliii  Stark.  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  near  Blandfonl.  Prince  George  co.,  Va..  in  1772;
d.  in  WilliamslHvrough,  N.  C,  5  .March.  1830.  His
father  and  family  removeti  to  Sc«itlan<l  soon  after
the  Uiy's  birth,  and  John  was  sent  to  school  in  the
north  of  England. In  January,  1789,  he  returned


188


RAWDON-HASTINGS


RAWLE


to  Virginia  on  family  affairs,  and.  having  a  de-
sire to  study  law,  he  entered  William  and  Mary
with  this  object ;  but  he  never  accomplished  it.
In  1792  ho  went  to  Scotland  again,  settled  his  fji-

ther's  estate,  and,
on  coming  back  to
Virginia,  surren-
dered himself  to  a
country  life  in
Lunenburg  coun-
ty, regardless  of
religion  and  relig-
ious obligations.
In  1810  he  united
with  a  body  of  pro-
fessing Christians,
called  "  Republi-
can Methodists,"
but  the  connection
did  not  last  long.
In  1815  he  became
.  a  candidate  for  or-

TV)  <^  /)  .jL^ ^^'^'^ "^  ^^^ Prot-

/rio/C^iCs^^^LYcnu/ft estant Episcopal

'-^  church,  and  he  was
licensed  as  a  lay  reader  in  February,  1816.  So  ac-
ceptable were  his  services  that  St.  James's  church,
Mecklenburg  county,  chose  him  for  its  rector  before
he  was  admitted  into  the  ministry.  He  was  ordained
deacon  in  the  Monumental  church,  Richmond,  Va.,
25  April,  1817.  by  Bishop  Richard  C.  Moore,  and

Sriest  in  St.  George's  cnurch,  Fredericksburg,  6
lay,  1817,  by  the  same  bishop.  He  received  the
degree  of  I),  t).  from  Columbia  in  1823.  This  same
year  he  was  called  to  Norfolk,  Va.,  but  declined ;
and  also  was  invited  to  become  assistant  to  Bishop
Moore,  in  the  Monumental  church,  Richmond.  At
this  time  he  was  elected  first  bishop  of  North  Caro-
lina, and  was  consecrated  in  St.  Paul's  church,
Philadelphia,  22  May,  1823.  William  and  Mary
also  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1823.  In  order  to  supplement  his  salary,  he  as-
sumed the  rectorship  of  Christ  church,  Raleigh,
whicii  he  held  for  five  years,  during  which  time  his
health  failed.  He  attended  the  general  convention
in  Philadelphia  in  August,  1829,  but.  on  his  re-
turn home,  gradually  sank  until  his  death.  Bishop
Ravenscroft  published  numerous  sermons  that
he  preached  on  special  occasions,  and  episcopal
charges.  After  his  decease  these  were  republished,
together  with  61  sermons,  selected  by  himself,  and
a  memoir  of  his  life,  edited  bv  Dr.  (afterward  Bishop)
Wainwright  (2  vols..  New  York,  1830).

RAWDONHASTINOS,  Francis,  British  sol-
dier, b.  in  County  Down,  Ireland,  9  ti^c,  1754;  d.
near  Natjles,  Italy,  28  Nov.,  1826.  He  was  the  son
of  the  Earl  of  Moira,  was  educated  at  Oxford,  and
entered  the  army  in  1771  as  ensign  in  an  infantry
regiment.  In  1773  he  was  sent  to  this  country,  and
participated  in  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill  as  cap-
tain in  the  63d  foot.  He  became  aide  to  Sir  Henry
Clinton,  and  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Long
Island  and  White  Plains,  and  the  attacks  on  Fort
Washington  and  Yox\,  Clinton.  In  1778  he  was  ap-
pointed adjutant-general,  with  the  rank  of  lieuten-
ant-colonel, and  afterward  he  raised  in  New  York
a  corps  called  the  "  Volunteers  of  Ireland,"  which
he  commanded.  His  conduct  at  the  battle  of
Monmouth  procured  for  him  the  command  of  a
British  corps  in  South  tJarolina,  which  he  led  at
the  battle  of  Camden,  6  Aug.,  1780.  He  remained
in  the  Carolinas  after  Lord  Cornwallis's  return  to
the  north,  attacked  and  defeated  Gen.  Nathanael
Greene  at  Hobkirk's  Hill,  25  April,  1781,  relieved
Fort  Ninety-Six,  and  fortified  himself  at  Orange-


burg. His  last  act  before  leaving  this  countiy  was
to  order  the  execution  of  Col.  Isaac  Hayne  (q.  v.\
for  which  he  has  been  generally  condemned.  Owing
to  impaired  health,  he  returned  to  England,  and  on
his  voyage  was  captured  by  a  French  cruiser  and
taken  to  Brest.  On  5  March,  1783,  he  was  made
Baron  Rawdon  and  aide-de-camp  to  George  III.,
and  l)ecame  an  intimate  friend  cf  the  Pnnce  of
Wales.  He  succeeded  to  the  title  of  Earl  of  Moira
in  1793,  and  inherited  the  baronies  of  Hastings
and  Hungerford  in  1808.  He  was  appointed  major-
general,  with  the  command  of  10.000  troops,  served
under  the  Duke  of  York  in  the  Netherlands  in
1794,  was  intrusted  with  the  direction  of  the  expe-
dition to  Quiberon  in  1795,  and  was  made  .com-
mander-in-chief of  the  British  forces  in  Scotland
and  constable  of  the  Tower  of  London  in  1803.  He
effected  a  reconciliation  between  the  king  and  the
Prince  of  Wales,  was  made  lord-lieutenant  of  Ire-
land in  1805.  became  master-general  of  ordnance
in  1806  under  the  Grenville  and  Fox  ministry,  and
after  the  assassination  of  Mr.  Perceval  in  1812
made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  form  a  cabinet,
He  received  the  order  of  the  garter,  and  was  ap-
pointed governor-general  of  India  in  1813,  which
post  he  held  until  1823,  The  most  important  event
of  his  administration  was  the  successful  termina-
tion of  the  Nepaul  war,  and  he  was  thus  instru-
mental in  laying  the  basis  for  P^ngland's  power  in
India.  On  7  Dec,  1816,  he  was  created  Marquis  of
Hastings,  and  in  1824  he  became  governor  of  Mal-
ta. Lord  Rawdon  obtained  from  several  engineers
of  the  British  army  a  series  of  sketches  and  water-
colors  of  the  principal  events  and  scenes  of  his  ex-
perience in  this  country.  Several  of  these  were
purchased  by  Dr.  Thomas  Addis  Emmet,  of  New
York,  for  his  collection  of  the  Signers.  His  private
journal  was  edited  and  published  by  his  daughter,
the  Marchioness  of  Bute  (2  vols.,  London,  1858).

RAWLE,  Francis,  colonist,  b.  in  England  about
1660;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  5  March,  1727.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends.  With  his
father,  of  the  same  name,  he  came  to  Pennsylvania
in  1686,  to  escape  persecution  on  account  of  his  re-
ligious faith.  lie  located  2,500  acres  in  Plymouth
township,  where,  with  a  few  others,  he  founded  the
settlement  known  as  "  The  Plymouth  Friends."  In
1688  he  was  commissioned  a  justice  of  the  peace
and  of  the  court  of  common  pleas ;  under  the  first
city  charter  (1691)  he  is  named  as  one  of  the  six
aldermen;  in  1692  he  became  deputy  register  of
the  wills;  and  in  1694  he  was  a  commissioner  ot
property.  He  was  subsequently  chosen  to  the  pro-
vincial assembly,  in  which  he  served  for  ten  years,
and  to  the  provincial  council.  He  is  said  to  be
the  first  person  in  the  British  colonies  in  America
that  wrote  on  the  subject  of  political  economy  and
its  application  to  local  requirements.  In  1721  he
published  "  Some  Remedies  Proposetl  for  the  Re-
storing the  sunk  Credit  of  the  Province  of  Penn-
sylvania ;  with  Some  Remarks  on  its  Trade,  Hum-
bly Offer'd  to  the  Consideration  of  the  Worthy
Representatives  in  the  0eneral  Assembly  of  this
Province.  By  a  Lover  of  this  Country."  During
the  following  year  numerous  petitions  came  to  the
assembly,  praying  for  the  issuance  of  paper  money,
and  a  committee,  with  Rawle  at  the  head,  was  ap-
pointed, to  whom  was  committed  "  the  drawing-un
the  bill  for  issuing  bills  of  credit,  &c."  The  bill
then  drawn  became  a  law.  The  paper  money  is-
sueti  under  it  was  the  first  in  the  province.  In
1725  he  published  "Ways  and  Means  for  the  In-
habitants of  Delaware  to  become  Ric^i :  Wherein
the  several  Growths  and  Products  of  these  Coun-
tries are  demonstrated  to  be  a  sufficient  Fund  for


RAWLE


RAWLE


189


a  flourishing  Trade.  Humbly  submitttMl  to  the
Ijejji.sliilivc  Authority  of  tlu-se  t'olonifs."  This
UMik  in  sai<l  to  U*  the  first  that  waa  printml  by
Kninklin.  tu'orjfu  Brinley's  copy  of  this  work  sold
for  f  100.  In  the  followinj;  year  he  published  "  A
Just  Kobuke  t^)  a  I>ialo);uo  betwixt  Sinion  and
Timothy,  shewing  What's  therein  to  Ihj  found.
&c.,"  beinjr  a  repTv  to  James  l>>pin's  "  Diaiopie
shewing;  What's  therein  Ui  Ix*  found,  &<•,"  (I'hila-
tleiphiu,  l?i5),  printe<l  by  I/ican  in  answer  to
Itawlf's  "  Wavs  and  Means." — 11  is  preat-grandson,
William,  lawyer,  b.  in  IMiihidelphia,  28  April,
IT*)!*;  <i.  there,  12  April,  18JJ({,  was  educated  at  the
Friends'  aea«lemv,  and  was  yet  a  stu<lent  when  the
war  for  indeiK?nilence  wa.s  U'gun.  His  immediate
relatives  ana  eonnections  wen>  loyalists.  On  the
evacuation  of  Philadelphia  by  the'  British,  young
liawle  aceumpanieil  his  step-father,  Samuel  Shoe-
maker, who  had  lxH»n  one  of  the  civil  magistrates
of  the  city  under  Howe,  to  New  York,  and  there
began  the  study  of  the  law.  Mr.  Itawle  oomplele<l
his  studies  in  the  Middle  Temple,  London,  and  re-
turned to  Phila<lelphia,  where,  in  1783,  he  was  ad-
mittctl  to  the  bar.  In  1791  he  was  ap|K)inted  by
President  Washington  U.  S.  district  attorney  for
Pennsylvania.  By  direction  of  the  j)resident,  Mr.
Rawle"  accompanied  the  \J.  S.  district  judge  and
the  military  on  the  western  expedition  in  1794,
and  it  became  his  duty  to  prosecute  the  offenders
after  the  insurrections  in  that  year  and  in  1798
had  been  put  down.  In  1792  he  wa.s  offered  by
the  president  the  office  of  judge  of  the  U.  S.  dis-
trict court  for  Pennsylvania,  but  declined  it  on  ac-
count of  his  youth  and  professional  pros|>ects.  He
was  for  manv  vears  the  attornev  and  counsel  for
the  Bank  of  the  United  States.  Prom  1786  till  his
death  he  was  a  memlter  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  and  for  twenty  years  he  was  one
of  its  councillors.  In  1789  he  was  chosen  to  the
assembly.  He  was  one  of  the  original  members
of  the  Society  for  political  inquiries,  founded  by

Franklin,  which  held
its  weekly  meetings
at  his  house.  From
1796  till  his  death  he
was  a  trustee  of  the
University  of  Penn-
sylvania. He  was  the
chancellor  of  the  As-
sociated members  of
the  bar  of  Philadel-
phia, and  when,  in
1827,  this  institution
was  merged  in  the
Law  assf)ciation  of
Philadelphia,  he  be-
came chancellor  of
the  latter  in  1822.  and
held  the  office  till  his
death.  He  was  chosen
the  first  vice-presi-
dent of  the  Law  acad-
emy, was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Historical  soci-
ety of  Pennsylvania  in  1824,  ami  its  first  president.
He  was  al»t>  a  member  of  the  Agricultural.  Humane,
Ijinnn>aii,  and  AlM)lition  societies,  and  was  long
president  of  the  latter.  For  many  years  he  was
secretary  and  afterwanl  a  dire<'tor  of  the  Library
company  of  Philailelnhia.  In  IKiO  he  wasap|>oint-
e<i.  with  Thomas  I.  Wharton  and  Joel  Jones,  to  re-
vise the  civil  ccxle  of  Pennsylvania,  and  he  was  the
principal  author  of  the  re|K)rt«  of  the  commission,
the  result-s  of  whose  labors  are  emlxxlied  in  stat-
utes that  still  remain  in  force.  Among  his  pub-
lished writings  are  "An  Address  before  the  Pnila-


ytyC/^Lz66^


delphia  Society  for  promoting  Agriculture  "(Phila-
deljdiia,  1819);  "Two  Addreshes  to  the  AsMx-iated
Memlxjrsof  the  Bar  of  Philadelphia"  (1824);  "A
View  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Unitnl  .States"
(182:)):  and  "The  Study  of  the  Uw  "  (1882).  To
the  litensture  of  the  Historical  society  he  cf)ntril>-
uteil  a  "  Vindication  (»f  the  Kev.  Mr.  l!«H-kewfIder'»
'  History  of  the  Itxlian  Nations,' "a  "Biographical
Sketch  of  Sir  Wiiliinn  Keith."  and  "  .\  Sketch  of
the  Life«)f  Thoma,s  .Mitllin."'  He  left  various  manu-
scripts on  theological  matters,  among  them  an  "  K«-
say  on  Angelic  Influences,"  and  an  argument  on  the
evidences  of  Christianity.  He  wa.s  a  fine  classical
scholar.  He  translated  from  the  Grt-ek  the  "  Pha*-
do  "  of  Plato,  adding  thereto  a  commentary  there-
on. These  "would  in  themM-lves  alone,"  acconl-
ing  to  David  Paul  Brown,  "suffice  to  pn>twt  his
name  acainst  oblivion."  He  received  the  degree
of  LL,  T),  from  Princeton  in  1827,  and  from  Dart-
mouth in  1828.  See  a  sketch  of  him  bv  Thomas
1.  Wharton  (Philadelphia,  1840).— William's  son,
Wiliiam,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  19  July,  1788;
d.  in  Montgomery  county.  Pa..  9  Aug.,  IKW,  was
educated  at  Princeton,  studie<l  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia  in  IHIO.  During
the  war  of  1812  he  servinl  as  captain  of  the  2d
troop  of  Philadelphia  city  cavalry.  Returning  to
the  practice  of  the  law,  he  in  due  time  attained  a
rank  at  the  bar  but  little  inferior  to  that  of  his
father.  He  was  for  four  years  president  of  the
common  council.  He  was  a  memlx^r  of  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society,  for  manv  years  a  vice-
president  of  the  Historical  societv  o\  Pennsylvania,
and  secretary,  and  afterwanl  a  director,  of  the  Li-
brary company,  and  for  twenty  yejirs  a  trustee  of
the  XTniversity  of  Pennsylvania.  As  rej>orter  of
the  state  supreme  court,  he  published  2")  volumes
of  reports  (1818-'*i).  Among  his  publisheil  writ-
ings are  an  "Address  before  the  Law  Academy  of
Philadelphia"  (18;}5),  and  "An  Address  before  the
Trustees  of  Lafayette  College,  J^a-xton,  Pa."  (1H36).
— The  second  William's  son,  William  Henry,
lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  31  Aug.,  1823;  <1.  theiv,
19  April,  1889,  was  graduated  in  1841  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania,  from  which  he  receive<l  in
1882  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  studied  law  with  his
father,  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1844.  and  has
won  reputation  in  his  profession.  In  1862.  uix)n
the  "emergency"  call.  Mr.  Rawle  enlisted  as  a
private  of  artillery,  and  in  1863,  under  a  similar
call,  he  served  as  quartermaster.  He  was  a  vice-
nrovost  of  the  Law  academy  from  1865  to  1873.
later  vice-chancellor  of  the  I^aw  ass<K-iation,  and
was  for  several  years  the  secretary,  and  after-
wanl a  din»ctor.  of  the  Library  company.  He
publishe<l  a  treatise  on  the  "  I^w  of  Covenants
for  Title  "(Philadelphia.  1852):  the  3«1  American
edition  of  John  W.  Smith's  "  I^aw  of  Contracts,"
with  notes  (185J^;  with  additional  notes  bv  (Jeorge
Sharswood,  1856);  the  2d  American  edition  of
Joshua  Williams's  "I^aw  of  Real  Pro|H'rty  "(1857);
"Pkjuity  in  Pennsvlvania."  a  le<'tun',  to  which  was
anpendeil  "The  Registrar's  Btnik  of  Gov.  William
Keith's  Court  in  Chancery  "  (1868):  ",S4inip  Con-
trasts in  the  Growth  of  I^ennsylvania  in  English
Ijaw"  (1881);  "Oration  at  Unveiling  of  the  Monu-
ment en'cted  by  the  Bar  of  the  U.  S.  to  Chief-Jus-
tice Marshall  "  (Washington.  1S84) ;  and  "  The  Case
of  the  Educate«l  Unempioye<l,"  an  addn^s  (ISHTi).
—William  Henry's  nenhew,  William  Brooke*
Rawle,  lawyer,  li.  in  Phila<leli>hia,  29  Aui;.,  1843,
is  the  .son  of  Charles  Wailac-e  Bnn.ke  by  his  wife,
Klizidx'th  Tilghman,  daughter  of  the  second  Will-
iam liawle.  and  has  taken  for  his  surname  Brooke-
liawle. He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of


190


RAWLINGS


RAWLINS


Pennsylvania  in  1863,  and  immediately  afterward
onteretl  the  armv  as  lieutenant  in  the  3d  Pennsyl-
vania cavalry,  lie  was  promoted  canttiin  and  bre-
vetted  major  and  lieutenant-colonel,  at  the  close
of  the  war.  studied  law,  and  in  1807  was  admitted
to  the  Philadelphia  Imr.  He  is  secretary  of  the
Historical  society  of  Pejinsylvania,  treasurer  of  the
Law  asscx'iation  of  Philadelphia,  and  agent  for  the
Penn  estates  in  Pennsylvania.  Col.  Bnx)ke-Rawle
has  published  " The  Biight  Flank  at  Gettysburg"
(Phihidelphia,  1878);  "With  Gregg  in  the  Gettys-
burg Campaign"  (1884);  and  "Gregg's  Cavalry
Fight  at  Gettysburg,"  an  address  delivered  at  the
unveiling  of  the  monument  on  the  site  of  the  cav-
alry engagement  (1884). — The  first  William  Rawle's
grandson,  Henry,  iron-master,  b.  in  Mifflin  coun-
ty, Pa.,  21  Aug.,  1833,  is  the  son  of  Francis  Will-
iam Rawle,  a  graduate  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania, who  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  became  a
civil  engineer,  was  largely  engaged  in  the  manu-
facture of  iron,  and  was  for  some  time  judge  of
Clearfield  county.  The  son  studied  civil  engineer-
ing, and  as  a  young  man  engaged  in  constructing
the  Pennsylvania  niilroad,  and  became  principal
assistant  engineer  of  the  western  division  of  the
Sunbury  and  Erie  railroiul. He  subseouently  en-

faged  extensively  in  the  coal  and  iron  business  in
Irie,  Pa.,  and  established  the  Erie  blast-furnace
and  Erie  rolling-mill.  In  1874-'6  he  was  mayor  of
Erie,  and  from  1876  till  1878  he  was  treasurer  of
Pennsylvania. — Henrv's  brother,  Francis,  lawyer,
b.  in  Mifflin  county.  Pa.,  7  Aug.,  1846,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1869  and  at  the  law-school  in
1871,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  Philadelphia.  He  has  published  two  revised
editions  of  Bouvier's  "  Law  Dictionary,"  in  which
are  given  over  seven  hundred  subjects  not  named
in  the  original  work  (Philadelphia.  1883-'5).

RAWLINGS,  Moses,  soldier,  b.  in  Anne  Arun-
del county,  Md.,  about  1740;  d.  in  Hampshire
county,  Va.,  in  1808.  His  ancestor,  Henry,  was
among  the  first  settlers  of  Maryland,  having  emi-
grated to  the  colony  in  1635.  In  1650  his  son.
Anthony,  was  a  member  of  Gov.  Calvert's  colonial
council. Moses Rawlings was  educated in the

Earish  school  of  his  native  county  and  afterward
y  private  tutors.  His  father  was  a  wealthy  to-
bacco-planter, and  the  son  engaged  in  the  same
occupation.  He  was  a  zealous  patriot,  and  when
in  June,  1775,  Maryland  was  called  upon  to  fur-
nish two  companies  of  riflemen,  he  was  among  the
first  to  volunteer  for  the  service.  He  received  a
lieutenant's  commission,  and  afterward  joined
Washington  at  Boston.  In  1776  congress  ordered
four  companies  from  Virginia  and  two  more  from
Maryland,  which,  with  the  two  companies  that  had
been  already  raiseil,  were  formed  into  a  regiment,
of  which  Rawlings  was  commissioned  lieutenant-
colonel.  At  the  storming  of  Fort  Washington,  16
Nov.,  1776,  the  Maryland  riflemen  withstood  the
attack  of  5,000  Hessians  for  several  hours,  but,
being  xmsupported  by  other  troops,  were  at  last
obliged  to  retire  under  the  guns  of  the  fort,  which
was  soon  afterward  surrendered  to  the  enemy.  In
this  action  Rawlings  commanded  the  Maryland
riflemen  with  skill  and  bravery.  He  received  the
wannest  praise  from  Washington  for  his  conduct
on  this  occasion.  After  his  exchange  he  was  made
colonel  of  the  riflemen,  and  fought  in  all  the  bat-
tles where  the  Maryland  troops  were  engaged.  At
the  close  of  the  war  he  retired  to  Virginia.

RAWLINS,  John  Aaron,  soldier,  b.  in  East
Galena,  III.,  13  Feb.,  1831;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  9  Sept.,  1869.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish  ex-
traction. His  father,  James  D.  Rawlins,  removed


Jii,<^si^y3>


^2-^x>^^Cmo


from  Kentucky  to  Mis.souri  and  then  to  Illinois.
John  passed  his  early  ^ears  on  the  family  farm,
and  attended  the  district  school  in  winter.  He
also  assisted  at  buniing  charcoal  and  hauling  it
to  market ;  but  this
work  Ijecame  dis-
agreeable to  him  as
he  approached  man-
hooa,and,afterread-
ing  all  the  books
within  his  reach,  he
attended  the  Mount
Morris  seminary  in
Ogle  county.  111.,  in
18o2-'3.  His  money
having  given  out.
he  resumed  his  occu-
pation of  chareoal-
burnerthat  he  might
earn  more ;  but,  in-
stead of  returning
to  the  seminary,  as
he  had  intended,  he
studied  law  with
Isaac  P.  Stevens  at
Galena,  and  in  Octo-
ber, 1854,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  taken  into
partnership  by  his  preceptor.  In  1855  Mr.  Stevens
retired,  leaving  the  business  to  be  conducted  by
Rawlins.  In  1857  he  was  elected  attorney  for  the
city  of  Galena,  and  in  1860  he  was  nominated  for
the  electoral  college  on  the  Douglas  ticket.  During
the  contest  that  followed  he  held  a  series  of  joint
discussions  with  Allen  C.  Fuller,  the  Republican
candidate,  and  added  greatly  to  his  reputation  as  a
public  speaker.  He  held  closely  to  the  doctrines
of  Judge  Douglas,  but  was,  of  course,  defeated
with  his  party.  His  own  opinions  were  strongly
opposed  to  human  slavery,  and  yet  he  looked  upon
it  as  an  evil  protected  within  certain  limits  by  the
constitution  of  the  United  States.  His  love  for
the  Union  was,  however,  the  master  sentiment  of
his  soul,  and  while  he  had  followed  his  party  in  all
peaceful  advocacy  of  its  claims,  when  the  South
Carolinians  fired  upon  Fort  Sumter,  April  12. 1861,
he  did  not  hesitate  for  a  moment  to  declare  for  co-
ercion by  force  of  arms.  He  was  outspoken  for
the  Union  and  for  the  war  to  maintain  it,  and  at  a
mass-meeting  at  Galena  on  16  April,  1861,  Rawlins
was  called  on  to  speak ;  but,  instead  of  deprecating
the  war,  as  had  been  expected,  he  made  a  speech  of
an  hour,  in  which  he  upheld  it  with  signal  ability
and  eloquence.  Among  those  of  the  audience  thai)-
had  acted  with  the  Democrats  was  Capt.  Ulysses
S.  Grant,  He  was  deeply  impressed  by  the  speech,
and  thereupon  offered  his  services  to  the  country,
and  from  that  time  forth  was  the  warm  friend  of
Rawlins.  The  first  act  of  Grant  after  he  had  been
assigned  to  the  command  of  a  brigade,  7  Aug.,
1861,  was  to  offer  Rawlins  the  post  of  aide-de-camp
on  his  staff,  and  almost  immediately  afterwaro,
when  Grant  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  he  offered  Rawlins  the  position  of  cap-
tain and  assistant  adjutant-general,  to  date  from
30  Aug.,  1861.  He  joine'd  Grant  at  Cairo,  lU.,  15
Sept.,  1861.  and  from  that  time  was  constantly  with
the  latter  till  the  end  of  the  war,  except  from  1  Aug.
to  1  Oct.,  1864,  when  he  was  absent  on  sick-leave.
He  was  promoted  major,  14  April,  1862,  lieuten-
ant-colonel, 1  Nov.,  1862,  brigactier-^eneral  of  vol-
unteers, 11  Aug.,  1863,  brevet  major-general  of
volunteers.  24  Feb.,  1865.  chief-of-staff  to  Lieut.-
Gen.  Grant,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,
U.  S.  army,  3  March.  1865,  and  brevet  major-gen-
eral, U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865. Finally  he  was


HAWLINS


RAW80N


101


app4^int«d  «»cTt>t«rv  of  WHr,  9  March,  IftflO.  which
ohlc'c  hi«  h«'l«l  till  ^is  ilcath.  lU'fotv  entering  the
army  Kawlins  had  novt-r  socn  a  company  of  uni-
forme<l  soldiers  nor  read  a  Uxik  on  ta«'tics  or  mili-
tary organization,  but  he  soon  develo|»e<l  rare  ex-
ecutive abiliti««s.  During  (Jrant's  earlier  career  he
was  assistant  adjutant-^>neral.  but  lis  Grant  was
promotwl  and  his  staff  iK'canu'  larjfcr.  Rawlins  l)e-
came  chief  of  staff.  F^rlv  after  joining  Grant,
Rawlins  acquired  great  inAui>nce  with  him.  He
was  bold,  resolute,  and  outs(ioken  in  coimsel,  and
never  hesitated  to  give  his  opinion  ujKin  matters
of  im|»ortan«"e,  whether  it  was  asktMl  or  not.  His
relations  with  (Srant  were  closer  than  those  «)f
any  other  man,  and  so  highly  <lid  the  latter  value
his  sterling  (piaiities  an(i  his  gn>Ht  abilities  that,
in  a  letter  to  Henry  Wilson,  chairman  of  the  sen-
ate military  committee,  urging  his  confirmation  as
brigadier  -  general,  he  declare*!  that  liawlins  was
raon>  nearly  indispensable  to  him  than  any  officer
in  the  army.  He  was  a  man  of  austere  habits,  se-
vere morals,  aggressive  temper,  and  of  inflexible
will,  resolution,  and  courage.  He  verifi«Hl,  re-ar-
rangcil,  ancl  re-wrote,  when  necessary,  all  the  state-
ments of  Grant's  official  rejK)rts,  adhering  as  closely
as  possible  to  Grant's  original  drafts,  but  making
them  conform  to  the  facts  as  they  were  understood
at  headquarters.  While  he  did  not  originate  the
idea  of  running  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg  with
the  gun-boats  and  trans|>ort5  and  marching  the
army  by  land  below,  he  was  its  first  and  most  per-
sistent atlvocate.  His  views  upon  such  questions
were  sound  and  vigorous,  and  were  always  an  im-
portant factor  in  Gen.  Grant's  decisions  concern-
ing them.  At  Chattanooga  he  became  an  ardent
advocate  of  the  plan  of  operations  devised  by  Gen.
William  F.  Smith,  and  atlopted  by  Gens.  Thomas
and  Grant,  and  for  the  relief  of  the  army  at  Chat-
tanooga, and  for  the  Iwittle  of  iSIissionary  Ridge,
where  his  persistence  Anally  secured  positive  or-
ders from  Grant  to  Thomas  directing  the  advance
of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  that  resulted  in
carrying  the  heights.  He  accompanied  Grant  to
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and.  after  careful  study,
threw  his  influence  in  favor  of  the  overland  cam-
paign, but  throughout  the  operations  that  followed
tie  deprecated  the  repeated  and  costly  assaults  on
the  enemy's  intrenched  positions,  and  favored  the
flanking  movements  bv  which  Lee  was  finally
driven  to  the  south  side  of  the  Potomac.  It  has
been  said  that  he  opposed  the  march  to  the  sea.
and  appeale<l  to  the  government,  over  the  head
of  his  chief,  to  prevent  it ;  but  there  is  no  evidence
in  his  |)apers,  nor  in  those  of  Lincoln  or  Stanton,
to  support  this  statement.  It  is  doubtless  true  that
he  thought  the  timechosen  for  the  inarch  somewhat
premature,  and  it  is  well  known  that  he  opposetl  the
transfer  of  Sherman's  army  by  steamer  fi*oin  Savan-
nah to  the  James  river  for  fear  that  it  would  leave
the  country  o[)en  for  the  march  of  all  the  southern
forces  to  a  junction  with  Ijce  in  Virginia  l)efore
Sherman  could  reach  that  fleld  of  action,  and  it  is
suggested  that  the  recollection  of  these  facts  has
been  c<infused  with  such  as  would  justify  the  state-
ment above  referred  to,  but  which  wjis  not  made
till  sj'veral  years  after  his  death.  He  was  a  devot-
e«l  and  loyal  friend  to  Gen.  Grant,  and  by  far  t<K)

{fo<Hl  a  disciplinarian  to  ap[>eal  secretly  over  his
lead  to  his  su|)erior8.  His  whole  life  is  a  refuta-
tion of  this  story,  and  when  it  is  rememl)ered  that
Gen.  Grant  does  not  tell  it  a.s  of  his  own  knowl-
edge, it  may  well  be  dismisseil  from  history.
Rawlins,  as  secretary  of  war,  was  the  youngest
member  of  the  cabinet,  a-s  he  was  the  youngest
member  of  Grant's  staff  when  he  joined  it  at  Cairo


in  1881. Me  found  the  a^lministration  of  the  anny
as  fixed  by  the  law  somewhat  inlerfere<l  with  by
an  onler  issued  by  his  pretliHfssor,  and  thisonler
j  he  at  onc(<  induce<l  the  |>resident  to  countermand.
From  that  time  till  his  death  he  was  a  gn>at  Mif-
ferer  from  imlmonary  consumiition.  which  he  had
!  contract«Hl  ov  exposure  <iurtng  the  war; but  he
1  jHTformed  all  the  duties  of  his  office  ami  exerted  a
!  commanding  influence  in  the  counsels  of  the  presi-
dent to  the  last. A  bnmze  statue  has  lieen  ere<-t«l
to  his  memory  at  Washington. He  was  married
twice. After  his  death  jtrovision  was  made  by  a
public  sul)scription  of  if.W.tKH)  for  his  family.

RA>>'SON,  Albert  I^ighton.  author,  b.  in
( 'hester.  Vt.,  15  Oct.,  1H20.  After  stu<lyinK  law,  the-
ology, and  art,  he  made  four  visits  to  the  Orient,
and  in  lHr)\-2  made  a  pilgrimage  from  Cairo  to
Mecca  with  the  annual  caravan  disguised  as  a  Mo-
hammedan student  of  me<licine.  He  also  explored
the  Indian  mounds  of  the  Mississippi  valley,  and
visited  Central  America  in  1854-'o,  publishing
"The  Crania  of  the  Moutid-Iiuilders  of  the  I'nited
States  and  of  Central  America."  He  travelled  in
the  Hudson  l>ay  territories  in  18G3.  Mr.  Rawson
ha.s  been  adopted  as  a  brother  by  the  Adwan
Redawins  of  Moab  and  initiated  by  the  Druzes  in
Mount  Lebanon,  is  a  founder  of  the  Theosophical
society  in  the  United  States,  and  is  a  memlxT  of
various  literarj',  scientific,  an«l  ge^igraphical  so-
cieties. He  has  received  honorary  degrees,  includ-
ing that  of  LL.  D.  from  Oxford  in  IHHO.  He  has
fiublished  many  mans  and  has  illustrated  books
rom  original  sketches,  including  "The  Life  of
Jesus,"  by  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Reecher  (New  York,
1871),  has  executed  more  than  3.(X)0  engravings,  con-
tributed to  magazines,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Rible
Dictionaries"  (Philadelphia,  187t>-'5);  "Histories
of  all  Religions"  (1870);  "Statistics  of  Protestant-
ism "  (1870);  "Antiquities  of  the  Orient"  (New
York,  1870);  "  Vocabular)'  of  the  Iic<lawin  lan-
guages of  Syria  and  Egypt "  (Cairo,  1874);  "  Dic-
tionaries of  Arabic,  German,  and  English"  (Ix?i|)-
sic.  1876) :  "  Vocabulary  of  Persian  and  TurkL«h
I^aneuages  "  (Cairo,  1877) ;  "  Ch<»rogranhy  of  Pales-
tine '  (London,  1880);  a  translation  of  "The  Sym-
posium of  Basra"  (1880);  "  Historical  and  Arclue-
ological  Intnxluction  to  the  Holy  Rible"  (New
York,  1884):  and  "The  Unseen  Worid"  (1888).

RAWSON.  Edward,  colonial  secretary,  b.  in
Gillingham,  Dorsetshire,  England,  IG  April,  1G15;
d.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  27  Aug.,  1G93.  He  stntle<l  in
Newburv,  Ma.ss.,  about  IGliG,  was  graduated  at
HarvanI  in  1658,  and  represented  Newbury  in  the
general  court,  of  which  he  was  clerk.  For  many
years  he  was  secretary  of  Ma.ssachusetts  colony,  and
he  was  also  chosen  "  stewanl  or  agent  for  the  re-
ceiving and  disjx>sing  of  such  coods  and  commo<li-
ties  as  should  be  sent  to  the  I  nited  colonies  frr>m
England  toward  Christianizing  the  Indians."  He
is  bi'lieveil  to  have  been  one  of  the  authors  of  a
small  lx)ok  published  in  IGUl.  entitled  "The  Revo-
lution in  New  England  Justifle<i."  and  signed  "E.
R"  and  "S,  S."  He  published  "The  tieneral  Laws
and  LilH?rties  concerning  the  Inhabitants  of  Mas-
sachusetts" (IGGO).  —  His  son,  (jrindall,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Boston,  Mass..  28  Jan.,  IG-jU:  d.  in  Men-
don,  Mass.,  G  Feb.,  1715,  was  graduatinl  at  Har-
vard in  1G78.  and  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Men-
don  from  1680  until  his  death.  He  was  instructed
by  the  commissioners  for  the  propajjation  of  the
gospel,  in  1698,  to  visit  the  Indians  in  New  Eng-
land. An  account  of  this  visit  was  jmblished  in  the
"Massachusetts  Historical  Collections  "  (1st  s<Ties,
vol.  X.).  Several  interesting  anectlotes  are  recorded
of  Rev.  Grindall  liawson  in  connection  with  Cot-


192


RAY


RAYMOND


ton  Mather,  who  mentions  him  in  his  "  Mantissa,"
and  i^ays  in  one  of  his  sermons :  "  We  pjenerally
esteemetl  him  as  a  truly  pious  man,  and  a  very
prudent  one."  He  wtvs  an  accomplished  scholar
and  writer,  and  preached  to  the  Indians  in  their
own  lanpuajje.  lie  pul)lislu'd  a  sermon  "preached
to  and  at  the  request  of  the  Ancient  and  Honorable
Artillery  company  in  1703,"  an  election  sermon
(Boston,  1709),  and  a  work  entitled  "The  Confes-
sion of  Faith,"  written  in  English  and  also  in  the
Indian  dialect. — Edward's  daughter,  Rebecca,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  23  May,  1050,  was  the  heroine  of
a  romantic  episode  in  the  history  of  the  colony,
commemorated  by  John  G.  Whittier  in  "  Leaves
from  Margaret  Smith's  Journal  "  (1849).  Her  por-
trait is  in  possession  of  the  New  England  historic
genealogical  society.  See  Sullivan  S.  Ilawson's
"  Memoir  of  Edward  Ilawson,  with  Genealogical
Notices  of  his  Descendants"  (Boston,  1849),  and
"  Genealogy  of  the  Descendants  of  Edward  Raw-
son,"  by  ReulMjn  Ilawson  Dodge  (1849  ;  revised  ed.,
Worcester,  Mass.,  1875).

RAY,  Isaac,  physician,  b.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,  16
Jan.,  1807;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  31  Alarch,  1881.
He  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  Bowdoin  in  1827,
and  practised  in  Portland  and  Eastport,  Me.  In
1841  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of  the  state
insane  asylum  in  Augusta,  and  in  1845  he  was
made  superintendent  of  the  Butler  hospital  for  the
insane  in  Providence,  R.  I.  He  held  this  office
until  1806,  and  then  removed  to  Philadelphia.
Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1879.  In
addition  to  many  contributions  to  medical  jour-
nals and  other  periodicals,  and  a  series  of  valuable
official  reports,  he  was  the  author  of  "  Conversations
on  Animal  Economy  "  (Portland,  1829) ;  "  Medical
Jurisprudence  of  Insanity"  (Boston,  1838;  Lon-
don, 1839 ;  5th  ed.,  enlarged.  Boston,  1872) ;  "  Edu-
cation in  Relation  to  the  Health  of  the  Brain"
(1851);  and  "Mental  Hygiene"  (1863).

RAY,  James  Browii,  governor  of  Indiana,  b.
in  Jefferson  county,  Ky.,  19  Feb.,  1794 ;  d.  in  Cin-
cinnati. Ohio,  4  Aug.,  1848.  After  studying  law  in
Cincinnati,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
to  practise  in  Brookville.  In  1822  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature,  in  which  he  frequently  served  as
president  joro /<^w/)o/-e.  From  1825  till  1831  he  was
governor  of  Indiana,  and  in  1820  he  was  appointed
IJ.  S.  commissioner,  with  Lewis  Cjiss  and  John
Tipton,  to  negotiate  a  treaty  with  the  Miami  and
Pottawattamie  Indians  for  the  purchase  of  lands  in
Indiana.  The  constitution  of  the  state  prevented
the  governor  from  holding  any  office  under  the
U.  S.  government,  and  he  was  consequently  in-
volved in  a  controversy.  Through  his  exertions
the  Indians  gave  land  to  aid  in  building  a  road
from  Lake  Michigan  to  Ohio  river.  Gov.  Ray  was
active  in  promoting  railroad  concentration  in  In-
dianapolis. He  practised  law,  was  a  defeated  can-
didate for  congress  in  1837,  and  in  his  later  years
became  very  eccentric.

RAY,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Washington  county.
Mo.,  14  Oct.,  1816:  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  4  March,
1888.  His  grandfather,  John  Ray,  emigrated  to
Missouri,  and  was  associated  with  Daniel  Boone.
He  was  a  member  of  the  1st  Constitutional  con-
vention there,  and  Ray  county  was  named  for  him.
The  grandson  was  educated  at  Augusta  college  and
Transylvania  university,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1835.  He  removed  to  Monroe,  La.,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839,  and  took  high
rank  in  his  profession.  He  was  electetl  in  1844  to
the  state  house  of  representatives,  and  in  1850  to
the  state  senate.  In  1854  and  again  in  1859  he
was  nominated  by  the  Whigs  for  lieutenant-gov-


ernor, but  was  defeated.  In  1860  he  was  an  elector
on  the  Bell-and-Everett  presidential  ticket,  and
canvjissed  northern  Louisiana  for  those  candidates,
against  the  growing  feeling  in  favor  of  secession.
Throughout  the  civil  war  Mr.  Kay  was  a  consistent
Unionist,  and  at  its  close  he  favored  the  plan  of  re-
construction that  was  advocated  by  the  Republican
party.  In  1865  he  was  elected  to  congress,  but,
with  all  other  representatives  from  the  seceded
states,  he  was  refused  a  seat  in  that  body.  In
1868-'72  he  was  again  state  senator.  During
the  former  year  he  was  appointed  to  revise  the
civil  code,  the  code  of  proceflure,  and  the  statutes
of  the  state  of  Louisiana,  and  his  revisions  were
adopted  by  the  legislature  of  1870.  In  1872  he  re-
moved to  New  Orleans,  where  he  resided  until  his
death,  and  where  he  served  as  registrar  of  the  state
land-office  from  1873  till  1877.  In  1873  he  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  by  the  "  Kellogg  "  legis-
lature ;  but  his  election  was  contested  by  William
L.  McMillen,  who  had  been  chosen  by  the  "  Mc-
Enery  "  legislature.  Neither  contestant  was  given
the  seat.  In  1878  Mr.  Ray  was  appointed  by  John
Sherman,  then  secretary  of  the  treasury,  special  at-
torney for  the  United  States  to  prosecute  the
"  whiskey  cases."  He  was  also  one  of  the  attor-
neys of  Sirs,  Myra  Gaines  (q.  v.),  and  at  the  time  of
his  death  was  engaged  in  the  prosecution  of  an  im-
portant suit  by  which  Louisiana  is  endeavoring  to
establish  her  title  to  certain  swamp  lands  given  to
her  by  the  general  government.  His  services  had
also  been  secured  by  the  great  majority  of  the
French  citizens  of  New  Orleans  to  prosecute  their
claims  under  the  international  commission  of  1880
to  adjust  the  claims  of  French  subjects  against
this  government  growing  out  of  the  operations  of
the  National  forces  in  Louisiana  during  the  civil
war.  He  published  "  Ray's  Digest  of  the  Laws  of
Louisiana  "  (2  vols.,  New  Orleans,  1870).

RAYMOND,  Benjamin  Wright,  merchant,  b.
in  Rome,  N.  Y.,  23  Oct.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,
5  April,  1883.  His  father,  a  native  of  Massachu-
setts, was  for  several  years  engaged  in  surveying
the  northern  counties  of  New  York,  selected  the
site  of  Potsdam,  lived  there  for  several  years,  and
was  judge  of  the  county.  After  serving  as  a  clerk
for  several  years,  the  son  engaged  in  business  for
himself,  first  in  Rome  and  next  in  Bloomfield.  and
in  1837  removed  to  Chicago  and  began  business  as  a
merchant.  In  1839  he  was  elected  the  third  mayor
of  Chicago,  and  he  was  re-elected  in  1842.  He  was
one  of  the  originators  of  the  city  of  Lake  Forest,
a  founder  of  Lake  Forest  university  and  president
of  its  board  of  trustees,  and  was  a  member  of  the
board  of  trustees  of  Beloit  college  and  Rockford
female  seminary.  In  1864  he  organized  the  Elgin
national  watch  company,  and  became  its  president
— His  son.  Oeorg'e  Lansing^.  educator,  b.  in  Chi-
cago, III.,  3  Sept.,  1839,  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1862.  studied  theology  at  Princeton,  and  was
pastor  at  Darby,  Pa.,  in  1870-'4.  He  was  professor
of  oratory  at  Williams  in  1874-'81,  and  became
professor  of  oratory  and  aesthetic  criticism  at
Princeton  in  1881.  He  is  the  author  of  "Ora-
tor's Manual "  (Chicago,  1879) ;  '*  Modem  Fishers  of
Men,"  a  novel  (New  York.  1879) :  "  A  Life  in  Song  "
(1886);  "  Poetry  as  a  Representative  Art"  (1886):
"Ballads  of  the  Revolution,  and  other  Poems"
(1887):  and  "Sketches  in  Song"  (1887).

R.4YM0ND,  Henry  Jarvis,  journalist,  b.  in
Lima,  Livingston  co..  N.  Y.,  24  Jan.,  1820:  d.  in
New  York  city,  18  June,  1869.  His  father  owned
and  cultivated  a  small  farm  on  which  the  son  was
employed  in  his  youth.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Vermont in 1840,  studied law  in


RAYMOND


RAYMOND


193


Ha/^/^^ J (K«crY^y^.''^^#^>v/J


Now  York,  and  maintaiiuHi  hitnaolf  hv  teaching  in
a  yoiiii);  ladies'  iM'ininarv  hihI  writini;  for  tho  "  New
Y'orkt-r,"  a  liU>rary  wtn-klv  oditisi  hy  Hunu-o  (treelev.
On  the  fstablishnifiil  oJ  the  "  Trilmiu-  "  in  Apn'l.
1841,  Mr.  Raymond  became  aasiiitant  editor  and  was

well  known  as  a
reporter.  lie  made
a  Bfiecialty  of
lectureH,  sermons,
and  speeches,  and,
amon^  other  re-
inarkultle  feats,
reported  Dr.  Di-
onysius  Lardner's
lectures  so  per-
fec'tly  that  the  lec-
turer const»nte«l  to
their  puldiration
in  two  large  vol-
umes, by  Ureeley
and  McKlrath,
with  his  certifi-
cate of  their  ac-
curacy. In  1843
he  left  the  "  Tribune  "  for  the  *'  Courier  and  En-
quirer," and  he  remained  connected  with  this  jour-
nal till  1851,  when  he  resigned  and  went  to  Europe
to  benefit  his  health.  W  iiile  on  the  staff  of  tne
*•  Courier  and  Enquirer  "  he  formed  a  connection
v.ith  the  publishing  -  house  of  Harper  Brothers,
which  lasted  ten  years.  During  this  period  a
spirited  discussion  of  Fourier's  principles  of  so-
cialism was  carried  on  between  Mr.  Raymond  and
Mr.  Greeley,  and  the  articles  of  the  former  on  this
subject  were  afterward  publishe<l  in  pamphlet-
form.  In  1849  he  was  elected  to  the  state  as-
sembly by  the  Whigs.  He  was  re-elected  in  1850,
and  chosen  speaker,  and  manifested  s[)ecial  inter-
est in  the  school  system  and  canal  policy  of  the
state.  The  New  York  "  Times  "  was  established  by
him,  and  the  first  number  was  issued  on  18  Sept.,
1851.  In  1852  he  went  to  Baltimore  to  report  the
proceedings  of  the  Whig  national  convention,  but
was  given  a  seat  as  a  delegate,  and  made  an  eloquent
speech  in  exposition  of  northern  sentiment,  in
1854  he  was  elected  lieutenant-governor  of  the
state.  He  was  active  in  organizing  the  liepublican
party,  composed  the  "  Address  to  the  People  "  that
was  promulgated  at  the  National  convention  at
Pittsburg  in  February,  1856,  and  spoke  frequently
for  Fremont  in  the  following  presidential  cam-
paign. In  1857  he  refused  to  be  a  candidate  for
govenior  of  New  York,  and  in  1858  he  favored
btephen  A.  Douglas,  but  he  finally  resumed  his
relations  with  the  liepublican  partv.  In  1860  he
was  in  favor  of  the  nomination  of  W'illiam  H.  Sew-
ard for  the  presidency,  and  it  was  through  his  in-
fluence that  Mr.  Seward  was  placed  in  the  cabinet.
He  was  a  warm  sumwrter  and  jiersonal  friend  of
Mr.  Lincoln  in  all  nis  active  measures,  though  at
times  deploring  what  he  considered  a  hesitating
policy.  After  the  disaster  at  Bull  Hun  he  proposed
the  establishment  of  a  provisional  government.  In
1861  he  was  again  elected  to  the  state  assembly,
where  he  was  chosen  speaker,  and  in  1863  he  was
defeated  by  Gov.  Edwin  D.  Morgan  for  the  nomi-
nation for  U.  S.  senator.  In  1864  he  was  elected  to
congress,  and  in  a  s|H»ech  «in  22  Dec.,  1865,  main-
tained that  the  southern  states  had  never  in^en  out
of  the  Union.  He  sustained  the  reconstruction
policy  of  Pre,<si<lent  Johnson.  On  the  expiration
of  his  term  he  declinetl  renomination,  ana  he  re-
fuse<l  the  mission  to  Austria  in  1867.  He  assisted
in  the  organization  of  the  "  National  Union  con-
vention "  which  met  at  Philadelphia  in  August,

TOL.  V. — 18


1866.  and  was  the  author  of  the'*  Philatlelphia  Ad-
dress "  to  the  people  of  the  United  Statett.  In  the
summer  of  18(i8  he  visited  Flun>tM]  with  his  family,
and  after  his  return  n>siinu>d  tne  active  lat>ors  of
his  profession,  with  which  he  wa.H  <K*cupied  till  his
deatn.  As  an  orator  Mr.  Itayniond  posMSHMHl  great
power.  As  a  journalist  he  aid  itckkI  service  in  ele-
vating the  t(me  of  news|>a[>er  discussion,  showing
by  his  own  exam[*le  that  it  was  powible  to  lie  ear-
nest and  brilliant  without  transgressing  the  laws  of
decorum.  He  wrote  •*  I'olitical  I.iessons  of  the  Revo-
lution "  (New  York,  1854);  "  I^etters  to  Mr.  Yan-
cey" (I860);  "History  of  the  Administration  of
President  Lincoln  "(1864);  and  "Life  and  Ser-
vices of  Abraham  Lincoln ;  with  his  State  Papers,
SiK'eches,  Ijetters,  etc."  (186.5).  Sec  Augustus  Slav-
erick's  "  H.  .1.  Itavmond  and  the  New  York  Press
for  Thirtv  Years  ''  (Hartford,  1870).

RAYSCOND.  JanieH,  lawyer,  b.  in  Connecticut
in  1796;  d.  in  Westminster,  Md.,  in  January,  1858.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1818,  removed  to
Marylanu,  studied  law  in  Frederick  city,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835.  After  practising  at
Frederick,  he  removed  to  Westminster.  Carroll  co.,
where  he  resided  till  his  death.  In  1844  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  house  of  delegates,  and  in
1847  he  was  appointed  state's  attorney.  He  was  a
profound  lawyer,  and  was  exceptionably  well  read
m  the  literature  of  his  profession.  He  published
"  Digest  of  the  Marvland  Chancery  Decision  "  (New
York.  1839),  and  "  t'olitical,"  a  book  in  opi>osition
to  "  Knownothin£:ism "  as  a  phase  of  politics  in
the  state  of  Maryland.

RAYMOND,  John  Howard,  e<lucator,  b.  in
New  York  city,  7  March,  1814  ;  d.  in  i'oughkeepsie,
N.  Y.,  14  Aug.,  1878.  He  was  for  a  time  a  student
in  Columbia,  but  was  graduated  at  Union  college
in  1832.  Immediately  thereafter  he  enteral  ujKtn
the  study  of  the  law  in  New  Haven.  The  con-
straint of  religious  convictions  led  him  to  abandon
this  pursuit,  and  in  1834  he  entere<l  the  theological
seminary  at  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  with  the  intention  of
preparing  for  the  Baptist  ministry.  His  progress  in
the  study  of  Hebrew  was  so  marked  that  l)efore  his
graduation  he  was  appointed  a  tutor  in  that  lan-
guage. In  1839  he  was  raised  to  the  chair  of  rhet-
oric and  English  literature  in  Madison  university,
which  he  filled  for  ten  years  with  a  constantly
growing  reputation  as  a  teacher  and  orator.  In
1850  he  accepted  the  professorship  of  l)elles-let-
tres  in  the  newly  estaolished  Rochester  univer-
sity. In  1856  he  was  selected  to  organize  the  Col-
legiate and  iK)lytechnic  institute  in  Brooklvn,  and
accomplishcil  the  task  with  great  success.  "He  was
summoned  in  18(J5  to  perform  a  similar  service  in
connection  with  the  recently  founded  Vassar  col-
lege at  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  made
president  and  professor  of  mental  and  moral  phi-
losophy. His  variwl  gifts  and  accomplishments
here  found  scoi)e  for  t  heir  highest  exercise.  Though
an  able  and  eloquent  preacher,  ministering  regu-
larly as  chaplain  of  the  college,  he  was  never  or-
dained. His  published  works  were  confined  to
Samphletsand  sermons.  Hereceivetl  the  honorarj"
egree  of  LL.  I).  See  his  '•  Life  and  Ivetters  "  (New
York,  1880).— His  brother,  Robert  Raikes,  «lu-
cator,  b.  in  New  York  city  in  1H19;  d.  in  Bnwklvn,
N.  Y.,  16  Nov.,  1888.  He  was  eradunted  at  Union
college  in  1839.  He  editetl  the  .Syracuse  "  Free
Democrat"  in  1852,  and  the  "  Evening  Chronicle"
in  1853-*4,  and  was  j)rofessor  of  elocution  and  Eng-
lish in  Brooklvn  polytechnic  institute  fmm  1857
till  1864.  He' publishe<l  "Gems  from  Tupjwr"
(Syracuse,  1854) :  "  Little  Don  Quixote,"  from  the
German  (1855);  "Patriotic  S|K»ker"(New  York.


194


RAYMOND


RAYNAL


1864);  and  single  sermons  and  addresses. — Rob-
ert's son,  Ro88lter  Worthiiigton,  mining  engi-
neer, b.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  27  April,  1840,  was
graduated  at  Brooklyn  polytechnic  institute  in
1858,  and  spent  three  years  in  professional  study  at
the  Royal  mining  acatlemy  in  Freiberg,  Saxonv,
and  at  the  universities  of  Heidelbsrg  and  Munich.
On  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  entered
the  armyjis  additional  aide-de-camp,  with  the  rank
of  captain,  on  31  March,  1862,  and  resigned  on  6
April,  1864.  Subsequently  he  settled  in  Isew  York
city  as  a  consulting  engineer,  with  special  reference
to  mining  property  ana  metallurgical  processes.  In
1868  he  was  appomted  U.  S.  commissioner  of  min-
ing statistics,  which  office  he  held  until  1876,  issu-
ing each  year  "  Reports  on  the  Mineral  Resources
of  the  United  States  West  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  "
(8  vols.,  Washington,  1869-76),  of  which  several
were  published  in  New  York  with  the  titles  of
"American  Mines  and  Mining,"  "The  United
States  Mining  Industry,"  "  Mines,  Mills,  and  Fur-
naces," and  "Silver  and  Gold."  He  was  invited
to  lecture  on  economic  geology  at  Lafayette  in
1870,  and  continued  so  engaged  until  1882.  Dr.
Raymond  has  travelled  extensively  throughout  the
mining  districts  of  the  United  States  in  connection
with  his  official  appointments,  and  from  his  knowl-
edge of  the  subject  has  been  very  largely  consulted
concerning  the  value  of  mines,  serving  also  as  an
expert  in  court  on  these  subjects.  He  was  one  of
the  U.  S.  commissioners  to  the  World's  fair  in
Vienna  in  1878,  and  was  appointed  in  1885  New
York  state  commissioner  of  electric  subways  for
the  city  of  Brooklyn.  Dr.  Raymond  was  one  of
the  original  members  of  the  American  institute  of
mining  engineers,  its  vice-president  in  1871,  presi-
dent in  1872-4,  and  secretary  in  1884-'8.  In  the
latter  capacity  he  has  edited  tlie  annual  volumes  of
its  "  Transactions  "  since  his  election.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  the  Society  of  civil  engineers  of  France  and
of  various  other  technical  and  scientific  societies  at
home  and  abroad.  In  1867  he  was  editor  of  the
"American  Journal  of  Mining,"  which  in  1868  be-
came the  "  Engineering  and  Mining  Journal,"  of
which  he  is  still  (1888)  senior  editor.  In  addition
to  numerous  professional  papers,  he  has  published
"  Die  Leibgarde  "  (Boston,  1863),  being  a  German
translation  of  Mrs.  John  C.  Fremont's  "  Storv  of
the  Guard  " ;  "  The  Children's  Week  "  (New  York,
1871) ;  "  Brave  Hearts,"  a  novel  (1873) ;  "  The  Man
in  the  Moon  and  other  People  "  (1874) ;  "  The  Book
of  Job  "  (1878) ;  "  The  Merry-go-Round  "  (1880) ;
"  Camp  and  Cabin  "  (1880) ;  "  A  Glossary  of  Mining
and  Metallurgical  Terms"  (1881);  and  "Memorial
of  Alexander  L.  Hoi  ley  "  (1883).

RAYMOND,  John  T.,  actor,  b.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  5  April,  1836;  d.  in  Evansville,  Ind.,  10
April,  1887.  His  original  name  was  John  O'Brien  ;
was  educated  in  the  common  schools,  and  made
his  first  appearance,  27  June,  1853,  at  the  Roch-
ester theatre  as  Lopez  in  "  The  Honeymoon."  In
the  summer  of  1857  he  accompanied  Edward
Sothern  to  Halifax,  N.  S.,  and  afterward  appeared
at  Charleston  as  Asa  Trenchard  in  "  Our  American
Cousin,"  with  Sothern  as  Lord  Dundrearv.  He
went  to  England  in  1867,  and  on  1  July  he  ap-
peared in  London  at  the  Haymarket  theatre  as
Asa  Trenchard  with  Sothern,  making  a  great  suc-
cess, and  afterward  made  a  tour  of  the  British
provincial  theatres  in  company  with  Sothern,  and
also  acted  in  Paris.  Returning  to  this  country  in
the  autumn  of  1868,  he  reappeared  in  New  York,
playing  Toby  Twinkle  in  "  All  that  Glitters  is  not
Gold."  A  little  later  he  went  to  San  Francisco,
where,  on  18  Jan.,  1869,  he  made  his  first  appear-


ance as  Graves  in  Bulwer's  comedy  of  "  Money.""
Mr.  Raymond  returned  to  New  York  in  1871,  and
there  his  greatest  success  was  achieved  in  1874,
when  he  brought  out  at  the  Park  theatre  "  The
Gilded  Age."  In  this  Mr.  Raymond  took  the  part
of  Colonel  Mulberry  Sellers,  which  he  rendered  pe-
culiarly his  own,  and  in  which  he  delighted  thou-
sands by  the  original  character  of  his  humor.  He
went  to  England  on  a  professional  engagement  in
1880,  but  his  character  of  Colonel  Sellers  did  not
prove  popular  and  he  soon  returned.  He  ap-
peared on  the  stage  for  the  last  time  in  Hopkins-
ville,  Ky.  Though  Mr.  Raymond's  talent  as  a
comedian  was  not  of  the  highest  order,  it  was  of
such  a  peculiar  character  as  to  secure  him  success.
Mr.  Raymond's  wife  accompanied  her  husband  to
Europe,  and  played  Florence  Trenchard  in  "  Our
American  Cousin "  at  the  Theatre  des  Italiens,
Paris.  She  also  accompanied  him  to  California,
and  took  the  role  of  Clara  Douglas  in  "  Monev."

RAYMOND,  Miner,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York
city,  29  Aug.,  1811.  He  was  educated  at  Wesleyan
academy,  Wilbraham,  Mass.,  where  he  became  a
teacher  in  1824,  and  was  its  principal  in  1848-'64.
Since  1864  he  has  been  professor  of  svstematic
theology  in  Garrett  biblical  institute,  Evanston»
111.  He  has  been  a  member  of  the  annual  con-
ferences of  his  church  for  forty-eight  years,  and  six
times  a  delegate  to  the  general  conference.  Wes-
leyan university  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1854,  and  Northwestern  university,  Evanston,  that
of  LL.  D.  in  1884.  He  has  published  "  Systematic
Theology  "  (3  vols.,  Cincinnati.  1877).

RAYNAL,  Gruillaume  Thomas  Francois,
called  Abbe,  French  historian,  b.  in  St.  Geniez,
Rouergue,  12  April,  1713;  d.  in  Paris,  6  March,
1V93.  He  received  his  education  in  the  college  of
the  Jesuits  at  Pezenas.  and  was  ordained  priest.
In  1747  he  moved  to  Paris,  and  was  attached  to
the  parish  of  St.  Sulpice,  but  was  dismissed  for
conduct  unbecoming  a  clergyman.  He  then  en-
tered literary  life,  became  an  editor  of  the  "  Mer-
cure  de  France."  and,  soon  acquiring  fame,  gained
entrance  to  fashionable  society,  where  he  mjSe  the-
acquaintance  of  Diderot,  d'Alembert,  Rousseau^
Voltaire,  and  othei's.  By  their  advice  he  under-
took the  publication  of  a  philosophical  history  of
the  discovery  and  conquest  of  the  American  colo-
nies, and  devoted  nearly  ten  years  to  that  work^
which  made  a  great  sensation,  and  was  translated
into  all  European  languages.  It  is  entitled  "  His-
toire  philosophique  et  politique  des  etablisseinent*
et  du  commerce  des  Europeens  dans  les  deux  In-
des  "  (4  vols.,  Paris,  1770 ;  revised  ed.,  with  new  docu-
ments furnished  by  the  Count  d'Aranda,  Spanish
secretary  of  state,  16  vols.,  Geneva,  1780-'5).  Sev-
eral of  the  most  noted  authors  of  the  time  contrib-
uted to  the  work.  Raynal's  history  contained  viru-
lent attacks  on  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  and
the  author  was  obliged  to  seek  a  refuge  in  Prussia,
By  order  of  Louis  XVI.  the  parliament  of  Paris-
pronounced  condemnation  upon  Raynal's  history,
and  it  was  burned  by  the  public  executioner  in  the-
Place  de  Greve  in  1761. Toward  1787  he  obtained

Sermission  to  return  to  France,  and  fixed  his  resi-
ence  in  Toulon.  He  was  elected  to  the  states-
general  in  1789  by  the  city  of  Marseilles,  but  de-
clined on  account  of  his  age.  During  the  revolu-
tion he  lived  chiefly  in  Montlhery.  Besides  those
already  cited,  Ravnal's  works  include  "Histoire
du  stathouderat "  (The  Hague.  1748):  "Anecdotes-
litteraires  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1750) ;  "  Histoire  du  par-
lement  d'Angleterre "  (London,  1751);  and  "Me-
moires  politiques  de  I'Europe"  (3»vols.,  175^'74).
William  Mazzey,  Virginia,  published  a  refutation


RAYNER


RRA


195


of  Raynal's  chief  work  under  the  title  "  Recherches

historiniios  ot  |ihil(is()i>hi(}iu>s  8tir  Ips  ^tattt-Unis  do
rArn.rn^iif  <lu  Nonl '  (4  vols.,  Phhs.  1788).

KAYNER.  Keuiioth,  jurist,  h.  in  Itertio  county,
N.  C,  in  imw;  «1.  in  W'jishiriKton,  I).  ('.,  4  Murch,
1884.  His  fatlior,  n  linntist  i-lcr^ynmn,  was  a
soldier  duriiiji;  the  war  of  the  Revolution.  The  son
was  edu(«tiHl  at  Tarlxjro  academy,  studied  law,  and
was  ndinitte<l  to  the  bar,  hut  di«l  not  practise.  He
was  a  n»en>l»er  of  the  convention  of  1835  to  revise
the  stat«  constitution,  and,  havinfj  removed  to
Hertford  county,  representetl  it  in  the  legislature
almost  continuously  from  1835  till  1851.  lie  wa«
elected  to  congress  from  North  Carolina  for  three
successive  terms,  and  served  from  2  Dec.,  18JJ9,  till
3  March,  1845.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  on
the  Taylor  and  Fillmore  ticket  in  1849.  Mr.  Ray-
ner  afterward  removed  to  Mississippi.  In  1874  he
was  apjviinted  by  President  Grant  a  judge  of  the
court  of  commissioners  of  Alabama  claims,  and  in
1877  he  l»ecame  solicitor  of  the  treasury,  which  post
he  held  till  his  death.

RAYNOLDS,  \^'illiam  Franklin,  soldier,  b.
in  Canton,  Ohio,  17  March,  1820.  He  was  gnuiu-
ated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1843,  and
entered  the  army  in  July,  as  brevet  2d  lieutenant
in  the  5th  infantry.  He  served  in  the  war  with
Mexico  in  1847-'8,  and  was  in  charge  of  the  ex-
ploration of  Yellowstone  and  Missouri  rivers  in
18o9-'61.  He  was  chief  topographical  engineer
of  the  Department  of  Virginia  in  1861.  and  was
appointed  colonel  and  additional  aide-de-camp,  31
March,  1862.  Besides  serving  as  chief  engineer  of
the  middle  department  and  the  8th  army  corps
from  January,  1863,  till  April,  1864,  he  was  ni
charge  of  the  defences  of  Ilarper's  Ferry  during
the  Confederate  invasion  of  Pennsylvania  in  June,
1863,  and  was  chief  engineer  of  the  defences  of
Baltimore,  Md.,  28  June,  1863.  He  was  super-
intending engineer  of  north  and  northwest  laKes,
and  engineer  of  light-houses  on  northern  lakes,  and
in  charge  of  harbor  improvements  in  the  entire
lake  region  from  14  April,  1864,  till  April,  1870.
At  the  end  of  the  civil  war  he  was  brevetted  colonel
and  brigadier -general  in  the  regular  army.  He
was  promoted  Reutonant-colonel,  7  March,  1867,
and  colonel,  2  Jan.,  1881.

RAYON,  Ignacio  Lopez  (ri-yong),  J^Iexican
patriot,  b.  in  llalpujahua  in  1773;  d.  in  Mexico,  2
Feb.,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of
San  Ildefonso  in  Mexico,  and  practised  law.  In
September,  1810,  he  espoused  the  cause  of  inde-
pendence, joined  Miguel  Hidalgo  in  October  in  Ma-
ravatio,  and  was  ap|)ointed  general  secretary.  In
Decemljer  he  was  appointed  by  Hidalgo  secretary
of  state  and  foreign  relations.  He  followed  the
fugitive  chiefs  to  Saltillo.  and,  after  they  went  to
the  United  States,  became  the  real  chief  of  the
revolution  in  Mexico.  He  gathered  a  force  of
8,500  men  and  marched  to  the  south,  defeating
several  Spanish detachments,  and  on 13 April,

1811,  occupied  Zacatecas,  where  he  cast  cannon,
and  was  busy  organizing  his  army.  On  the  ap-
proach of  Gen.  Felix  Callcja  he  abandoned  the  city,
and  in  Zitacuaro  convened  the  instirgent  chiefs,
who  appointed  in  August  a  governing  junta,  over
which  Kayon  presidetl. He  published  proclama-

.tions  until  Gen.  Calleja  surrounded  the  town.  Al-
though it  was  valiantly  defended  by  Rayon  with
only  600  regular  soldiers  and  a  great  number  of  In-
dians, the  town  was  stormed  next  day.  Rayon  fled,
and,  gathering  his  forces,  attacked  Toluca,  18  April,

1812.  During  1813  disagreements  arose  l^etween
the  members  of  the  governing  junta,  and  Rayon
separated  from  them,  out  he  took  part  in  the  con-


^W' ^ou^^m.


greM  of  Chilpancingo.  After  the  defeat  and  cap-
ture of  -Matamoros  he  rftire<l  to  the  mountain
fortress  of  CojKtro,  occu(>ied  by  his  brother  Kamon,
and  on  4  March,  1815,  defeated  the  royalisUi  under
Llano  and  Iturbide.  .
In  September,  1816,
he  left  CojH)ro,  and,
after  many  encoun-
ters, was  captured
by  the  royalists,  11
Dec.,  1817,  and  con-
demned to  death,  but
was  pardoned  and
kept  prisoner  till  15
Nov.,  1820,  when  he
was  releaseil  under
l)ail.  After  the  oc-
cupation of  Mexico
by  Iturbide,  Itayon
was  apfKjinted  in
1822  treasurer  of  the
province  of  San  Luis
rotosi,  and  lat«r  he
was  deputy  to  con-
gress for  Michoacan.
Congress  promoted
him  in  1824  major-
general,  and  in  1825  commander-in-chief  of  Jalisco,
which  place  he  occupie<I  till  February,  1827,  when
he  was  appointed  president  of  the  supreme  tribu-
nal of  war  and  the  navv.  In  1842  Santa-Anna
ordered  Rayon's  name  to  be  inscribed  in  gold  let-
ters in  the  chamber  of  congress. — His  brother,
Ramon,  b.  in  Tlalpujahua  in  1775;  d.  in  Mexico,
19  July,  1839,  was  established  in  business  in  Mexico
when  the  revolution  began  in  Dolores  in  1810,  and
hearing  that  his  brother  hrnl  l)een  appointed  Hi-
dalgo's secretary,  he  abandoned  his  store  and  joined
the  insurgents.  He  began  to  study  fortification
and  the  art  of  casting  cannon,  and  soon  established
a  foundry  at  Zitacuaro,  the  fortifications  of  which

Slace  he  designed,  and  took  an  active  part  in  its
efence,  losing  an  eye  on  the  retreat.  Afterward  he
established  a  factory  of  arms  at  Tlalpujahua,  took
part  in  the  principal  engagements  during  1813-'14,
and  with  his  forces  retired  into  the  fortress  of  Co-
poro,  which  he  had  erected,  and  where  he  held  out
for  more  than  two  years  against  the  re|)eated  attacks
of  the  royalists,  till  he  was  forced  by  want  of  pro-
visions and  a  military  mutiny  to  sign  an  honorable
capitulation,  7  Jan.,  1817.  He  was  so  much  es-
teemed by  his  enemies  that  he  obtained  in  1818
from  the  viceroy  Apodaca  the  pardon  of  his  brother
Ignacio.  After  the  triumph  of  Iturbide  he  retireil
to  private  life, and  openetl  several  industrial  estab-
lishments. In  1834  Santa-Anna  ap|K)inted  him
chief  of  operations  against  the  insurgents  of  Mi-
choacan, and  in  a  short  campaign  he  pacified  the
province,  capturing  Morelia  on  14  June,  1834,  and
re-establishing  confidence  by  his  humane  measures.
At  the  time  of  hU  death  lie  was  governor  of  the
state  of  Mexico.

REA,  John,  member  of  congress,  b.  in  Penn-
sylvania in  1755;  d.  in  Chambersburg.  Pa.,  6  Feb.,
1829.  He  served  during  the  Revolutionary  war,
was  several  times  a  memljer  of  the  state  house  of
representatives,  and  was  five  times  elected  as  a
Democrat  to  congress,  serving  from  1803  till  1816,
except  in  1811-'13.

REA,  John  Patterson,  soldier,  b.  in .  Ix)wer
Oxfonl,  Chester  co..  Pa..  13  Oct.,  1840.  He  was
educated  in  the  public  schools,  and,  after  working
for  some  time  in  a  factorv,  ho  removed  in  the  au-
tumn of  1860  to  Miami  county,  Ohio.  In  the
spring  of  1861  he  enlistetl  as  a  private  in  the  11th


196


READ


READ


Ohio  infantry,  and  in  August  he  joined  the  Ist
Ohio  cavalry.  He  was  coininissioned  2d  Ueutenant
soon  afterward,  promoted  1st  lieutenant,  12  March,
1862,  captain,  1  April,  1863,  and  brevet  major,  23
Nov.,  1863.  He  participated  in  all  the  campaigns
and  battles  of  his  regiment,  which  formed  part  of
Loring's  cavalry  brigade,  Army  of  the  Cumberland,
and  during  his  service  was  never  absent  from  duty
except  while  he  was  a  prisoner  for  eielit  days.
After  leaving  the  army  he  entered  the  Wesleyan
university,  Delaware,  Ohio,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1867.  lie  afterward  returned  to  Pennsylvania,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1868.
In  1869-'73  he  was  assessor  of  internal  revenue.
Removing  to  Minnesota,  he  then  became  editor
of  the  >iinneapolis  "  Tribune,"  but  in  May,  1877,
he  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  and  in  November
was  elected  a  judge  of  probate  for  Hennepin  county.
He  was  next  elected  judge  of  the  4th  Minnesota
district,  and  in  November.  1886,  was  re-elected  for
the  term  of  six  years.  He  was  quartermaster-gen-
eral of  Minnesota  from  1883  till  1886.  holding  the
rank  of  brigadier-general,  and  in  1887  was  chosen
commander-in-chief  of  the  Grand  army  of  the  re-
public at  the  national  encampment  at  St.  Louis.

READ,  Charles,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
1  Feb..  1715;  d.  probably  in  North  Carolina
about  1780.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was
mavor  of  Philadelphia  in  1725,  sheriff  of  the  county
in  1729-31,  collector  of  excise  in  1725-'34,  after-
ward collector  of  the  port  of  Burlington,  N.  J.,  and
at  his  death  was  a  provincial  councillor  and  sole
judge  uf  the  admiralty.  The  son  succeeded  his
father  as  collector  of  the  port  of  Burlington,  stud-
ied law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1753.
About  1760  he  became  an  associate  justice  of  the
supreme  court,  which  office,  as  well  as  that  of  col-
lector, he  held  till  the  Revolution,  acting  for  a  time
as  chief  justice  on  the  death  of  Robert  H.  Morris
in  1764.  He  was  several  times  mayor  of  Burling-
ton. He  was  chosen  colonel  of  a  regiment  of
militia  in  1776,  was  a  deputy  to  the  convention
to  frame  a  new  constitution,  and  on  18  July  was
made  colonel  of  a  battalion  of  the  flying  camp,  but
in  December  he  made  his  submission  to  the  British.
Bancroft,  in  an  early  edition  of  his  "  History  of  the
United  States,"  confounded  Gen.  Joseph  Reed  with
the  officer  that  submitted  to  Sir.  William  Howe.
Read  was  afterward  taken  prisoner  by  the  Ameri-
cans and  sent  to  Philadelphia,  whence  he  was  re-
moved to  North  Carolina.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  American  philosophical  society.
— His  brother,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  29  Jan.,  1716;  d.  there,  17  Oct.,  1793,  studied
law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  September,  1742.
He  was  deputy  prothonotary  of  the  supreme  court
of  the  province,  and  also  a  justice  of  the  peace.
About  tne  time  of  the  formation  of  Berks  county
he  settled  in  Reading,  where  in  1752  he  became
the  first  prothonotary,  register  of  wills,  and  clerk
of  the  courts,  which  offices  he  held  for  more  than
twenty-five  years.  He  served  in  the  general  assem-
bly in  1777,  and  in  the  supreme  executive  council
from  June,  1778,  till  October,  1781.  From  1781
till  1783  he  was  register  of  the  admiralty.  In
1783  he  became  one  of  the  council  of  censors
whose  duty  it  was  to  propose  amendments  to  the
constitution.  From  1787  till  1790  he  was  again
a  member  of  the  executive  council.  Shortly  after-
ward he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  re-
sided until  his  death.  He  wa.s  a  man  of  scholarly
attainments.  His  corresjx)ndence,  which  is  still  in
existence,  besides  remarks  on  gardening  and  ob-
servations of  nature,  gives  his  views  on  education
and  politics  and  criticisms  on  current  French  and


English  works.  His  death  was  caused  by  yellow
feter  during  the  great  epidemic. — James's  son,
Collinsuii.  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1751;  d.  in
Reading.  Pa..  1  March,  1815,  studied  law  at  the
Temple,  London,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
lierks  county  on  13  Aug.,  1772.  He  was  aprx)inted
deputy  register  of  wills  for  the  county,  and  after-
ward practised  law  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  a
presidential  elector  when  George  Washington  was
first  chosen  president  of  the  United  States.  He
published  a  "  Digest  of  the  Laws  of  Pennsylvania"
(Philadelphia,  1^1) ;  "  Abridgment  of  the  Laws  of
Pennsylvania"  (1804);  "American  Pleader's  As-
sistant "  (1806) ;  and  "  Precedents  in  the  Office  of  a
Justice  of  the  Peace  "  (3d  ed.,  1810).  His  daughter,
Sarah,  married  Gen.  William  Gates.

READ,  Daniel,  composer,  b.  in  Attleborough,
Mass.,  16  Nov.,  1757;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in
1841.  He  was  a  manufacturer  of  combs  in  New
Haven,  but  at  the  same  time  cultivated  music,  and
published  in  1791  "The  American  Singing-Book,
or  a  New  and  Easy  Guide  to  the  Art  of  Psalmodj,"
and  in  1793  "Columbian  Harmony,"  a  collection
of  devotional  music.  Subsequently  he  published  a
"  New  Collection  of  Psalm-Tunes,''  which  came  to
be  known  as  the  "  Litchfield  Collection,"  containing
many  tunes  of  his  own  composition  (Dedham,  1805).
"  Windham,"  "  Greenwich,"  "  Sherburne,"  "  Rus-
sia," "  Stafford,"  and  others  of  Read's  hymn-tunes
are  still  in  general  use  in  American  churches.

READ,  Daniel,  educator,  b.  in  Marietta,  Ohio,
24  June,  1805;  d.  in  Keokuk,  Iowa,  3  Oct.,  187a
He  was  graduated  at  Ohio  university  in  1824,  and
for  eleven  years  was  principal  of  the  preparatory
department,  at  the  same  time  studying  law,  and
obtaining  admission  to  the  bar,  although  he  never
practised.  He  became  professor  of  ancient  lan-
guages in  the  university  in  1836,  and  when,  in
1838,  a  separate  professorship  of  Greek  was  estab-
lished, taught  political  economy  in  connection  with
Latin  till  1843,  when  he  accepted  the  chair  of  lan-
guages at  the  Indiana  state  university.  He  was  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of
Indiana  in  1850.  In  1853-'4  he  performed  the
duties  of  president  of  the  university.  In  1856  he
became  professor  of  mental  and  moral  philosophy
in  Wisconsin  university,  and  in  1863  entered  on
the  presidency  of  Missouri  state  universitv,  Colum-
bia, which  oflBce  he  filled  until  1876.  lie  was  a
frequent  speaker  on  educational  subjects. — His
brother,  Abner,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Urbana,  Ohio,
5  April,  1821 ;  d.  in  Baton  Rouge,  La,,  12  July,
1863.  was  educated  at  the  Ohio  university,  but
left  in  his  senior  year,  having  received  an  appoint-
ment as  midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy.  After  a
voyage  to  South  America,  he  studied  for  a  year  at
the  Naval  school  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  appointed
acting  sailing-master,  in  which  capacity  he  gained
a  reputation  as  a  navigator.  He  took  part  in  the
later  naval  operations  of  the  Mexican  war,  and  in
1855  was  placed  on  the  retired  list  with  the  rank
of  lieutenant,  but  was  afterward  reinstated  by  the
examining  board.  In  the  early  part  of  the  ci\il
war  he  jierformed  important  services  as  commander
of  the  "  Wyandotte '  in  .'^aving  Fort  Pickens  from
falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Confederates.  He
was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  "New  Lon-
don "  in  1862,  and  cruised  in  Mississippi  sound,
taking  more  than  thirty  prizes,  and  breaking  up
the  trade  between  New  Orleans  and  Mobile.  He
captured  a  battery  at  Biloxi,  and  had  several  en-
gagements with  Confederate  steamers.  He  was
commissioned  lieutenant-commander  on  16  July,
and  commander  on  13  Sept.,  1862.  ,In  June,  1863,
he was placed in charge  of  the steam sloop


READ


READ


197


"  Mononprahelo,"  And,  while  onf^aging  the  batteries
above  IhnmUIsonville,  nToived  a  fatal  wound.
— Danii'l's  w»n,  Theodore,  soldier,  h.  in  Athens,
Ohio.  11  April.  188<J:  d.  near  Kannville.  Va..  5
April,  1HG5.  was  gradimt«>4l  at  the  Indiana  state
university  in  1854.  Htudieil  law,  was  a|i|x)inted
district  attorney,  afterwanl  held  a  clerkship  in  the
interior  de|»artinent  at  Washini^ton,  and  in  1860
beiran  nractisinjjr  law  at  Paris,  111.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  enlist***],  and  serve*!  his
term  of  three  months  in  the  ranks.  He  was  then
given  a  staff  apriointnu'nt  with  the  rank  of  cap-
tain, 24  Oct.,  IHol,  rweived  a  wouritl  at  Chaiicel-
lorsville,  at  Gettysburg,  and  for  the  third  time  at
Cold  Harljor.  He  was  promoted  major  on  2^>  Julv,
1864,  an<l  was  chief  of  staff  to  (len.  E*lward  O.  i\
Ord  fr*)ra  the  time  when  the  latter  took  command
of  a  ct»rps  in  the  Army  of  the  James.  He  served  in
various  battles  in  Gen.  Grant's  campaign,  and  on
29  .Sept.,  1864,  was  bre vetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  for  services  in  the  field.  He  lost  his
life  in  the  last  encounter  between  the  armies  of
Gens,  (trant  and  I.iee.  (Jen.  Ord  had  directetl  Gen,
Read  to  burn  the  bridge  at  Farmville,  in  the  line
of  I^ee's  retreat.  The  small  party  was  overtaken
by  the  advance  of  the  entire  Confederate  armv,  and
surrendered  after  everv  officer  ha*l  been  killetf,  hav-
ing, however,  accomplishe*!  its  purijose  of  checking
Lee's  movement. (See  Dearixo,  James.)

READ,  (jeorge  Campbell,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Ireland  aJwut  1787;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22
Aug..  1862.  He  came  to  the  United  States  at  an
early  age,  was  api>ointed  a  midshipman  in  the  navy
on  2'  April,  1804,  and  advanced  to  the  rank  of  lieu-
tenant on  25  April,  1810.  He  was  3d  lieutenant  on
the  "Constitution"  when  the  British  frigate
"  Guerriere  "  was  captured,  and  Capt.  Isaac  Hull  as-
signed to  him  the  honor  of  receiving  the  surrender
of  Capt.  James  It.  Dacres,  the  British  commander.
He  took  an  atrtive  |)art  in  other  engagements  of  the
war  of  1812,  and  near  its  close  commanded  the
brig  "Chip|)ewa,"  of  the  flying  8qua(^lron  com-
manded by  Com.  Oliver  H.  Perry  that  was  sent
out  to  destroy  the  enemy's  commerce.  He  was
pr*)moted  commander  on  27  April,  1816,  and  cap-
tain on  'S  March,  1825,  t<X)k  cnarge  of  the  East
India  squatlron  in  1840.  and  of  the  ."^juadron  on
the  coast  of  Africa  in  1846,  and,  after  commanding
the  Mediterranean  squadron  for  some  time,  was

? laced  on  the  reserve  list  on  13  Sept.,  1855.  In
861  he  was  appointed  governor  of  the  Naval  asylum
in  Philadelphia,  and  on  31  July,  1862.  by  virtue  of
an  act  of  congress  that  had  l)een  recently  passed,
was  made  a  rear-admiral  on  the  retire*!  list.

RE).\D,  Mollis,  missionarv,  b.  in  Newfane,  Vt,
86  Aug..  1802;  d.  in  Somenille.  N.  J.,  7  April,
1887.  He  was  graduaU'd  at  Williams  in  1826,
studied  theology  at  Princeton  seminary,  was  or-
dained as  an  evangelist  at  Ncwburyport,  Mass.,
24  Sept,  1829,  and  in  the  following  year  sailed  for
India.  He  laUtred  for  five  years  as  a  missionary
in  Bombay,  then  returned  to  the  Unite*!  States,
and  was  for  two  years  an  agent  for  the  American
board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions.  He
was  |>a»tor  in  18:i7-'8  of  the  Presbyterian  churc-h
at  Babylon.  L.  I.,  and  in  1838-'43  of  the  Congri'ga-
tional  church  at  Derbv,  Conn.  He  was  agent  f*)r
the  American  tract  society  in  184JJ-'4,  pastor  of  the
Congregational  churt;h  at  New  Preston,  Conn.,  in
184«^'51,  a  te»K*her  at  Orange  and  agent  for  the
Society  for  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  in  18ol-'5,
and  afterwanl  preache*!  at  Cranfonl.  N.  J.,  till  1864.
He  published  "Journal  in  Intlia"(New  York.  IKi.'i);
"Babaiee.  the  Christian  Brahmin"  (New  Y<trk,  1837);
"  The  Hand  of  God  in  History  "(Hartfonl,  1848-'52),


which  was  republished  in  England  and  had  great
jKipularitv ;  "  Memoirs  aii<l  Senmms  of  W.  J,  Arm-
stn.ng,  I).  D."  (New  York,  1851);  "Palace  of  the
(}r»'at  King"  (New  York,  1855);  "Commerce  ami
Chrisfianifv."  a  prize  essay  (Phila*lelphiu.  1856);
'•  India  and  its  Pe<iple,  Ancient  and  Modem"  (Co-
lumbus. 1858);  "  The  Coming  Crisis  of  the  World  "
(Columbus.  1858) ;  "  The  Negro  Problem  .Solve<I,  or
Africa  as  She  Was,  as  She  Is,  and  as  She  Shall
Be"  (New  York,  1864);  and  "The  F<Kit|»rints  of
Satan"  (1866).  Rev.  William  Ramsey  published
an  account  of  a  missionary  tour  in  "irulia  made
with  Mr.  Read.

READ,  Jacob,  senator,  b.  in  .South  Carolina  in
1752;*!.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  17  July,  1H16.  He
received  a  liberal  education,  studie*!  law  in  Eng-
land from  1773  till  1776.  and  practised  in  Charles-
ton. During  the  Revolution  he  sen-e*!  as  a  major
of  South  Carolina  volunteers,  and  was  taken  pris-
oner, and  confined  for  four  years  at  .St.  Augustine,
Fla.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  legislature,
and  in  178Ji  was  sent  as  a  delegate  of  South  Caro-
lina to  the  Continental  congress,  of  which  bfxly
he  was  a  memlKT  till  1786.  He  was  elected  as  a
Federalist  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  takine  his  seat  on
7  Dec.,  1795,  and  when  he  had  serve*!  through  his
term,  which  ended  on  3  March,  1801,  President
John  Adams  appointed  him  judge  of  the  U.  S.
court  for  the  district  of  .South  Carolina,  which
oflUce  he  held  until  his  death.

READ,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mendon,  Mass.,  about
1673;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  7  Feb.,  1749.  He  was
graduate*!  at  Harvard  in  1697,  studie*!  theology',
and  was  for  some  time  a  popular  preacher.  Sub-
sequently he  studied  law,  and  attained  eminence
at  the  bar.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  pro-
vincial house  of  representatives,  and  of  the  coun-
cil during  Gov.  William  Shirley's  administration.
He  contributed  greatly  to  the  refonu  of  legal
phraseology,  being  the'  first  to  reduce  the  anti-
quated forms  and  redundant  phrases  of  deeds  of
conveyance  to  simpler  and  clearer  language.

READ,  John,  planter,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  in
1088;  d.  at  his  seat  in  Delaware,  17  June,  1756.
He  was  the  son  of  an  English  gentleman  of  large
fortune  belonging  to  the  family  of  Rea<!  of  BerK-
shire,  Hertfortlshire.  and  Oxfordshire.  Having  re-
ceived a  severe  shock  by  the  death  of  a  y*»ung  lady
to  whom  he  was  attached,  he  came  to  the  American
colonies  and,  with  a  view  of  diverting  his  mind,
entered  into  extensive  enterprises  in  Mar}-land  and
Delaware.  He  purchased,  soort  after  his  arrival,  a
large  landetl  estate  in  Cecil  count  v,  Md.,and  founded,
with  six  ass*x;iates.  the  city  of  Oharlestown.  on  the
head-waters  of  Chesa|^ake  l)ay,  twelve  years  after
Baltimore  was  begun,  with  the  intention  of  creating
a  rival  mart  for  the  northern  trade,  and  thus  de-
veloning  northern  Maryland  and  building  up  the
neignlx)ring  iron-works  of  the  Principio  company,
in  which  the  older  generations  of  the  Washington
family  and,  at  a  later  peri*xl,  the  general  himself,
were  also  largely  interested.  As  an  original  proprie-
tor of  the  town,  he  was  ap{>ointed  by  the  colonial
legislature  of  Maryland  one  of  the  commissioners  to
lay  it  out  and  goveni  it.  He  held  various  militarv
offices  during  his  life,  and  in  his  later  years  resided
on  his  plantation  in  Newcastle  county,  Del. — His
eldest  son,  tieorge,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  at  the  familv-seat,  Cecil  county,
Md.,  17  Sept.,  1733  ;  d.  in  Newcastle,  Del..  21  Sept..
1798.  was  *)ne  of  the  two  statesmen,  and  the  only
southern  one.  that  signe*!  the  three  great  state  |ia-
|)ers  that  un«lerlie  the  foun*lations  of  our  govern-
ment:  the  original  petiti*m  to  the  kin^of  the  1st
Continental  c*)ngre8s,  the  Declaration  of  Independ-


198


READ


READ


/^^/^^


ence,  and  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  He
received  u  classical  education,  first  at  Chester.  Pa.,
and  afterward  at  New  London,  and  at  the  age  of
nineteen  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia  bar.  He
removed  in  1754  to  Newcastle,  where  the  family
had  large  landed  estates.  While  holding  the  ofBce
of  attorney-general  of  Kent,  Delaware,  and  Sussex

counties  in  1763-
'74,  he  pointed  out
to  the  British  gov-
ernment the  dan-
ger of  taxing  the
colonies  without
giving  them  direct
representation  in
parliament,  and  in
a  letter  to  Sir
Richard  Neave,  af-
terward governor
of  the  Bank  of
England,  written
in  1765,  he  prophe-
sied that  a  con-
tinuance in  such  a
policv  would  ulti-
mately lead  not
only  to  independ-
ence, but  to  the
colonies  surpass-
ing England  in  her  staple  manufactures.  He  was
for  twelve  years  a  member  of  the  Delaware  as-
sembly, during  which  period,  as  chairman  of  its
committee,  he  wrote  the  address  to  the  king  which
Lord  Shelburne  said  so  impressed  George  IIL
that  the  latter  read  it  twice.  Chagrined  at  the
unchanged  attitude  of  the  mother  country,  he  re-
signed the  attorney-generalship,  and  was  elected
to  the  first  congress  which  met  at  Philadelphia
in  1774.  Although  he  voted  against  independence,
he  finally  signed  the  Declaration,  and  thenceforth
was  one  of  the  stanehest  supporters  of  the  cause  of
the  colonies.  He  was  president  of  the  first  naval
committee  in  1775:  of  the  Constitutional  conven-
tion in  1776;  author  of  the  first  constitution  of
Delaware,  and  the  first  edition  of  her  laws ;  vice-
president  of  Delaware,  and  acting  president  of  that
state  after  the  capture  of  President  McKinley ;
judge  of  the  national  court  of  admiralty  cases  in
1 782 ;  and  a  commissioner  to  settle  a  territorial  con-
troversy between  Massachusetts  and  New  York  in
1785.  Mr.  Read  was  a  delegate  to  the  Annapolis
convention  in  1786,  which  gave  rise  to  the  conven-
tion that  met  in  Philadelphia  in  1787  and  framed
the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  In  the  lat-
ter convention  he  ably  advocated  the  rights  of  the
smaller  states  to  an  equal  representation  in  the
U.  S.  senate.  He  was  twice  elected  U.  S.  senator,
serving  from  1789  till  1793,  when  he  resigned  to
assume  the  office  of  chief  justice  of  Delaware,
which  post  he  filled  until  his  death.  In  person.
Read  was  tall,  slightly  and  gracefully  formed,  with
pleasing  features  and  lustrous  brown  eyes.  His
manners  were  dignified,  bordering  upon  austerity,
but  courteous,  and  at  times  captivating.  He  com-
manded entire  confidence,  not  only  from  his  pro-
found legal  knowledge,  sound  judgment,  and  im-
partial decisions,  but  from  his  severe  integrity  and
the  purity  of  his  private  character.  He  married  in
1763  Gertrude,  daughter  of  the  Rev.  George  Ross,
and  sister  of  George  Ross,  a  signer  of  the  Declara-
tion. See  his  "  Life  and  Correspondence,"  by  Will-
iam T.  Read  (Philadelphia,  1870).— Another  son,
Thomas,  naval  oflScer,  b.  in  Newcastle,  Del.,  in  1740;
d.  at  White  Hill,  N.  J.,  26  Oct.,  1788,  was  the  first
naval  officer  to  obtain  the  rank  of  commodore  in


command  of  an  American  fleet.  He  was  appointed
on  23  Oct.,  1775,  commodore  of  the  Pennsylvania
navy,  having  as  the  surgeon  of  his  fleet  Dr.  Benja-
min Rush,  and  while  holding  this  command  he
made  a  successful  defence  of  the  Delaware.  He
was  appointed,  7  June,  1776,  to  the  highest  grade  in
the  Continental  navy,  and  assigned  to  one  of  its  four
largest  ships,  the  32-gun  frigate  "  George  Wash-
ington," then  building  on  Delaware  river.  While
awaiting  the  completion  of  his  ship  he  volunteered
for  land  service,  and  was  sent  as  captain  by  the  com-
mittee of  safety  to  join  Washington.  He  gave  valu-
able assistance  in  the  crossing  of  the  Delaware,  and
at  the  battle  of  Trenton  commanded  a  battery
made  up  of  guns  from  his  frigate,  and  with  it  raked
the  stone  bridge  across  the  Assanpink.  For  this  ser-
vice he  received  the  formal  thanks  of  all  the  general
officers  that  participated  in  that  action,  as  is  stated
in  a  letter  of  14  Jan.,  1777,  written  by  his  brother,
Col.  James  Read  (who  was  near  him  during  the  en-
gagement), to  his  wife.  After  much  service  on  sea
and  land  he  resigned  his  commission,  and,  retiring
to  his  seat  near  Bordentown,  N.  J.,  dispensed  a  lib-
eral hospitality  to  his  old  companions-in-arms,  espe-
cially to  his  brother  members  of  the  Society  of  the
Cincinnati.  Shortly  afterward  he  was  induced  by
his  friend,  Robert  Morris,  to  take  command  of  his
old  frigate,  the  "  Alliance,"  which  had  recently  been
bought  by  Morris  for  commercial  purposes,  and
make  a  joint  adventure  to  the  China  seas.  Taking
with  him  as  chief  officer  one  of  his  old  subordinates,
Richard  Dale,  afterward  Com.  Dale,  and  George
Harrison,  who  became  an  eminent  citizen  of  Phila-
delphia, as  supercargo,  he  sailed  from  the  Delaware,
7  June,  1787,  and  arrived  at  Canton  on  22  Dec.,
following,  after  sailing  on  a  track  that  had  never
before  been  taken  by  any  other  vessel,  and  making
the  first  "  out-of-season  "  passage  to  China.  In  this
voyage  he  discovered  two  islands,  which  he  named,
respectively,  "  Morris  "  and  "  Alliance  "  islands,  and
which  form  part  of  the  Caroline  group.  By  this
discovery  the  United  States  became  entitled  to
rights  which  have  never  been  properly  asserted.
In  his  obituary  of  Read,  Robert  Morris  said :
"While  integrity,  benevolence,  patriotism,  and  cour-
age, united  with  the  most  gentle  manners,  are  re-
spected and  admired  among  men,  the  name  of  this
valuable  citizen  and  soldier  will  be  revered  and  be-
loved by  all  who  knew  him." — Another  son,  James,
soldier,  b.  at  the  family-seat,  Newcastle  county,
Del.,  in  1743  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  31  Dec,  1822,  was

f)romoted  from  1st  lieutenant  to  colonel  for  gaj-
ant  services  at  the  battles  of  Trenton,  Princeton,
Brandywine,  and  Gerraantown,  appointed  by  con-
gress, 4  Nov.,  1778,  one  of  the  three  commissioners
of  the  navy  for  the  middle  states,  and  on  11  Jan.,
1781,  was  invested  by  the  same  body  with  sole  power
to  conduct  the  navy  board.  When  his  friend,  Roljert
Morris,  became  agent  he  was  elected  secretary,  and
was  the  virtual  head  of  the  marine  department,
while  Morris  managed  the  finances  of  the  American
confederacy. — George's  son.  John,  lawyer,  b.  in
Newcastle,  Del.,  7  July,  1769 ;  d.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,
13  July,  1854,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1787,
studied  law  with  his  father,  and,  removing  in  1789
to  Philadelphia,  rose  to  high  rank  in  his  profession.
He  was  appointed  in  1797  by  President  Adams
agent-general  of  the  United  States  under  Jay's
treaty,  and  held  that  office  until  its  expiration  in
1809.  Mr.  Read  was  also  a  member  oi  the  su-
preme and  common  councils  of  Philadelphia  and  of
the  Pennsylvania  legislature,  and  in  1816  chairman
of  its  celebrated  committee  of  seventeen.  He  suc-
ceeded Nicholas  Biddle  in  the  Pennsylvania  senate
in  1816,  was  state  director  of  the  Philadelpliia  bank


READ


READ


109


in  1817,  and  «iicc«><linjf  his  wifo's  unolp,  Oeorpp  C\y-
mer,  «.<«  pivi«itlent  of  that  Iwrik  in  IN  11).  hu  filltHl  that
post  till  1841.  when  he  n>«iffniHl.  He  whs  promitient
in  the  cttunrils  of  the  Kpixcoiml  chun-h.  During
th«  yellow-fever  plapie  in  Philadelphin  in  179H,
Mr.  liead  and  Stephen  (liranl  reniaine<l  in  the
citv,  and  he  o^K>ne«l  Ms  purs(>  and  ex|Nts(Ml  his  life
in  behalf  of  his  sufTerin>;  fellow-citizens.  Mr.  Kend
was  the  author  of  a  valiiuble  w(»rk  entitleil  "Arjfu-
raents  on  the  British  Dclits  "  (Phihwielphia,  ITOH).
—John's  son,  John  Meredith,  jurist.  !>.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa,.  21  July.  17»7;  d.  in  Philwlelphia,  29
Nov.,  1H74.  was  ^nuluate<l  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1812,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1818.  '  He  was  a  memlwr  of  the  Pennsylvania
le^slature  in  1822-'!i,  city  solicitor  and  niend)er
of  the  select  council,  in  which  capacity  he  «lrow  up
the  first  clear  ex[)osition  of  the  finances  of  Phila-
delphin. U.  S.  attorney  for  the  eaistern  <listrict  of
Pennsylvania  in  1837-'44,  solicitor-general  of  the
Unite<i  States,  attorney  general  of  Pennsylvania,
and  chief  justice  of  that  state  from  1860  until  his
death.  He  early  became  a  Democrat,  and  was  one
of  the  founders  of  the  free-soil  wing  of  that  party.
This  induce<l  opposition  to  his  ctmfirmation  by  the
U.  S.  senate  wnen  he  was  nominated  in  1H45  as
judge  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  and  caused  him
to  withdraw  his  name.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest
and  stnnchest  atlvocates  of  the  annexation  of  Texas
and  the  building  of  railroads  to  the  Pacific,  and
was  also  a  powerful  supporter  of  President  Jack-
son in  his  war  against  the  U.  S.  bank.  He  was
leading  counsel  with  Thaddcus  Stevens  and  Judge
Joseph  J,  Ijcwis  in  the  defence  of  Castner  Hanway
for  constructive  treason,  his  speech  on  this  occasion
giving  him  a  wide  reput-ation.  He  enteretl  the
Itepublican  party  on  its  formation,  and  at  the  lie-
ginning  of  the  presidential  canvass  of  185Gdelivered
a  speech  on.  the  "  Power  of  Congress  over  Slavery
in  the  Territories."  which  was  used  throughout
that  canvass  (Philadelphia,  la'iG).  The  Repub-
lican party  gained  its  first  victory  in  Pennsyl-
vania m  18,58,  electing  him  judge  of  the  supreme
court  by  ;JO,0<K)  majority.  Ihis  brought  him  for-
ward as  a  candidate  for  the  presi«k'ncv  of  the
United  States  in  1860 ;  and  Abraham  t^incoln's
fri(<hd8  were  prepared  to  nominate  him  for  that
office,  with  the  former  for  the  vice-pri'sidency,
which  arrangement  was  defeated  l)y  Simon  Cam-
eron in  the  Pennsylvania  Republican  convention
in  February  of  that  year,  tie  nevertheless  re-
ceived several  votes  in  tlie  Chicago  convention,  not-
withstanding that  all  his  personal  infiuencc  was
usetl  in  favor  of  Mr.  Lincoln.  The  opinions  of
Judge  Read  run  through  forty-one  volumes  of  re-

Krts.  His  "  Views  on  the  Suspension  of  the  Ha-
is  Corpus  "  (Philadelphia,  18613)  were  adoptetl  as
the  basis  of  the  act  of  3  March,  1863,  which  author-
ized the  president  of  the  United  States  to  susjH'tid
the  habeas  corpus  act.  He  refustnl  an  injunc-
tion to  prevent  the  running  of  horse-cars  on  Sun-
day, since  he  could  not  consent  to  stop  "  |MH)r
men's  carriages."  Many  thousand  copies  of  this
opinion  (Philadelphia,  1867)  were  pnnte<l.  His
amendments  form  an  essential  j»art  of  the  consti-
tutions of  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey,  and  his
id^as  were  formulated  in  many  of  the  statutes  of
the  United  .States.  Bmwn  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  I),  in  1H60.  Judge  Read  was  the  author  of
a  great  numlter  of  publisheil  a<ldresses  and  legal
opinions.  Among  them  are  "  Plan  for  the  Admin-
istration of  the  Girard  Trust "(I'hiladelphia,  IKW);
"The  Ijaw  of  Evidence"  (1864);  and  "Jefferson
Davis  and  his  Complicity  in  the  Assassination  of
Abraham  Lincolu  "  (186d). — John  Meredith's  son.


John  Meredith,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
21  Feb.,  1H.'{7,  rei-eived  his  e<lucation  at  a  military
M'hool  and  at  Brown,  where  ho  nnwived  the  degree
of  A.  M,  in  18<M{,  WH."  gnuluated  at  Allianv  law-
school  in  18.'>9.  studiinl  international  law  in  Eu-
ro(M>,  was  ailmitted  t4>  the  bar  in  Pliilwlelphia,  and
afterwani  remov«Hl  to  Allmny.  N.  Y.  He  was  ad-
jutant-general of  New  York  in  1860-'6,  was  one  of
the  originators  <»f  the  "Wide-Awake"  itolitical
cIuIm  in  1860.  Ho  was  chairman  in  April  of  the
same  year  of  the  ccunmittee  of  thn^e  to  draft  a
bill  iti  U'half  of  New  York  state.  a{>prr>priating
|m)00.0(K)  for  the  purchase  of  arms  and  iHjuipments,
and  he  sultsequently  received  the  thanks  of  the
war  department  for  his  ability  and  zeal  in  organ-
izing.  equipping,  and  forwardmg  troops.  He  was
first  U.  S.  consul-g«'nenil  for  France  and  Algeria
in  1869-'73  and  lH70-'2.  acting  consul-general  for
(lermany  during  the  Franco-German  war.  After
the  war  he  was  ap|>ointed  by  (>en.  de  Ciss«'y.  minis-
ter of  war,  to  form  and  preside  over  a  commission  to
examine  into  the  desirability  of  teaching  the  Eng-
lish language  to  the  P'rench  troops.  In  November,
1873.  he  was  ap]K>inted  U.  S.  mmister  resident  in
Greece.  One  or  his  first  acts  was  to  secure  the
release  of  the  American  ship  "  Armenia  "  and  to
obtain  from  the  Greek  government  a  revocation  of
the  onler  that  prohibited  the  sale  of  the  Bible  in
Greece.  During  the  Russt)-Turkish  war  he  dis-
covered that  only  one  fmrt  in  Russia  was  still  open,
and  he  |x)intetl  out  to  Secretary  Evarts  the  advan-
tages that  would  accrue  to  the  commerce  of  the
United  States  were  a  grain-fleet  despatche<l  from
New  York  to  that  port.  The  event  justified  his
judgment,  sinc-e  the  exf)orts  of  cereals  from  the
United  States  showed  an  increase  withiti  a  year  of
$73,000,000.  While  minister  to  Greece  he  received
the  thanks  of  his  government  for  his  effectual  pro-
tection of  American  persons  and  interests  in  the
dangerous  crisis  of  18(8.  Soon  afterward  congress,
from  motives  of  economy,  refused  the  appropria-
tion for  tHe  legation  at  Athens,  and  Gen.  Head,
bi'lieving  that  the  time  was  too  critical  to  with-
dniw  the  mission,  carried  it  on  at  his  individual
expense  until  his  resignation.  23  Sept.,  1879.  In
1881,  when,  owing  in  part  to  his  efforts,  after  his
resignation,  the  territory  that  had  l)een  adjudged  to
Greece  had  been  finally  transferred.  King  (Jeorge
created  him  a  Knight  grand  cross  of  the  order  of
the  Redeemer,  the  highest  dignity  in  the  gift  of
the  Greek  government,  (ien.  Itead  was  president
of  the  Social  science  congrt'ss  at  Albany.  N.  Y.,  in
1868,  and  vice-president  of  the  one  at  Plyujouth,
England,  in  1872.  He  is  the  author  of  an"His-
toriwil  FInquiry  coiu-erning  Henry  Hudson,"  which
first  threw  light  ujion  his  origin,  and  the  sources
of  the  ideas  that  guided  that  navigator  (.Mbany,
1866),  and  contributions  to  current  literature.

READ,  Nathan,  inventor,  b.  in  Warren,  Mass.,
2  July.  1759;  d.  near  lii'lfast.  Me.,  20  Jan.,  1849.
He  was  grmluate<l  at  Harvard  in  1781,  and  con-
tinue<l  there  as  tutor  for  four  years.  In  1788  he
began  exjierimenting  with  a  view  of  utilizing  the
steam-engine  for  prt)|H'iling  Ix^iats  and  carriages,  by
devising  lighter  and  morecom|^K't  nuu-hinery  than
that  in  common  use.  He  invented  as  a  substitute
for  the  great  working-lK?«m  t  he  cross-head  running
in  guides  with  a  connect ing-riKl  to  communicate
the  motion,  similar  to  that  adoj»ted  by  Robert
Fulton  in  his  "Car  of  Neptune.'  The  "  new  in-
vented cylinder,"  »us  he  calls  it,  to  which  this
working-?rame  was  attached,  was  a  double-acting
cylinder.  To  n«nder  the  Ijoiler  more  i»ortable.
Read  invented  the  multitubular  form,  which  was
patented  with  the  cylinder,  chain-wheel,  and  other


200


READ


READ


appliances.  This  boiler  was  either  horizontal  or
upright,  cylindrical,  and  contained  the  furnace
within  itself.  A  double  cylinder  formed  a  water-
jacket,  connecting  with  a  water-  and  steam-cham-
ber above,  and  a  narrow  water-chamber  below.
Numerous  small,  straight  tubes  parallel  to  the
axis  of  the  boiler,  and  about  three  quarters  its
length,  connected  these  chambers.  He  also  in-
vented another  form  of  boiler,  in  which  the  fire
passed  through  small  spiral  tubes  on  the  principle
of  the  present  locomotive-boiler,  an  arrangement
that  had  the  advantage  of  consuming  the  smoke.
In  addition  he  had  several  other  forms  with  nu-
merous apartments,  to  which  the  water  was  to  be
gradually  admitted  as  fast  as  it  was  evaporated.
As  a  means  of  communicating  motion  to  his  steam-
boat, he  first  tried  to  use  paddle-wheels ;  but,  as
these  had  been  used  before,  ne  substituted  a  chain-
wheel  of  his  own  invention.  He  planned  a  steam-
carriage,  which,  with  his  tulmlar  boiler,  he  said
could  move  at  the  rate  of  five  miles  an  hour,
with  a  load  of  fifty  tons.  In  1796  he  established
the  Salem  iron-foundry,  where  he  manufactured
anchors,  chain-cables,  and  similar  articles,  and  in-
vented a  machine  that  was  patented  in  January,
1798,  for  cutting  and  heading  nails  at  one  opera-
tion. He  also  invented  a  method  of  equalizing
the  action  of  windmills  by  accumulating  the  force
of  the  wind  by  winding  up  a  weight ;  a  plan  for
using  the  force  of  the  tide  by  means  of  reservoirs,
alternately  filled  and  emptied  in  such  a  way  as  to
produce  a  constant  stream ;  different  forms  of
pumping-engines  and  thrashing-machines;  and  a
plan  for  using  the  expansion  and  contraction  of
metals,  multiplied  by  levers,  for  winding  up  clocks
and  other  purposes.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Federalist  in  1800,  and  served  till  3  March,  1803.
He  removed  to  the  vicinity  of  Belfast,  Me.,  in  1807,
where  he  cultivated  a  large  tract  of  land,  and  was
appointed  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.
In  1787  he  received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Dartmouth,  and  he  was  a  member  of  the
American  academy  of  arts  ahd  sciences.  Mr.  Read
was  the  first  petitioner  for  a  patent  before  the

fatent  law  was  enacted.  See  "  Nathan  Read :  His
nvention  of  the  Multitubular  Boiler  and  Portable
High-Pressure  Engine,"  bv  his  nephew,  David
Read  (New  York,  1870).

READ,  Thomas,  patriot,  b.  in  Lunenburg
county,  Va.,  in  1745;  d.  at  Ingleside,  Charlotte  co.,
Va.,  4  Feb.,  1817.  His  father.  Col.  Clement,  was
clerk  of  Lunenburg  county  in  1744-'65,  for  many

{rears  a  member  of  the  house  of  burgesses,  and  a
arge  landed  proprietor.  Thomas  was  educated  at
William  and  Mary,  began  life  as  a  surveyor,  and
from  1770  until  his  death  was  clerk  of  Charlotte
county.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  in  1775,  supporting  his  neighbor
Patrick  Henry,  was  county  lieutenant  throughout
the  Revolution,  and  rendered  valuable  service  by
supplying  the  quotas  of  Charlotte  county,  by  col-
lecting recruits,  and  by  supplementing  the  neces-
sary means  from  his  own  resources.  On  hearing
the  report  that  Lord  Comwallis  was  crossing  Dan
river,  tie  marched  at  the  head  of  a  militia  regiment
to  oppose  his  progress.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Virginia  convention  of  1776,  and  of  the  state  con-
vention of  1788  that  ratified  the  constitution  of
the  United  States.  He  was  an  ardent  adherent  of
the  politics  of  Jefferson  and  Madison,  and  advo-
cated the  second  war  with  Great  Britain  in  1812.
— His  brother,  Isaac,  soldier,  b.  in  Lunenburg
county,  Va.,  in  1746:  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4
Sept.,  1778,  was  educated  at  William  and  Mary,
lor  many  years  was  a  member  of  the  house  of  bur-


f:esses,  and  on  its  dissolution  by  order  of  Lord
Jotetourt,  was  one  of  those  that  adjourned  to
Williamsburg.  Va.,  to  form  an  as.sociation  against
the  act  of  parliament  that  imposed  duties  on  teas,
etc.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Mercantile  associa-
tion, and  of  the  Virginia  conventions  of  1774  and
of  March  and  June,  1775,  ahd  by  the  last-named
body  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th
Virginia  regiment.  He  was  promoted  colonel  in
August,  1776,  and  participated  in  the  battles  of
White  Plains,  Trenton,  and  Princeton.  His  death
resulted  from  exposure  in  camp.

READ,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  that  part  of
Maryland  that  is  now  part  of  Chester  county.  Pa.,
in  March,  1746  ;  d.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  14' June,
1823.  He  was  the  son  of  a  farmer,  who  came  to
the  United  States  from  Ireland  several  years  be-
fore Thomas's  birth.  After  his  graduation  at
Philadelphia  academy  in  1764,  the  son  became  a
tutor  in  a  cla.ssical  school  at  Newark.  Del.,  was
licensed  to  preach  in  1768,  and  was  installed  as
pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  at  Drawyer's
Creek,  Del.  In  1797  he  accepted  the  pastorate
of  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  at  Wilmington,
Del.  He  was  an  ardent  patriot  in  the  Revolution-
ary war.  In  1776  he  marched  with  a  company  of
neighbors  and  members  of  his  church  to  Philadel-
phia for  the  purpose  of  volunteering  in  the  Ameri-
can army,  arriving  just  after  the  victories  of  Tren-
ton and  Princeton,  which  rendered  its  services
unnecessary.  In  August,  1777,  he  performed  an
important  service  for  the  American  cause  by  draw-
ing for  Gen.  Washington  a  map  that  showed  the
topography  of  the  country  and  a  route  by  which
he  could  retreat  from  Stanton,  and  avoid  a  con-
flict with  the  superior  British  force  that  had  land-
ed at  Elk  ferry,  and  was  advancing  on  the  Ameri-
can camp.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Princeton  in  1796,  and  exercised  his  pastoral  func-
tions with  great  success  till  1817,  when  bodily  in-
firmities impelled  him  to  resign  his  charge.  Even
after  that  he  supplied  the  pulpit  of  the  1st  Presby-
terian church  in  Wilmington.

READ,  Thomas  Bachanan,  poet,  b.  in  Ches-
ter county.  Pa.,  12  March,  1822 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  11  May,  1872.  His  mother,  a  widow,  appren-
ticed him  to  a  tailor,  but  he  ran  awav.  learned
in  Philadelphia  the  trade  of  cigar-making,  and
in  1837  made  his  way  to  Cincinnati,  where  he
found  a  home
with  the  sculptor,
ShobalV.Cleven-
ger.  He  learned
the  trade  of  a
sign-painter,  and
attended  school
at  intervals.  Not
succeedinginCin-
cinnati,  he  went
to  Dayton,  and
obtained  an  en-
gagement in  the
theatre.  Return-
ing to  Cincinnati
in  about  a  year,
he  was  enabled
by  the  lilx-rality
of  Nicholas  Long-
worth  to  open  a  studio  as  a  portrait-painter.  He
did  not  remain  long  in  Cincinnati,  but  wandered
from  town  to  town,  painting  signs  when  he  could
find  no  sitters,  sometimes  giving  public  entertain-
ments, and  reverting  to  cigar-maKing  when  other
resources  failed.  In  1841  he  removefl  to  New  York
city,  and  within  a  year  to  Boston. While  there  he


/A<Lu>^c


5^^


KEADE


RRAOAN


201


made  his  flrat  eanj*  as  a  poet,  publitihing  in  the
"  Courier"  several  lyric  pcieins  in  1848-*4.  He  sot-
tle<l  in  I'hilHilelphiH  in  IH4<I.  nnd  visited  Kun)|M>  in
IKV).  In  1K58  he  weiit  apiin  to  Kur<>iM'.  and  devot-
e<l  hiins«df  t«»  tiio  ^tudy  nixl  pnwtifo  of  art  in  Flor-
enr»«  an«l  limine  till  IKV*.  !!«•  ufterwunl  siwiit
much  time  in  IMiiladelphia  and  Cincinnati,  but  in
the  Iiu>*t  yeHP<  of  his  life  made  Home  his  principal
residence.  While  in  the  l'nite<l  States  during  the
civil  war  he  jrnve  public  n^ailinps  for  the  benefit  of
the  soldiers,  and  n>cite<l  his  war-songs  in  the  camps
of  the  National  army.  He  diinl  while  raakin);^  a
visit  to  the  Cnite*!  States.  His  paintings,  most  of
which  deal  with  allegorical  and  mythological  suli-
jects,  ar»'  fidl  of  i)oetican<l  graceful  fancies,  but  the
te<'hnical  trt«atment  is  careless  ami  unskilful,  betray-
ing his  lack  of  earlv  training.  The  Itest  known  are
"The  Spirit  of  the  Waterfall,"  "The  Lost  Pleiad."
"The  Star  of  IMhlehem,"  "Undine,"  "  Ijongfel-
low's  Children."  "Cleopatra  and  her  Barge,"  and
"Sheridan's  Hide."  Ho  painted  portraits  of  Kliza-
beth  liarrett  Browning,  the  ex-queen  of  Naples,
Gtv.rge  M.  Dallas,  Henry  W^.  Ij<mgfellow,  and
others.  His  group  of  Ixingfellow's  daughters  was
popular  in  phot<)graph8.  He  turned  his  hand  oc-
casionally to  sculpture,  pnMlucing  one  work,  a
bust  of  Sheridan,  that  attracted  much  attention.
He  possessed  a  much  more  thorough  mastery  of
the  means  of  expression  in  the  art  of  poetry  than
in  painting.  His  poems  are  marked  by  a  fervent
spirit  of  patriotism  and  by  artistic  power  and  fidel-
ity in  the  description  of  American  scenery  and
rural  life.  His  first  volume  of  "  Poems"  (Phila-
delphia, 1847)  was  followed  by  "  Lays  and  Ballads  "
(1H4H).  He  next  made  a  collection  of  extracts  and
si>ecimens  from  the  "  F'emale  Poets  of  America  "
(i84^<),  containing  also  biographical  notices  and
i)ortraits  drawn  by  himself.  An  edition  of  his
lyrics,  with  illustrations  by  Kenny  Meadows,  ap-
peared in  Ijondon  in  18o2,  and  in  lbo3  a  new  and
enlarged  e<lition  was  published  in  Philadelphia.
A  prose  romance  entitled  "The  Pilgrims  of  the
Great  St.  Bernard"  was  publishetl  as  a  serial.
"  The  New  Pastoral,"  his  most  ambitious  poem,
describes  in  blank  verse  the  pioneer  life  of  a  family
of  emigrants  (Philadelphia,  1854).  The  more  dra-
matic and  imaginative  poem  that  followed,  entitled
"The  House  by  the  Sea"  (185G),  gainetl  for  it
more  readers  than  had  been  attractetl  by  its  own
superior  merits.  Next  apiieared  "Sylvia,  or  the
Lost  Shepherd,  and  other  Poems"  (ISflT),  and  "  A
Voyage  to  Iceland  "  (1857),  and  the  same  year  a
collection  of  his  "  Rural  Poems "  was  issue«l  in
London.  His  "Complete  Poetical  Works  "(Bos-
ton, 1860)  contained  the  longer  and  shorter  poems
that  had  been  already  published.  His  next  narra-
tive |K)em  was  "  The  "W  agoner  of  the  Alleghanies,"
a  tale  of  Revolutionary  times  (Philadelphia,  18(52).
During  the  civil  war  he  wrote  many  patriotic
Ivrics,  including  the  stirring  poem  of  "Sheridan's
ftitle,"  which  was  printed  in  a  volume  with  "  A
Summer  Story  "  and  other  pieces,  chiefly  of  the
war  (Philadelphia,  1865).  His  last  long  p<HMn  was
"The  (fCKxl  Samaritans "  (Cincinnati.  1867).  The
fullest  e<litions  of  his  "  Poetical  Works  "  were  print-
e<l  in  Pliiiadeiphia  (3  vols.,  1865  and  1867).

RE  A  UK,  John,  journalist,  b.  in  Ballyshannon,
Donegal,  Ireland,  13  Nov.,  18JJ7.  He  was  educated
at  Portora  royal  school,  Enniskillen,  and  at
Queen's  college,  Belfast,  came  to  Canada  in  1856,
and establishe<l  the  "Montreal  Literary  Magazine."
He  afterward  was  connected  with  the  Montreal
"0a2ette,"  and  for  three  years  was  rector  of  I^-
chut«  academy.  At  the  same  time  he  studied
theology,  and  wa*  ordained  in  1864  a  elergynum  of


the  Church  of  England  by  Biiihop  Fulford.  and  in
that  capacity  »crve<l  in  tlie  eastern  township*.  In
lHfl8-'9  Mr.  Reade  hwl  charge  of  the  Church  of
England  journal  in  Montreal,  and  since  1H74  he
has  Ih'ou  employ«><l  on  the  staff  of  the  Montreal
"  Gazette"  as  literary  e<litor.  He  has  contribut«-«l
to  ever>'  magazine  or  review  that  has  U^-n  ••stal>-
lisheil  in  Canada  since  1860,  an<l  has  made  transla-
tions frt)m  the  (in'ck,  Latin,  Fr«»nch,  Cicnnan,  and
Italian.  In  1887  he  was  electetl  president  of  the
Montreal  sfK'iety  for  historical  studies,  and  he  was
one  of  the  original  memlK^rs  of  the  R^iyal  s<K'ietv  of
Canada.  Among  other  works,  he  has  publisVied
"  The  Prophecy,  and  other  Poems  "  (Montn.-al,  1870) ;
"  Ijanguage  and  Conquest "  (188Ji);  "The  Making
of  Canada"  (1885);  "Literary  Faculty  of  the  Na-
tive Races  of  America  "(1885);  "The  Half -Breed"
(1886);  "  Vita  Sine  Lilxjris"  (1886);  and  "  Aborigi-
nal American  Poetry"  (1887).

READY.  Samnel,  philanthropist,  b.  near  Balti-
more, Md., 8  Manh,  1789 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  28  Nov.,
1871.  He  received  a  common-school  e<lucation,
learned  the  trade  of  a  sail-maker,  worke<l  in  the
government  navy-yard  at  Washington  for  several
years,  returned  to  lialtimore  al)out  1815,  and  en-
gage<]  in  the  business  of  sail-making,  which  he
pursue<l  with  success  till  1846,  and  after  that  the
luml)er  business  till  1861,  when  he  retire*!.  Having
observeti  the  helpless  condition  of  poor  girls  who
frequented  his  lumber-yard  and  wharves,  he  deter-
mined to  establish  an  institution  for  female  or-
phans. He  obtained  a  charter  in  18<>4,  and.  having
no  immediate  family,  left  $371,000.  constituting
the  bulk  of  his  fortune,  as  an  endowment  for  the
Samuel  Ready  asvlum.  The  fund  increased  after
his  death,  providing  an  investetl  capital  of  $505,-
000,  after  tne  expenditure  of  $151,000  on  land  and
buildings.  The  institution,  which  is  in  the  north-
ern part  of  Baltimore,  was  opene<l  in  1888.  The
children  who  are  admitted  are  maintained  without
expense  to  them,  and  are  educated  in  industrial
pursuits.

REAOAN,  John  Henninger,  senator,  b.  in
Sevier  county.  Tenn..  8  Oct..  1818.  From  an  early
age  he  was  engaged  in  various  occupation.s  which
included  ploucrhing,  chopping  wood.  Keeping  books,
running  aflat -boat
on  Tennessee  riv-
er,and  managinga
mill,  and  through
his  diligent  lalK)r
earned  sufficient
money  to  procure
a  go<xl  education.
Before  he  was
twenty  years  old
he  went  to  Nat-
chez, and  in  1839
removed  to  Texas.
He  soon  enlisted
in  the  force  to  ex-
pel the  Cherokeea
from  Texas,  and
was  selected  by
Gen.  Albert  Sid-
ney Johnston  as
one  of  a  picked  escort  for  dangerous  sen'ice,  but
declined  tne  offer  of  a  lieutenancy,  and  became  a
surveyor:  He  penetrat«»d  into  the  Indian  country
alKuit  the  Three  Forks  of  Trinity,  and  was  engage<l
in  sur\'eying  that  region  aUiut  three  years.  His
was  the 'first  fiarty  that  esca|»e<l  massacre  by  the
Indians.  In  1844  he  U-gan  the  study  of  law.  and
in  1848  he  received  his  license  to  practise.  In
1846  he  was  elected  colonel  of  militia  and  probate


/rda.  ^./(jUk^^U^


202


REALP


EEAVIS


judge  of  Henderson  county,  and  in  1847  he  was
chosen  to  the  legislature,  where  he  was  chairman
of  the  committee  on  public  lands.  In  1849  he  was
a  defeated  candidate  for  the  state  senate,  but  in
1852  he  was  elected  district  judge.  In  the  enforce-
ment of  the  laws  he  was  brought  into  personal
collision  with  the  gamblers  and  desperadoes  that
then  held  the  frontier  towns  in  awe,  but  his  physi-
cal courage  and  moral  force  won  him  a  triumph
for  law  and  order.  Judge  Reagan  was  first  elected
to  congress  in  1856  as  a  Democrat,  after  a  severe
contest.  He  remained  in  congress  until  1861,
when  he  returned  home,  and  was  elected  to  the
state  convention,  in  which  he  voted  for  secession.
He  was  chosen  by  the  convention  to  the  provisional
Confederate  congress.  On  6  March,  1861,  he  was
appointed  postmaster-general  under  the  provisional
government,  and  the  next  year  he  was  reappointed
to  the  same  office  under  the  permanent  govern-
ment. He  was  also  acting  secretary  of  the  treas-
ury for  a  short  time  near  the  close  of  the  war.
He  was  the  only  one  of  the  cabinet  that  was
captured  with  Jefferson  Davis,  and  was  confined
for  many  months  in  Port  Warren.  He  had  con-
ferences with  President  Johnson,  William  H.  Sew-
ard, Henry  Wilson,  James  Speed,  and  others  on
reconstruction,  and  wrote  an  open  letter  to  the
people  of  Texas,  advocating  laws  for  the  protection
of  negroes,  which  should  grant  them  civil  rights
and  limited  political  rights  with  an  educational
qualification.  His  letter  subjected  him  to  miscon-
struction, and  he  was  retired  from  politics  for  nine
years.  But  he  was  elected  to  congress  by  4,000
majority  in  1874,  in  1876  by  8,000,  and  after  1878
with  little  or  no  opposition.  For  nearly  ten  years
he  held  continuously  the  post  of  chairman  of  the
committee  on  commerce,  with  the  exception  of  one
term,  and  has  been  noted  for  his  decided  vie\vs  and
efforts  to  regulate  inter-state  commerce.  He  was
one  of  the  authors  of  the  Cullom-Reagan  inter-
state commerce  bill,  which  became  a  law  in  1887.
In  1887  he  took  his  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  having
been  chosen  for  the  term  that  ends  in  1893.

REALF,  Richard  (relf),  poet,  b.  in  Framfleld,
Sussex,  England,  14  June,  1834;  d.  in  Oakland,
Cal.,  28  Oct.,  1878.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  began
to  write  verses,  and  two  years  later  he  became
amanuensis  to  a  lady  in  Brighton.  A  travelling
lecturer  on  phrenology  recited  some  of  the  boy's
poems,  as  illustrations  of  ideality,  and  thereupon
several  literary  people  in  Brighton  sought  him  out
and  encouraged  him.  Under  their  patronage  a
collection  of  his  poems  was  published,  entitled
"Guesses  at  the  Beautiful"  (London,  1852).  Realf
spent  a  year  in  Leicestershire,  studying  scientific
agriculture,  and  in  1854  came  to  the  United  States.
He  explored  the  slums  of  New  York,  became  a
Pive-Points  missionary,  and  assisted  in  establish-
ing there  a  course  of  cheap  lectures  and  a  self-
improvement  association.  In  1856  he  accompa-
nied a  party  of  free-state  emigrants  to  Kansas,
where  he  became  a  journalist  and  correspondent
of  several  eastern  newspapers.  He  made  the  ac-
quaintance of  John  Brown,  accompanied  him  to
Canada,  and  was  to  be  secretary  of  state  in  the  pro-
visional government  that  Brown  projected.  The
movement  being  deferred  for  two  years,  Realf
made  a  visit  to  England  and  a  tour  in  the  southern
states.  When  Brown  made  his  attempt  at-Harper's
Ferry  in  October,  1859,  he  was  in  Texas,  where  he
was  arrested  and  sent  to  Washington,  being  in  im-
minent danger  of  lynching  on  the  way.  Early  in
1862  he  enlisted  in  the  88th  Illinois  regiment,  with
which  he  served  through  the  war.  Some  of  his
best  lyrics  were  written  in  the  field,  and  were


widely  circulated.  After  the  war  he  was  commis-
sionea  in  a  colored  regiment,  and  in  1866  was
mustered  out  with  the  rank  of  captain  and  brevet
lieutenant-colonel.  In  1868  he  established  a  school
for  freedmen  in  South  Carolina,  and  a  year  later
was  made  assessor  of  internal  revenue  forEdgefield
district.  He  resigned  this  office  in  1870,  returned
to  the  north,  and  became  a  journalist  and  lecturer,
residing  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.  In  1873  he  delivered  a
poem  before  the  Society  of  the  Army  of  the  Cum-
berland, and  in  1874  wrote  one  for  the  Society  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  a  brilliant
talker  and  a  fine  orator.  Among  his  lectures  were
"Battle-Flashes"  and  "The  Unwritten  Story  of
the  Martyr  of  Harper's  Perry."  His  most  admired
poems  are  "  My  Slain,"  "  An  Old  Man's  Idyl,"  "  In-
direction," and  the  verses  that  he  wrote  just  before
he  took  the  poison  that  ended  his  life.  He  com-
mitted suicide  in  consequence  of  an  unfortunate
marriage  and  an  imperfect  divorce.  He  appointed
as  his  literary  executor  Col.  Richard  J.  Hinton,
who  now  (1888)  has  his  complete  poems  ready  for
publication,  together  with  a  biographical  sketch.

REAMY,  Thaddeas  Asbiiry,  physician,  b.  in
Frederick  county,  Va.,  28  April,  1829.  He  accom-
panied his  parents  in  1832  to  Zanesville,  Ohio,  was
graduated  at  Starling  medical  college  in  1854,  and
followed  his  profession  in  Zanesville  until  1870,
when  he  removed  to  Cincinnati.  During  the  civil
war  he  served  as  surgeon  in  the  122d  Ohio  volun-
teers. In  1858  he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  ma-
teria medica  and  theraputics  in  Starling  medical
college,  which  he  held  for  two  years,  and  in  1867  he
was  chosen  professor  of  the  diseases  of  women  and
children,  but  he  resigned  in  1871  to  accept  the  chair
of  obstetrics,  clinical  midwifery,  and  diseases  of
children  in  the  Medical  college  of  Ohio.  Dr.  Reamy
has  made  a  specialty  of  obstetrical  practice,  and
holds  the  office  of  gynsecologist  to  the  Good  Samar-
itan hospital  in  Cincinnati.  He  has  invented  vari-
ous modifications  of  instruments  that  are  used  in
his  specialty.  Besides  being  a  member  of  several
gynaecological  societies  and  other  medical  associar
tions,  he  was,  in  1870,  president  of  the  Ohio  state
medical  society.  Dr.  Reamy  has  been  a  frequent
contributor  to  medical  journals.  Among  his  pa-
pers are  "  Metastasis  of  Mumps  to  the  Testicle
treated  by  Cold  "  (1855) ;  "  Epidemic  Diphtheria  "
(1859);  "Puerperal  Eclampsia"  (1868) ;  and  "  La-
ceration of  the  Perina?um '  (1877).

REAVIS,  Logan  Uriah  (rev-is),  journalist,  b.  in
Sangamon  Bottom.  Mason  co..  111.,  26  March,  1831 ;
d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  25  Ajiril,  1889.  After  attending
the  village  high-school,  he  taught  from  1851  till
1855.  In  the  latter  year  he  entered  the  office  of
the  Beardstown,  111.,  "  Gazette,"  in  which  soon  af-
terward he  purchased  an  interest,  and  continued
its  publication  under  the  name  of  "  The  Central
Illinoian  "  till  the  autumn  of  1857,  when  he  sold
his  share  and  removed  to  Nebraska.  Returning  to
Beardstown  he  repurchased  "  The  Illinoian  "  after
the  nomination  of  Abraham  Lincoln  for  the  presi-
dency. In  the  spring  of  1866  he  disposed  of  that
journal  for  the  last  time,  and  settling  in  St.  Louis
earnestly  advocated  the  removal  of  the  National
capital  to  that  city.  His  first  effort  in  this  direc-
tion was  the  publication  of  a  pamphlet  entitled
"The  New  Republic,  or  the  Transition  Complete,
with  an  Approaching  Change  of  National  Empire,
based  upon  the  Commercial  and  Industrial  Expan-
sion of  the  Great  West "  (St.  Louis.  1867).  This
was  followed  by  "  A  Change  of  National  Empire,
or  Arguments  for  the  Removal  of  the  National
Capital  from  Washington  to  the  Mi^sissiripi  Val-
ley," with  maps  (1869). Besides  issuing  tne  fore-


REBOUgAS


REDDING


203


goin;;,  Mr.  Reavis  lectured  pxtenwvelr  throujfh-
oiit  the  (•«)untrv  on  the  same  subject.  "In  1871)  he
visited  Kn>;land,  and  on  liis  return  to  St.  Louis  he
In'jjnn  a  uiovenient  to  promote  emigration  to  .Mis-
souri, twice  returning  to  Lon<lon  to  further  that
object.  Ilesi<les  the  W(»rk8  noticed  aljove,  ho  pub-
lished "St.  Louis  the  Future  (treat  t'ity  of  the
Worhl  "(1807);  "A  R«'presentative  Life  of  Horace
Greelev,  with  an  Introduction  bv  Cassius  M.  Clay"
(Now  Vnrk.  187i) :  "  Thouifhts  /or  the  Voung  Men
atid  Women  of  America'  (187;J);  "Life  of  Gen.
William  S.  Harney"  (St.  Louis,  1875) ;  and  "  Rail-
way and  River  System  "  (1871)).

REHOU<j'AS,  Manoel  Maiirlcio  (ray-Jw'-sas),
Hra/ilian  soldier,  b,  in  MaraK<)j;i|)e  in  1702;  d.  in
liahia,  19  July.  1800.  After  finishing  his  studie.s
he  was  ani>ointed  assistant  clerk  of  the  j>robate
court  of  tne  districts  of  Maragot:ii)e  and  Jaguari|)e,
but,  at  the  o|)ening  of  hostilities  Ijctwcen  the
Portuguese  trf)opsand  the  imtriots,  he  retired  with
the  indcnendents  to  the  interior,  and  served  till  2
July,  18s3.  He  served  again,  24  May,  1806,  in  the
battle  of  Tuyuty.  He  wrote  "Sobre  a  instituvfio
dos  cimeterios  extra-mural"  (Bahia,  1850);  "Da
E^IucacJIo  privada  c  publica  tratando  de  explicar
ipor  oniem  su  gesta^fio,  hasta  su  emancipa^-tkj  civil
e  politica  "  (Rio  Janeiro.  1859) ;  and  "  Estudo  sobre
OS  meios  mais  conveniente  para  impe<lir  no  interior
da  Bahia  afflicto  dc  aridez.  e  de  su  consequcncia,  6
de  su  rcpt't  iv»Io  de  devasta(;flo  "  (Bahia,  1800).

KECABARKEN  DE  MARIN,  Liilsa  (ray-cah-
bar-ren),  Chilian  patriot,  b.  in  Serena  in  1777;  d.
in  Santiago,  31  May,  1839.  She  became  an  orphan
at  the  age  of  eight  years  and  was  educated  by  her
uncle,  Lstanislao  Recabarren,  dean  of  the  cathedral
of  Santiago.  In  1796  she  married  Dr.  Jose  Gasnar
Marin  (q.  v.),  in  whose  house  she  aided  in  preparing
for  the  events  of  18  Se[)t.,  1810.  After  the  re-
conquest  of  Chili  by  the  Spaniards  in  Octobt^r,  1814,
her  nusband  fled  to  the  Argentine  Republic,  but
she  remained  in  Santiago,  attending  to  the  edu-
cation of  her  children.  In  the  last  days  of  1816
the  authorities  captured  the  correspondence  of  a
Datriot  in  Melipilta,  and  found  a  letter  from  San
Martin  for  Luisa,  together  with  a  list  in  cipher  of
the  j)ersons  concerned  in  the  conspiracv  agauist  the
government.  By  order  of  Marco  del  f*ont  she  was
arrest«<l,  4  Jan,  1817,  and  imprisonetl  in  the  convent
of  the  Augustine  nuns,  whence  she  was  liberated  by
the  triumphant  entry  of  the  patriots,  12  Feb.,  1817.
She  live<i  afterward  greatly  honored  by  the  public,
but  survived  her  husband  only  three  months.

RECLl'S,  Jean  Jacques  £llg§e  (ray-cloo),
French  geographer,  b.  in  Sainte-Foy-la-(jrande.
Gironde,  15  May,  18JJ0.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Prot-
estant clergyman,  and  was  educated  by  the  Mora-
vian brethren  at  Neuwi«l,  and  afterward  in  the
universities  of  Montauban  and  Berlin.  PVom  1852
till  1857  he  travelled  extensively  in  PZngland,  Ire-
land, and  North  and  South  America,  and  after  1800
he  devote<l  himself  to  writing  works  on  his  travels
and  the  social  and  (>olitical  condition  of  the  coun-
tries that  he  had  visited,  most  of  which  were  pul>
lished  in  the  "Revue  des  deux  mondes"and  the
"Tour  du  monde."  In  1871  he  supported  the
Commune  of  Paris,  and  was  taken  pris<iner  and
sentenced  to  transportation  for  life,  but  the  U.  S.
minister  and  representatives  of  the  republics  of
South  Americji,  supporte<I  by  eminent  scientists,
interee<led  in  hisl)ehalf,  and  his  sentence  was  com-
mute<l  to  banishment.  He  fixeti  his  residence  at
Clarence  in  Switzerlan<l,  but  returned  to  Paris
after  the  amnesty  of  March,  1879.  He  has  since
devoted  himself  to  the  publication  of  a  universal
geograj»hy. His  publications  include  "Le  Missis-


sipi,  ^-tudes  et  souvenirs"  (Paris,  1889);  **Le
delta  du  Mississipi  et  la  Xouvelle  Orleans" (1859);
"  Un  voyage  k  la  Xouvdlc  (in-na«le,  le»  cVUes  nt*o-
Grenmlines  "  (1859) ;  "  Voyage  k  .Saint  Marthe  et  k
la  Horqueta"  (1800);  "  Ijc  Rio  Hacha,  les  Indiens
Goagires  et  la  .Sierra  Negrn"  (18<J0);  "  I.<cs  Ama-
ques  et  la  .Sierra  Nevada"  (1800);  "  De  Tesclft-
vage  aux  f)tat,s-UniK,  le  code  noir  et  les  escUves**
(1800);  "  liCs  planteurs  de  la  Louisiane  et  les  alx>-
litionistes  "  (1801);  "  Ia-.  Mormonisme  et  Ie»  i<^tat8-
Unis"  (1801);  "  Le  Bn'-sil  et  la  colonisation,  le
bassin  des  Amazones  et  les  Indiens"  (1802);  "Les
provinces  du  littoral  du  Bresil,  les  noirs  et  les
colonies  Allemandes"  (1802):  "  Ijc  coton  et  la
crise  Americaine,  les  com|)agnies  cotonniercs,  et
les  tentatives  du  commerce  Anglais  depuis  la  rup-
ture de  rUnion "  (1802) ;  "Les  livres  sur  la  crise
Americaine.  guerre  de  la  secession  "  (1802) ;  "  L'elec-
tion  presidentielle  de  la  Plata,  et  la  guerre  du
Paraguay" (1802);  "Les  noirs  Aniericains  depuis
la  guerre  civile  aux  fitats-Unis"  (18(J3);  "Les
planteurs  de  la  Louisiane  et  les  regimes  Africains"
(18(}3);  "  Histoire  de  la  guerre  civile  aux  £tats-
Unis.  les  deux  dernieres  annees  de  la  grande  lutte
Americaine  "  (1864);  "  La  poesie  et  les  j>oetes  dans
I'Amerique  Espagnole  depuis  I'indeftendance "
(1864);  "  La  commission  sanitaire  de  la  guerre
aux  fitats-Unis,  1801-04 "  (1804) ;  "  La  guerre  de
rUruguay  et  les  republiques  de  la  Plata"  (18(J5);
"  Les  republiques  de  rAmerique  du  Sud,  leurs
guerrcs  et  leur  projet  de  federation  "  (1806) ;  "  La
guerre  du  Paraguay"  (1807);  "La  terre"  (2  vols.,
1867-'68) ;  "  Les  republiques  de  risthme  Ameri-
cain"  (18(58);  "Les  phenomenes  terrestres,  le
monde  et  les  mcteores  (1872),  which  was  trans-
lated into  English  under  the  title  "The  Ocean,
Atmosphere,  and  Life"  (New  York,  18?2);  and
"  Geographic  universelle  "  (1875-'88, 13  vols.;  ?]ng-
lish  translation.  New  York,  1877-'80). — His  broth-
er, Elie  Ariuand  Ebenliezer,  b.  in  Orthez,  13
March,  1843,  served  in  the  navy,  and  in  1870  was
sent  by  Ferdinand  de  Lesseps  to  Panama  to  make,
in  conjunction  with  Lieut.  B<inapartc  Wyse,  the
preliminary  surveys  for  the  projected  canal.  He
nas  since  interested  himself  in  the  canal,  and  held
conferences  upon  the  subject.  His  works  include
"  F]xplorations  aux  ist  limes  de  Panama  et  de  Darien,
en  lH7r»-'8"  (Paris,  1880).

REDDALL,  Henry  Frederick,  author,  b.  in
London,  England.  25  Nov.,  1852.  He  was  educated
at  the  Birklx»ck  Foundation,  and  since  coming  to
this  country  has  been  a  contributor  to  jwriodic^ls
under  the  |)eii-name  of  "  Frederic  Alldred."  Since
1881  he  has  been  associate  edit<jr  of  "  The  People's
Cyclopjedia."  He  has  published  "  From  the  Golden
Gate  to  the  Golden  Horn"  (New  York,  1883);
"Who  Was  Hef"  six  historical  sketches  (1880);
"School-Boy  Days  in  Merrie  England"  (1888);
"  Courtship,  Love,  and  Wedlock "  (1888) ;  and
"Fancy,  Fac-t,  and  Fable"  (1888).

REIlUINdr,  Renjaniin  Rarnard,  pioneer,  b.
in  Yarmouth,  Nova  .Scotia.  17  Jan..  1824;  d.  in
.San  Francisco,  Cal.,  21  Aug.,  1882.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Yarmouth  academy,  and  in  1840  went  to
Boston,  where  he  became  a  clerk  and  afterward
entered  the  grocery  and  shi|)-chan(liery  business.
In  1849  he  organized  a  company  of  men  who  sailed
from  Yarmouth  for  California,  where  they  arrived
on  12  Mav,  1850.  He  went  to  the  Yulwi  river  dig-
gings, and  afterwawl  to  the  Pittsburg  l)ar.  working
as  a  laborer.  .Siil>se(|uently  he  was  employed  in
drawing  papers  for  the  .sale  of  claims,  acted  as
arbitrator,  was  elected  a  menilwr  of  the  assembly
from  Yul)a  and  Sierra  counties,  and  during  the
session  wrote  for  the  San  Joaquin  "  Republican  "


204


REDPIELD


REDFIELD


and  the  Sacramento  "  Democratic  State  Journal,"
of  which  he  was  an  editor  and  proprietor.  In  1856
he  was  mayor  of  Sacramento,  and  from  1863  till
1867  he  was  secretary  of  state.  From  1864  until
his  death  he  was  land  agent  of  the  Central  Pacific
railroad.  Mr.  Redding  was  a  regent  of  the  Uni-
versity of  California,  and  a  member  of  the  Cali-
fornia academy  of  sciences,  and  of  the  Geographical
society  of  the  Pacific.  He  was  also  a  state  fish
commissioner,  holding  this  office  at  the  time  of  his
death.  He  was  interested  in  all  scientific  work,
especially  in  the  paleontology  of  the  coast,  and
collected  numerous  prehistoric  and  aboriginal  relics,
which  he  presented  to  the  museum  of  theacatlemy.
He  contributed  a  large  number  of  papers  to  vari-
ous California  journals.

REDFIELD,  Aniasa  Angell,  lawyer,  b.  in
Clyde,  Wayne  co.,  N.  Y.,  19  May,  1837.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York  in  1860,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  began  to  practise  in  New  York  city.  Prom
1877  till  1882  he  was  the  official  reporter  of  the  sur-
rogate's court  in  that  city.  He  was  a  contributor
to  the  "Knickerbocker  "magazine,  and  has  pub-
lished "  Hand-Book  of  the  U.  S.  Tax  Laws  "  (New
York,  1863) ;  "  Reports  oif  the  Surrogates'  Courts  of
the  State  of  New  York  "  (5  vols.,  1864-'82) ;  "  Law
and  Practice  of  Surrogates'  Courts  "  (1875 :  3d  ed.,
1884) ;  and,  with  Thomas  G.  Shearman,  "  The  Law
of  Negligence"  (1869;  4lh  ed.,  1888).

REDFIELD,  Isaac  Fletcher,  jurist,  b.  in
Wethersfield,  Windsor  co.,  Vt.,  10  April,  1804;  d.
in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  23  March,  1876.  He  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1825,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  at  Derby  and
Windsor,  Vt.  He  was  state's  attorney  for  Orleans
county  from  1833  till  1835,  when  he  became  judge
of  the  Vermont  supreme  court,  and  in  1852  he  was
appointed  chief  justice.  He  finally  retired  from
the  bench  in  1800. From  1857  till  1861  he  was

frofessor  of  medical  jurisprudence  at  Dartmouth,
n  the  latter  year  he  removed  to  Boston,  where  he
remained  until  his  death.  From  January,  1867,
he  was  for  two  years  special  counsel  of  the  United
States  in  Europe,  having  charge  of  many  impor-
tant suits  and  legal  matters  in  England  and  France.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Trinity  in
1849,  and  from  Dartmouth  in  1855.  He  is  the  au-
thor of  "  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Rail-
wavs"  (Boston,  1857;  5th  ed.,  2  vols.,  1873);  "The
Law  of  Wills "  (part  i.,  1864 ;  3d  ed.,  1869 ;  and
parts  ii.  and  iii.,  1870) ;  "  A  Practical  Treatise  on
Civil  Pleading  and  Practice,  with  Forms,"  with
William  A.  Herrick  (1868):  "The  Law  of  Carriers
and  Bailments"  (1869);  and  "  Leading  American
Railway  Cases"  (2  vols.,  1870).  He  also  edited
Joseph 'Stor}''s  "  Equity  Pleadings,"  and  "  Conflict
of  Laws  "  ;  and  Greenleaf  "  On  Evidence."  From
1862  till  his  death  he  was  an  editor  of  the  "  Ameri-
can Law  Register"  (Philadelphia).

REDFIELD,  Justus  Starr,  publisher,  b.  in
Wallingford,  Conn.,  2  Jan.,  1810;  d.  near  Florence,
N.  J.,  24  March,  1888.  After  receiving  a  limited
education,  he  learned  the  printing  business,  and
afterward  stereotyping.  In  1831  he  opened  an  office
in  New  York,  and  began  the  publication  of  "  The
Family  Magazine,"  the  first  illustrated  monthly  in
this  country,  which  he  continued  for  eight  years.
Benson  J.  Lossing  and  A.  Sidnev  Doane  at  differ-
ent times  acted  as  editors.  The  early  death  of
Mr.  Redfield's  brother,  who  had  charge  of  the  en-
graving department,  discouraged  the  further  prose-
cution of  tne  work.  About  1841  he  opened  a  book-
store in  the  same  city,  and  carried  on  the  business
of  book-selling,  printing,  and  publishing  until  1860.


He  was  the  original  American  publisher  of  the
works  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe,  William  Maginn.  and
John  Doran.  He  also  issued  "  Noctes  Ambrosi-
ana;,"  the  revised  novels  of  William  Gil  more
Simms,  and  a  large  miscellaneous  list.  From  1855
till  1860  George  L.  Duyckinck  was  interested  with
Mr.  Redfield  as  a  special  partner.  In  1861  he  was
appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Otranto,  Italy,  and  in
1864  was  transferred  to  Brindisi,  but  resigned  in
1866.  He  edited  Jean  Mace's  "Histoire  d'une
bouchee  de  pain  "  (Paris,  1861),  and  translated  from
the  Italian  "The  Mvsteries  of  Neapolitan  Con-
vents," by  Henrietta  t'aracciolo  (Hartford,  1867).

REDFIELD,  William  C,  meteorologist,  b.  near
Middletown,  Conn.,  26  March,  1789;  d.  in  New
York  city,  12  Feb.,  1857.  He  assumed  the  initial
C  on  coming  of  age.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he
was  apprenticed  to  a  saddler  in  Upper  Middle-
town  (now  Cromwell).  In  1810,  on  tne  expiration
of  his  apprenticeship,  he  went  on  foot  to  visit  his
mother  in  Ohio,  and  kept  a  journal  of  his  experi-
ences. After  spending  the  winter  in  Ohio  he  re-
turned to  Upper  Middletown,  and  engaged  in  his
trade  for  nearly  fourteen  years,  also  keeping  a
small  country  store.  In  1827  he  came  to  New
York  city.  Meanwhile,  after  the  great  September
gale  of  1821,  Mr.  Redfield  arrived  at  the  conclu-
sion that  the  storm  was  a  progressive  whirlwind  ;
but  other  enterprises  prevented  the  development
of  his  theory  at  that  time.  He  became  interested
in  steam  navigation,  and  as  the  general  community
had  become  alarmed  by  several  disastrous  steam-
boat explosions  he  devised  and  established  a  line
of  safety-barges,  consisting  of  large  and  commo-
dious passenger-boats  towed  by  a  steamboat  at  suf-
ficient distance  to  prevent  danger,  to  run  Iwtween
New  York  and  Albany.  When  the  public  confi-
dence was  restored  he  transformed  his  line  into  a
system  of  tow-boats  for  conveying  freight,  which
continued  until  after  his  death.  He  was  largely
identified  with  the  introduction  of  railroads,  and
in  1829  he  issued  a  pamphlet  in  which  he  placed
before  the  American  people  the  plan  of  a  system  of
railroads  to  connect  Huason  river  with  the  Missis-
sippi by  means  of  a  route  that  was  substantially  that
of  the  New  York  and  Erie  railroad.  During  the
same  year  he  became  convinced  of  the  desirability
of  street-railways  in  cities,  and  petitioned  the  New
York  common  council  for  permission  to  lay  tracks
along  Canal  street.  In  1832  he  explored  the  pro-
posed route  of  the  Harlem  railroad,  and  was  instru-
mental in  securing  the  charter  of  that  road  ;  also,
about  that  time  he  was  associated  with  James  Brew-
ster in  the  movement  that  resulted  in  the  construc-
tion of  the  Hartford  and  New  Haven  railroad.  His
first  paper  on  the  "  Atlantic  Storms  "  was  published
in  1831  in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"  and
in  1834  it  was  followed  by  his  memoir  on  the"  Hur-
ricanes and  Storms  of  the  United  States  and  West
Indies,"  which  subject  he  continued  later,  with  nu-
merous papers,  descriptions,  and  tables  of  particu-
lar hurricanes.  Subsequently  he  devoted  some  at-
tention to  geology,  studying  the  fossil  fishes  of
the  sandstone  formations.  In  1856  he  demonstrat-
ed that  the  fossils  of  the  Connecticut  river  valley
and  the  New  Jersey  sandstones,  to  which  he  gave
the  name  of  the  >>ewark  group,  belonged  to  the
lower  Jurassic  period.  In  1839  he  received  the  hon-
orary degree  of  A.  M.  from  Yale,  and  he  was  an  ac-
tive member  of  the  American  association  of  natural-
ists and  geologists.  To  his  influence  the  change
of  the  latter  organization  to  the  more  comprehen-
sive American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science  was  largely  due,  and  in  1^3  he  was  ita
first  president,  having  charge  of  the  Philadelphia


RED-JACKET


REDMAN


906


nuH'tiiiK  «»f  that  year.  See  "Scientiflp  Life  and
Iitil>(*rs  of  William  ('.  |{e<lfleltl,"  by  Dfiinimui  Olin-
hUhI  (Cambridge.  1H58).— nis  mid,  John  Howard.
naturalist,  b,  in  C'r»)niw«>ll,  Middlosi-x  cd.,  Conn..  10
July.  1815.  removal  with  his  father  to  New  Vork
city  in  1827,  and  wa.««  wlucated  at  the  hijrh-sc-hool.
which  he  left  to  enter  bu«ine!«8.  and  was  enjjapMl  in
fn'ijrht-tmn!<|)ortHtion  on  the  Hudson  river  from
1833  till  18(J1.  when  he  removed  to  Philwlelphia,
whore,  until  1885.  he  was  cashier  of  a  car-wheel
foundry.  In  183C  he  be(«me  a  member  of  the
Lyceum  of  natural  history  (now  the  Nov  York
academy  of  sciences),  and  ho  was  its  correspontling
secretary  from  18:i«  till  18«1.  He  contributed  to
its  "  Annals  "  numenms  papers,  of  which  the  first,
in  1837.  was  ufion  "  Fossil  Fishes,"  and  contained
the  earliest  intimation  that  the  sandstones  of  Con-
necticut and  Massachusetts  were  of  a  more  recent
formation  than  that  to  which  they  had  been  pre-
viously referred.  His  sub9e<{uent  pa|K>rs  were  chief-
ly on  (ioncholoeical  subjects.  He  was  appointed
conservator  of  tne  herliarium  of  the  Phiftulelphia
academy  of  natural  sciences  in  187G,  and  he  has
contribute*!  lM)tanicHl  imiikts  Ui  the  "  Bulletin  of
the  Torrey  Botanical  Club."  and  to  the  "  liotanical
Gazette."  Mr.  Re<lfield  has  also  nublished  "(Jene-
alo);icaI  History  of  the  Kedftelu  Family  in  the
riiitc<l  .States  "'(.Xlbany.  1800).

RED-JACKET,  or  SACIOYEWATHA  ("He
keeps  them  awake  ").  chief  of  the  Wolf  tril)e  of  the
Senecas,  b.  at  Old-Castle,  near  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  1751 ;
d.  in  Seneca  Villaire,  N.  Y..  30  Jan.,  IKJO,  The
name  of  Ited-Jacket,  by  which  he  was  familiarly

known,  was  given
him  because  he
hrnl  been  present-
ed by  an  English
officer,  shortly  af-
ter the  Revolu-
tion, as  a  rcwanl
for  his  fleet  ness  of
foot,  with  a  richly
embroidered  straf-
let  jacket,  which
he  took  great
pride  in  wearing.
After  the  death  of
Brant.  Red-Jack-
et became  the  man
of  greatest  impor-
tance among  the
Six  Nations.  He
was  upon  the  war-path  during  both  the  conflicts
lietween  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain.  In
the  Revolution  he  serve<l  with  his  nation  the  cause
of  the  crown.  In  1812-'i;J — the  Senecas  having
change«l  their  allegiance — he  fought  under  the  col-
ors of  the  United  States.  He  was  deficient  in  physi-
cal courage;  so  much  so,  as  to  receive  from  lirant
the  nickname  of  the  "Cow-Killer" — though  it  is
said  that  in  the  action  in  1813  near  Fort  George,
on  the  Niagara  frontier,  he  l)ehave<l  with  great
bravery.  At  a  council  at  F'ort  Stanwix  in  1784,  to
negotiate  a  treaty  between  the  United  States  and
some  of  the  Six  Nations,  he  delivered  an  elotjuent
and  scathing  philippic  against  the  treaty,  which
wjis  nevertheless  rutifletl.  At  this  council  he  re-
sumed his  Revolutionary  acquaintance  with  I^afay-
ette.  whochance«l  to  be  |iresent.  In  1792  Washing-
ton, on  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty  of  jK'ace  between
the  Unite<l  States  and  the  .Six  N'ations,  ijave  him  a
medal  of  solid  silver,  which  he  jirized  nighly  an«l
wore  until  his  death.  It  is  now  (1888)  in  |K)s»ession
of  (ien.  Ely  S.  Parker.  In  1810  he  gave  valuable
information  to  th?  Indian  agents  of  the  attempts


I  of  Tecumseh  and  the  Prophet  to  draw  the  .Senecas
I  into  the  western  combination.  His  hostility  to
I  Christianity  was  implacable,  and  he  was  the  roost
I  inveterate  enemv  of  the  miRsionaries  that  were  sent
I  to  his  nation.  He  was  a  thomugh  Indian  in  his
costume,  as  well  as  in  his  undisguis4><lcontem|>t  for
the  dri>s.s  and  language  of  the  whites  and  anything
else  that  lM>longe<l  to  them.  He  was  of  a  tall  and
erect  form,  and  walk*-*!  with  <lignity.  His  eye«
were  fine,  an<l  his  address.  |»artiiulafly  when  he
spoke  in  council,  was  almost  maj(>stic.  In  his  later
^ears  he  )>ecame  a  conflrme<l  drunkani  and  sank
into  mental  imiKK'ility.  Red-Jacket's  character
was  singularly  ctmtnwlictory.  I^acking  firmness
of  nerve,  he  nevertheless  {M)ssess«'d  remarkable  te-
nacity of  purpose  and  great  moral  courage,  and  his
intellectual  powers  were  of  a  very  high  onler.  He
was  a  statesman  of  sagacity  and  an  orator  of  sur-
passing elo<|uence.  yet  he  was  capable  of  descend-
ing to  the  lowest  cunning  of  the  demagogue.  But
he  was  still  a  [wtriot,  and  loved  his  nation  and
his  race,  whose  extinction  he  clearly  foresaw,  and
continued  to  la)x>r  with  all  his  energies  to  put
off  the  evil  day.  F«»r  many  years  after  his  death
no  memorial  marked  his  grave,  but  on  9  Oct.,  1884.
his  remains  were  removed  and  buried,  under  the
auspices  of  the  Buffalo  historical  society,  in  Forest
Ijawn  cemetery  near  that  city.  Hon.  'William  C.
Bryant,  of  Buffalo,  delivering  an  oration.  The
proceedings,  with  additional  i)ai)er8  by  Horatio
Hale,  Gen.  Ely  S.  Parker,  and  others,  were  pub-
lished (Buffalo,  1884).  Several  i)ortraits  were  taken
of  the  great  Seneca.  George  Catlin  jwinteil  him
twice,  Henry  Inman  once,  and  RolxTt  W.  Wier
in  1828,  when  he  was  on  a  visit  to  New  York  city ;
Fitz-Greene  Halleck  has  celebrate<l  him  in  s<ing.
With  as  much  justice  as  Rienzi  has  l)een  styled  the
last  of  the  Romans,  may  Red-Jacket  be  cafled  the
last  of  the  Senecas.  Like  Rienzi.  he  was  more
energetic  in  s|)eech  and  council  than  in  action,  and
failed  in  courage  and  presence  of  mind  in  great
emergencies.  The  vignette  is  from  Wier's  iwrtrait.
See  his  life  by  William  L.  Stone  (New  York,  1841).
REDMAK,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa..  27  Feb.,  1722;  d.  there.  19  March,  1808.  He
received  his  preparatory  etlucatron  at  the  academy
of  Rev.  William  Tennent,  and  began  his  medical
studies  under  Dr.  John  Kearsley.  At  their  conclu-
sion he  went  to  Bermuda,  where  he  practistnl  his
profession  for  several  years,  and  then  visited  Eu-
roj)e  to  complete  his  education.  After  attending
lectures  and  "  walking  "  the  hospitals  in  Edinburgh,
Ijondon,  and  Paris,  he  proceeded  to  I^eyden,  where
he  was  graduated  at  tne  university  in  July,  1748.
About  1762  he  was  attacked  bv  disease  of  the  liver,
and  subsequent  delicate  health  com{>elled  him
largely  to  restrict  his  practice.  On  the  founda-
tion of  the  Philadelphia  college  of  physicians  in
1788  he  was  chosen  presi<lent  of  that  txxly,  and  for
many  years  he  was  one  of  the  physicians  of  the  city
hospital.  From  lx>th  these  institutions,  in  which  he
was  deeply  interested,  he  retired  only  when  he  was
forced  to  do  so  by  the  infirmities  of  age.  Dr.  Red-
man was  a  strong  advocate  of  heroic  remedies,  and
considereil  more  energetic  measures  necessary  in
the  cure  of  diseases  in  this  climate  than  in  Europe,
lie  bled  largely  in  the  yellow-fever  epidemic  of
1762,  and  ady<K-ated  the  "same  treatment  in  1793.
lie  wrote  an  account  of  the  former  visitation,
and  |)reM'nted  it  to  the  College  of  physicians  in  the
latter  year.  It  wjus  publisheti  in  18<15.  He  em-
ploye*!'mercury  friH'ly  in  all  chronic  affections,  and
in  the  disi'ases'of  old  agt»  he  rt'liwl  chiefly  on  slight
imt  fre<iuent  bleedings.  He  was  considered  one  of
the  foremost  practitioners  of  his  time.


206


REDPATH


REED


REDPATH,  Jnmes,  author,  b.  in  Berwiek-on-
Twecnl.  Scotland,  24  Aug.,  1833 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  10  Feb.,  1891,  He  emigrated  with  his  parents
to  Michigan.  At  the  ago  of  eighteen  he  came  to
New  York,  and  devoted  himself  to  joiirnulisni.
At  the  age  of  nineteen  he  hecame  an  editor  of  the
New  York  "Tribune,"  and  soon  afterward  he
formed  a  resolution  to  visit  the  southern  states
in  order  to  witness  for  himself  the  conditions
and  effects  of  slavery.  He  not  only  visited  the
plantations  of  slave-owners  Jis  a  guest,  but  went
on  foot  through  the  southern  seaboard  states.  In
the  course  of  his  long  journey  he  slept  frequently
in  slave-cabins,  and  visited  the  religious  gather-
ings and  merry-makings  where  the  negroes  con-
sorted. Although  at  that  period  it  was  social  out-
lawry to  speak  the  truth  about  slavery,  he  did
not  hesitate  to  do  so,  and  he  consequently  be-
came noted  as  a  fiery  Abolitionist.  In  1855  he  be-
came the  Kansas  correspondent  of  the  St.  Louis
"Democrat."  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  events
of  that  time,  and  in  1859  made  two  visits  to  Hayti.
During  the  second  one  he  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Geflfrard  commissioner  of  emigration  in  the
United  States.  Immediately  upon  his  return  home,
Mr.  Redpath  founded  the  Haytian  bureau  of  emi-
gration in  Boston  and  New  York,  and  several  thou-
sand negroes  availed  themselves  of  it.  In  connec-
tion with  the  Haytian  bureau  Mr.  Redpath  estab-
lished a  weekly  newspaper  called  "  Pine  and  Palm,"
in  which  were  advocated  the  emigration  movement
and  the  general  interests  of  the  African  race  in
this  country.  He  was  also  appointed  Havtian  con-
sul in  Philadelphia  and  then  joint  commissioner  to
the  United  States,  and  was  largely  instrumental  in

Erocuring  recognition  of  Haytian  independence.
[e  was  with  the  armies  of  Gen.  William  T.  Sher-
man and  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas  during  the  civil
war,  and  subsequently  with  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gill-
more  in  Charleston.  At  the  latter  place  he  was
appointed  superintendent  of  education,  organ-
ized the  school  system  of  South  Carolina,  and
founded  the  Colored  orphan  asylum  at  Charleston.
In  1868  he  established  the  Boston  lyceum  bureau,
and  subsequently  Redpath's  lecture  bureau.  In
1881  he  went  to  Ireland,  partly  to  recruit  his  health
and  partly  to  describe  the  famine  district  for  the
New  York  "  Tribune."  On  his  return  in  the  fol-
lowing year  he  made  a  tour  of  the  United  States
and  Canada,  lecturing  on  Irish  subjects,  and  in
the  same  year  founded  a  newspaper  called  "  Rod-
path's  Weekly,"  devoted  to  the  Irish  cause.  In
1886  he  became  an  editor  of  the  "  North  American
Review." Besides  contributions  to  the  newspa-

gjrs,  magazines,  and  reviews,  he  published  "  Iland-
ook  to  Kansas  "  (New  York,  1859) ;  "  The  Roving
Editor"  (1859);  "Echoes  of  Harper's  Ferry ^'
(Boston,  1860) ;  "  Southern  Notes  "  (1860) ;  "  Guide
to  Hayti"  (1860);  "The  John  Brown  Invasion"
(1860);  "Life  of  John  Brown"  (1860);  "John
Brown,  the  Hero "  (London,  1862) ;  and  "  Talks
about  Ireland  "  (New  York,  1881),

REDWAY,  Jacques  Wardlaw,  geographer,  b.
near  Nashville,  Tenn.,  5  May,  1849.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  University  of  California,  and  then  fol-
lowed a  special  course  in  mining  engineering  at  the
University  of  Munich.  Subsequently  he  became
instructor  in  chemistry  at  the  University  of  Cali-
fornia, and  then  was  professor  of  physical  geography
and  geology  at  the  State  normal  school  of  Califor-
nia. From  1870  till  1875  he  was  connected  with
various  mines  in  California  and  Arizona  as  engineer
or  superintendent.  Since  1880  he  has  devoted  his
attention  exclusively  to  geographical  science,  and
has  travelled  in  North  and  South  America,  Eurojw,


Asia,  and  Africa.  His  works  in  book-form,  for
schools,  are  "Complete  Geography"  (Philadelphia,
1887);  "Manual  of  Physical  Geogranhy"  (1887):
"  Elementary  Geography  "  (1888) ;  also'  "  Manual
of  Gcographvand  Travel  "  (1888);  and  "Sketches
in  Physicul  (Teogra|>hy."  in  preparation.

REDWOOD,  Abraham,  philanthropist,  b.  in
the  island  of  Antigua,  W.  I.,  in  1709;  d.  in  New-
port, R.  I..  6  March,  1788.  His  father  (b.  in  Bris-
tol, England,  in  1665)  came  into  jx)ssession  bv  mar-
riage or  a  large  sugar-plantation  in  Antigua,  icnown
as  Cassada  Garden,  where  he  resided  until  1712,
when  he  removed  to  the  United  States.  After  liv-
ing a  few  years  in  Salem,  Mass.,  he  settled  perma-
nently in  Newport,  R.  I.  His  son  was  educated
at  Philadelphia,  where  he  remained  until  he  was
eighteen  years  old.  He  returned  soon  afterward
to  Newport,  married,  and  divided  his  time  between
his  town  and  country  residence.  The  latter  com-
prised an  estate  of  145  acres  at  Portsmouth,  R.  I.,
which  is  still  known  as  "  Redwood  Farm,"  and  re-


mained in  the  familv  until  1882.  Here  Mr.  Red-
wood bestowed  much  care  on  the  cultivation  of  a
botanical  garden  of  rare  foreign  and  indigenous
plants,  the  only  one  of  its  kind  in  the  New  Eng-
land colonies.  He  also  frequently  assisted  indus-
trious young  men  in  their  efforts  to  gain  a  liveli-
hood. His  fondness  for  literature  brought  him
into  contact  with  a  society  of  Newport  gentlemen
that  had  been  organized  "for  the  promotion  of
knowledge  and  virtue,"  and  he  placed  at  their  dis-
posal £5(K)  for  the  purchase  in  London  of  standard
works  on  literature,  theology,  history,  and  the  sci-
ences. A  charter  of  incorporation  was  obtained  in
1747,  and  a  suitable  edifice  was  completed  for  their
reception  by  J  750.  The  association  took  the  name
of  tne  Redwood  library  company.  The  found-
ing of  this  institution  drew  to  Newport  many  men
and  women  of  letters,  students  and  artists,  and
gave  to  the  town  a  reputation  for  literary  taste  and
refinement,  causing  travellers  to  describe  it  as  "  the
most  learned  and  inquisitive  community  in  the
colonies."  During  the  Revolutionary  war  the  li-
brary was  roughly  handled  by  British  soldiers,  who
destroyed  and  carried  away  a  large  number  of  vol-
umes. '  These  were  ultimately  replaced,  and  the  col-
lection was  restored  to  its  original  size.  The  build-
ing is  shown  in  the  accompanying  engraving.  Mr.
Redwood  also  gave  £500  to  the  fiteciety  of  Friends,
of  which  he  was  a  member,  to  endow  a  school  in
Newport  for  the  education  of  the  children  of  parents
of  that  denomination,  and  offered  a  like  sum  to
found  a  college  in  the  same  town.  This  was  estab-
lished afterward  in  Providence,  R.  I.

REED,  Andrew,  benefactor,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 27  Nov.,  1788;  d.  there,  25  Feb.,  1862.  He
was  apprenticed  to  a  trade,  but,  as  he  had  a  taste
for  studv,  was  afterward  sent  to  a  Dissenting  col-
lege in  London.  In  1811  he  was  orflained  pastor
of  an  Independent  congregation  in  that  city,  which


REED


IlKED


307


oonnootion  ho  inaintHin<>(l  until  his  death.  In  1884
he  WH-H  ileputiHl,  with  Kt>v.  Jhiiu's  MHthcson.  by  the
C'<>M|fn»>f«ti()rmi  union  «>f  Kn^lHn<l  and  Wrtl«'«.  to
visit  tht>  Tniti"*!  States  and  rt'|M»rt  on  the  condition
of  religion  an<l  (Hlucat ion  in  that  country,  and  on
his  return  he  publishtMl,  with  Mr.  Matheson,  "  Visit
to  the  American  Chun-hes"  (2  vols..  Ijondon,  183C),
which  made  a  valuable  addition  to  Knglish  knowl-
eilp*  of  American  institutions  an<l  s<K'iefy.  He
foundtnl  in  1H1;{  the  Ijondon  orphan  asylum  ;  in
1H27.  the  Infant  orphan  asylum  :  ni  1847,  .the  Asy-
lum for  fatherless  children  at  ('roy<lon  ;  and  subse-
quently the  Koyal  asvlum  for  idiots,  and  theKoyal
hospital  for  incurables.  He  jjave  fn^-lv  to  these
and  other  charities,  but  made  it  a  principle  throuf^h
life  never  to  receive  in  any  form  a  recuimfwiiso  for
his  services  in  their  U'lialf.  At  his  death  he  left
over  £2,(XX)  to  the  al)ove  and  similar  institutions.
Besides  his  b(M)k  on  this  count rv,  he  published  "  No
Fiction  "  (London,  IHIH ;  24th  eil.,  18(50) : "  Martha  "
{\M{\) :  "  The  Day  of  Pentecost,"  "  The  Revival  of
R«'lij;i(m,"  and  "  tamest  Piety  essential  to  Emi-
nent Usefulness"  (185^9);  antf  "Advancement  of
R«'ligion  the  Claim  of  the  Times"  (1847).  See
"  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and  Ijatwrsof  Andrew  Reed,
D.  1).."  by  his  stms,  Charles  and  Andrew  (18(W).

REED.  David,  editor,  b.  in  Easton,  Bristol  co..
Mass.,  6  Feb..  1790;  d.  in  Boston.  Ma^is.,  7  June.
1870.  He  was  the  son  of  Rev.  William  Reed,  who
was  lx)rn  in  1755,  and  ha<l  charge  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  at  Easton  from  1784  until  his  death
in  1809.  David  was  grmluated  at  Brown  in  1810,
and  for  several  years  was  principal  of  the  Bridge-
water,  Mass.,  academy.  lie  subsequently  studied
theology,  and  in  1814  was  licensed  to  preach  as  a
Unitarian  dercvman.  In  1821  he  established  at
Boston  the  "Christian  Register,"  an  organ  of  that
denomination,  and  he  continued  to  put)lish  and
edit  it  until  1866.  From  the  outset  \fr.  Reed  had
the  assistance,  editorially  and  as  contributors,  of
many  of  the  ablest  writers  in  the  Unitarian  denom-
ination, and  his  journal  exercisi>d  much  influence.
He  was  also  a  founder  of  the  American  anti-sla-
verv  society  in  1828.

Reed. 'Horatio  Blake,  soldier,  b.  in  Rock-
awav,  L.  I.,  22  .Ian..  1837 ;  d.  in  Togus.  Kennebec
CO.,  ^le.,  7  March,  1888.  He  was  e<lucated  at  Troy
jHjIytechnic  institute,  and  on  14  May.  1861,  was
commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in  the  5th  U.  S.  artil-
lery. He  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Bull  Run  (for
which  he  was  brevetted  1st  lieutenant),  Hanover
Court-House,  Mechanicsville,  Gaines's  Mills,  Mal-
vern Hill,  and  Manassas.  He  was  also  present  at
Antietam.  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  He
was  brevetted  captain,  1  July,  18^2.  for  the  [)enin-
sular  cam[>aign,  and  commissioned  lieutenant,  19
Sept.,  18(KJ.  The  following  Octol)er  he  was  bre-
vetted major  for  the  skilful  handling  of  his  guns
at  Bristol  Station,  Va.  The  latter  appointment
was  made  at  the  special  request  of  Gen.  Gouver-
neur  K.  Warren,  who  di*clared  in  his  report  that
Cant.  Reed  had  saved  the  day.  From  November,
18<fci,  till  April.  1864.  he  was  acting  assistant  ad-

1'utant-general  of  the  1st  brigade  of  norse  artillery.
n  October,  1864,  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  22d  New  York  cavalry,  having  al-
ready commanded  the  regiment  at  the  crossing  of
the  OiKHjuan,  and  in  the  action  at  I^acey's  Springs.
He  was  promoted  colonel  in  Januar>',  1865,  and
comman(le<l  a  cavalry  "brigade  in  the  valley  of  Vir-

S'nia  from  May  till  August  of  that  vear  under
en.  George  A.  Custer.  On  13  March,  1865,  he
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  regular
army  for  meritorious  services  during  the  war.  On
8  May,  1870,  he  resigned  from  the  army  to  become


A  civil  engineer  in  the  emplovof  a  railroa^I  through
the  Adimndacks,  N.  Y.,  and  he  itubsequently  nerved
in  the  Egyptian  army.

REED,  lliigli,  solilier,  b.  in  Itichmond.  Wayne
CO.,  Ind..  17  Aug.,  IS-W.  He  waa  graduate<l  at  'the
U.  S.  military  ai-iwlemy  in  1878.  and  promoted  2d
lieutenant,  I'st  infantry,  serve<l  on  garrison  and
frontier  duty,  and  wa«'then  attached  to  the  xignal
service,  Mng  professor  of  militurv  science  and  tac-
tics in  the  signal-schiK>|  at  P'ort  XVliipjile  (now  Fort
Myer),  Va.,  in  1878-'9,  at  the  Southern  Illinois  nor-
mal university  in  Carbondale,  III.,  in  1880-*3,  on
garris<^»n  and  frontier  duty  at  Forts  A[iachc  and
Lowell,  Arizona,  and  San  Diego.  Cal.,  in  1888-'4.
In  1881  he  was  apfKiinted  insj»ector-genenU  on  the
statf  of  Gov.  AllHTt  G.  Porter,  of  Indiana.  .Since
1884  he  has  been  on  leave  of  al)sence,  owing  to  im-
paired health  from  exjK)sure  on  the  [ilains.  Lieut.
Keed  ha-s  invented  a  metallic  shelving,  using  cast-
iron  shelves  and  ga.s-pi[)e  supports,  for  which  two
'  patents  have  been  issued,  ana  has  also  invented  a
folding  cash-box.  He  compile<l  "  A  Calendar  of
the  Dakota  Nation,"  which  was  [»rinted  in  1877,
and  included  in  the  fourth  annual  report  of  the
bureau  of  ethnology  to  the  secretary  of  the  .Smith-
sonian institution  (U'ashington,  1886).  and  is  the  au-
thor of  ".Signal  Tactics  "(Baltimore,  18H0);  "Cadet
Regulations  "(Richmond,  Ind.,  1881);  Upton's"  In-
fantry Tactics,"  abridged  and  revi.sed  (Baltimore,
1882);  "Artillery  Tactics."  abridged  and  revised
(1882);  "Military  Science  and  Tactics"  (1882);
"  Standard  Infantry  Tactics"  (1883);  and  "Broom
Tactics,  or  Calisthenics  in  a  New  Form  "  (1883).

REED,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Wolnim,  Mi  die-
sex  CO.,  Mass.,  in  1724;  d.  in  Fitchburg,  Mas.<«.,  13
Feb.,  1807.  He  married  in  1748  and  settled  in
Brookfield,  but  subsequently  removed  to  Lunen-
burg, Mai>s.  He  commanded  a  company  in  Col.
Joseph  Blanchard's  regiment  in  the  camiiaign
against  the  French  and  Indians  under  Sir  William
Johnson  in  1755,  was  with  Gen.  James  Abercrombie
at  Ticonderoga  in  1758,  and  served  under  Gen.  Jef-
frey Amherst  in  1759.  In  the  early  days  of  the  Rev-
olution his  military  experience,  eru-rgy,  and  com-
manding address  made  him  unusually  successful  in
securing  recruits  for  the  patriot  cause.  In  1765  he
had  settleil  in  the  town  of  (^itzwilliam,  N.  H.,  of
which  he  was  an  original  proprietor.  In  1770  he
was  made  lieutenant-colonel,  and  in  May,  1775,  was
in  command  of  the  2d  New  Hampshire  regiment  at
Cambridge,  and  did  good  service  at  the  battle  of
Bunker  Hill,  holding  the  rail-fence  with  John
Stark,  and  protecting  the  retreat  of  the  main  body
from  the  redoubt.  Joining  the  army  in  Canada
under  Gen.  John  Sullivan  early  in  1*76,  his  regi-
ment suffereil  severely  from  disejise,  and  more  than
one  third  died  during  the  cam|>aign.  Before  arriv-
ing at  Ticonderoga  on  the  retreat.  Col.  Ree<i  was
attacked  by  smair-[)ox.  and  after  a  long  illness  rose
from  his  bed  incapacitated  for  further  service.  He
had  meanwhile  lK>en  apjwinted  briga<lier-general
on  the  ri'commendation  of  Gen.  Washington,  and
retained  the  commission  in  the  hotn^that  he  might
be  able  again  to  take  the  fieUI,  but  he  wjuscom|H>lletl
to  return  home,  nearly  blind  and  deaf,  and  at'ce{)ted
half-pay. — His  son.  fcJvLVAM's.  d.  in  1798.  served
throughout  the  war.  was  adjutant  in  Gen.  Sullivan's
campaign  of  1778,  and  afterward  promoted  colonel.

REED,  Jolin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Framingham,
Mass.,  11  Nov.,  1751;  d.  in  West  Bridgewaler,
Mass.,  17  Feb.,  \Ki\.  He  was  the  son  of  St»lomon,
minister  at  Middleborough.  Mass.,  and  was  grad-
uated at  Yale  in  1772.  After  studying  theology
and  t)eing  licenseil  to  preac*h,  he  was  employed  for
two  years  as  chaplain  in  the  navy,  although  he


208


REED


REED


never  went  to  sea.  On  7  Jan.,  1780,  he  was  in-
stalled at  Bridgewater,  Ma.ss.,  as  coUe^ue  pastor  of
Rev.  Daniel  Perkins,  who  died  in  1783,  and  main-
tained the  connection  until  his  death.  In  1794  he
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  and  he  was
twice  re-elected,  serving  from  7  Dec,  1795,  till  3
March,  1801.  He  was  a  follower  and  warm  friend
of  George  Washington  and  John  Adams.  His
opinions  on  ecclesiastical  affairs  were  so  just  and
accurate  as  to  receive  the  approbation  of  courts  and
judges ;  the  report  of  a  church  council  drawn  up
by  him  was  adopted  in  substance  as  the  foundation
of  an  important  decision  of  the  supreme  court  of
Massachusetts.  His  theological  views  were  Armin-
ian,  and  he  excelled  as  a  metaphysician  and  con-
troversialist. Although  the  last  ten  years  of  his
life  were  spent  in  blindness,  he  continued  to  preach
regularly  until  a  short  time  before  his  death.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Unitarian  council  that  was
called  to  consider  the  case  of  Rev.  Abiel  Abbott.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown  uni-
versity in  1803.  Besides  eight  occasional  sermons.
Dr.  Reed  published  "An  Apology  for  the  Rite  of
Infant  Baptism"  (1806).— His  son,  John,  legisla-
tor, b.  in  West  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  2  Sept.,  1781;
d.  there,  25  Nov.,  18W),  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1803,  where  he  was  tutor  from  1804  till  1806.  He
was  also  for  one  year  principal  of  the  Bridgewater
academy.  He  afterward  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise  at  Yarmouth,
Mass.  He  soon  became  popular  and  was  elected  to
the  13th  congress  as  a  Federalist,  and  re-elected  to
the  14th,  serving  from  24  May,  1813,  till  3  March,
1817.  Four  years  later  he  was  again  elected,  this
time  as  a  Whig,  and  he  was  successively  re-elected
until  he  had  served  from  3  Dec,  1821.  till  3  March,
1841,  making  in  all  nearly  twenty- four  years  of
congressional  experience.  He  was  sometimes  face-
tiously alluded  to  by  his  political  opponents  as  the
"  life-member."  In  1844  he  was  elected  lieuten-
ant-governor of  Massachusetts,  with  George  N.
Briggs  at  the  head  of  the  ticket.  Both  served
until  1851,  when  both  retired  to  private  life.  Gov.
Reed  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Brown  in
1845. — Another  s<in,  Caleb,  journalist,  b.  in  West
Bridgewater,  Mass.,  22  April,  1797;  d.  in  Boston,
14  Oct.,  1854,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1817,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised
at  Yarmouth,  Mass.,  until  1827.  He  then  became
a  partner  in  the  firm  of  Gyms  Alger  and  Co.,  carry-
ing on  an  iron-foundry  at  South  Boston.  This
connection  he  maintained  until  his  death.  He  was
a  believer  in  the  doctrines  of  Swedenborg,  and  for
more  than  twenty  years  edited  the  "  New  Jerusalem
Magazine,"  devoted  to  their  promulgation.  He
published  "  The  General  Principles  of  English
Grammar"  (Boston,  1821). — Another  son,  Samp-
son, editor,  b.  in  West  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  10  June,
1800 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  July,  1880,  was  grad-
uated at  Harvard  in  1818,  and  studied  theology  at
Cambridge,  but,  becoming  a  convert  to  the  doctrines
of  Swedenborg,  he  abandoned  the  design  of  pre-
paring for  the  ministry,  and  engaged  in  business.
ile  subseouently  edited  the  "  New  Church  Maga-
zine," ana  was  co-editor  of  the  "  New  Jerusalem
Magazine."  He  was  the  author  of  "  Observations
on  the  Growth  of  the  Mind  "  (Boston,  1826;  Lon-
don, 1839 ;  5th  ed.,  Boston,  1859).

REED,  John,  mine-owner,  b.  in  Germany  about
17C0;  d.  in  Cabarrus  county,  N.  C,  about  1848.
He  came  to  this  country  as  a  Hessian  soldier,  and
after  the  war  of  the  Revolution  settled  on  a  farm  in
Cabarrus  county,  N.  C.  But  little  is  known  of  his
history,  except  that  he  seems  to  have  been  grossly
ignorant  on  many  subjects  regarding  which  he


would  naturally  be  presumed  to  be  well  informed.
Thus  he  lived  to  be  more  than  eighty  years  old
before  discovering  that  he  was  entitled  to  l)ecome
a  citizen  of  the  United  States.  He  was  then  nat-
uralized at  Concord,  N.  C.  Reed  was  the  owner
of  the  first  gold-mine  that  was  discovered  in  this
country.  In  1799  his  son  Conrad,  while  shooting
fish  with  a  bow  and  arrow  in  a  small  stream,  called
Meadow  creek,  near  his  father's  house,  found  in  the
water  a  piece  of  glistening  yellow  metal,  which  he
carried  home.  It  was  aljout  the  size  of  "a  small
smoothing-iron."  His  father  did  not  recognize  it,
and,  a  silversmith  at  Concord  proving  equally  ig-
norant of  its  value,  it  was  for  several  years  used  as
a  convenient  door-weight.  Finally  it  was  sub-
mitted to  a  jeweler  at  Fayetteville,  N.  C,  who,  by
fluxing,  produced  from  it  a  bar  of  gold  from  six
to  eignt  inches  long.  In  1803  a  piece  of  gold
weighing  twentv-eignt  pounds  was  found  in  the
same  stream.  ()ther  pieces  were  afterward  gath-
ered ranginc  in  weight  from  sixteen  pounds  down
to  the  smallest  particles.  In  1831  quartz  veins
were  discovered,  and  Reed  died  a  wealthy  man.

REED,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wickford,  R.  I.,
in  1777;  d.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  6  Jul^,  1845.
He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1805,  studied  the-
ology, and  was  ordained  deacon,  27  May,  1806,  by
Bishop  Benjamin  Moore,  and  priest,  17  .June,  1808.
His  first  charge  after  ordination  was  St.  Luke's
church,  Catskill,  N.  Y.  In  Au^st,  1810,  he  was
called  to  the  rectorship  of  Christ  church,  Pough-
keepsie, N.  Y.,  and  occupied  that  post  for  the  re-
mainder of  his  life.  He  receivea  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1822.  Dr.  Reed  was  a  man
of  good  abilities,  and  devoted  himself  chiefly  to
pastoral  work.  He  published  a  small  work  in  de-
fence of  the  Episcopal  constitution  of  the  church,
and  a  few  occasional  sermons.

REED,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Adams  county,  Pa.,
in  1786;  d.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  19  June,  1850.  He  was
a  member  of  the  class  of  1806  in  Dickinson  college,
but  left  that  institution  before  graduation.  He
studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  West-
moreland county,  Pa.,  in  1808.  In  1815  he  was
elected  state  senator,  and  from  1820  till  1829  he
was  judge  of  the  9th  judicial  district  of  Pennsyl-
vania. From  1834  until  his  death  he  was  professor
in  the  law  department  of  Dickinson  college.  In
1839  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Wash-
ington college.  Pa.  He  wrote  "  The  Pennsylvania
Blackstone '  (3  vols.,  Carlisle,  1831),  "  a  medley  of
English,  Federal,  and  local  law."

REED,  Joseph,  statesman,  b.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,
27  Aug.,  1741;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  5  March,
1785.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1757,  and
then  studying  law  with  Robert  Stockton,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  17()3,  after  which  he  spent  two
years  as  a  law  student  in  the  Middle  Temple,  Lon-
don. On  his  return  in  1765  he  followed  his  pro-
fession in  Trenton,  and  in  1767  was  appointed
deputy  secretary  of  New  Jersey,  but  in  1770  he
went  again  to  England,  where  fie  married  Esther
De  Berdt.  daughter  of  Dennis  De  Berdt  (q.  v.),  agent
of  Massachusetts.  He  returned  to  this  country  in
October,  and  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  fol-
lowed his  profession  with  success.  He  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  the  popular  movements  in  Pennsyl-
vania, was  coHfidential  correspondent  of  Lord
Dartmouth,  who  was  then  colonial  secretary,  and
strove  to  persuade  the  ministry  to  measures  of
moderation.  He  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
committee  of  correspondence  for  Philadelphia  in
November.  1774,  and  in  January,  1775,  was  presi-
dent of  the  2d  Provincial  congress.  On  the  forma-
tion of  the  Pennsylvania  associated  fiiilitia  after


REED


REED


209


the  battle  of  Lexington,  he  was  chosen  lieutenant-
colonel,  and.  when  Ueor^ire  Wu.shin}rt<>n  whm  ap-
t)<>intC4l  to  the  (*otnniand  of  the  Anit-riran  fnrt'f!*,
Mr.  Hfetl  left  hit)  prac-licc  in  I'hilwldphiH  t4i  Ixv
coine  (Jen.  Wn-shinffton's  military  st-cn'tarv.  As
he  luul  beiMi  odueateU  to  the  orderly  and  methodi-
cal trunsaetion  of
business,  and  wan  a
rea«ly  writer,  there  is
no  doubt  that  the
JSil' ^kCM^A  o|)enin^  of  liuoks  of

^^^^jmH^^^I  re(>ord. preparing

^^<V|||^B9^^V  forms,  dinvting  cor-

resjHnulenee.  com-
posing legal  and  state
Im tiers,  and  esta)>-
isning  the  general
rules  and  etiquette
of  hemlouartors,  can
be  traceu  princi|mlly
to  him.  In  Octol)er,
1775,  he  returned  to
Philadelphia,  and  in
January,  1776,  he
was  chosen  member
of  the  assembly,  al-
though at  the  time
he  was  acting  chairman  of  the  committee  of  safe-
ty. He  was  ap|)ointed  on  5  June  adjutant-general
of  the  American  army,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,
and  was  excee<lingly  active  in  the  campaign  that
terminated  with  thelwittle  of  Long  Island.  Admi-
ral Howe,  who  reached  New  York  in  July.  1776,
waii  cliargeil.  as  s{K>cial  commissioner,  with  o|iening
negotiations  with  the  Americans,  and  under  a  flag
of  truce  a  meeting  took  place,  at  which  Col.  Keed
represcnteil  (Jen.  Washington,  but,  the  commu-
nication from  the  British  admiral  being  aildressed
to  "George  Washington.  KsKjuire,"  he  declined  to
receive  it.  In  1777.  on  Washington's  solicitation,
he  was  ap|M>inted  brigadier-general  and  tendered
command  of  all  the  American  cavalry,  and  mean-
while, on  20  March,  1777,  he  was  api«)inted  first
chief  justice  of  Pennsylvania  under  tlie  new  con-
stitution; but  he  declined  l»othof  these  ofllces,  pre-
ferring to  remain  attached  to  Washington's  head-
quarters as  a  volunteer  aide  without  rank  or  nay.  in
which  cajmcity  he  served  with  credit  at  the  oattles
of  Brandywine.  Germantown,  and  Monmouth.  In
Septeml)er.  1777,  he  was  electetl  to  the  Continental
conjfrt'ss.  but  continued  with  the  army  and  was
again  chosen  in  Decemlier.  He  declineil  the  com-
missionershin  of  Indian  affairs  in  Novcmlier.  1778.
but  accepteu  the  chairmanship  of  a  committee  to
confer  with  Washington  concerning  the  manage-
ment of  the  ensuing  campaign,  to  concert  measures
for  the  greatest  efficiency  of  the  army.  The  city  of
Philadelphia,  in  October,  1777,  elected  him  to  the
assembly,  and  the  county  ma<le  him  a  member  of
the  council ;  but  he  decline<l  the  former  election.
In  Decemljer.  177W.  he  was  chosen  president  of  the
supreme  extn-utive  council  of  Pennsylvania,  ami  he
was  continued  in  that  office  for  three  years.  Dur-
ing his  ailminist ration  he  aide<l  in  founding  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  favoriilthe  grad-
ual abolition  of  slavery  and  the  doing  away  with
the  pro|iriciary  jwwersof  the  Penn  family.  'While
Bene«li(t  Arnold  (y.  r.)  wtis  in  command  of  Phila-
delphii^  "ifter  the  evacuation  by  the  British,  he  was
le<l  into  extravagances  that  resultwl  in  his  being
trie<l  by  court-martial.  In  the  presentati<m  of  the
chargers  (Jov.  Heeil,  as  president  of  the  council,  t«Kik
an  active  |>art,  and  so  incurred  the  odium  of  the
friends  of  Arnold.  After  the  failure  of  the  British
peace  commissionors  to  treat  with  congress,  at-
VOL.  v. — 14


tempt*  were  made  to  bribe  high  otncials.  and.  among
others,  Gov.  Keed  wili  approached  and  offered  i'lO.-
(JOO.  together  with  any  office  in  the  co|<ini<*s  in  his
majesty's  gift.  His  n-ply  wa« :  *•  1  am  not  worth
inirchasing,  but,  such  as  I  am.  the  king  of  Gre«t
Britain  is  not  rich  enough  to  «lo  it."  In  17«0  he
was  invested  with  extraordinarv  [lowens  and  largely
through  his  influence  the  disaffection  of  the  IVnn-
sylvania  line  in  the  army  was  suppressed.  He  re-
sume<l  the  practice  of  his  {trofession  in  1781,  and
was  api>ointe«l  by  cf)ngress  one  of  the  commission
to  settle  the  dispute  between  the  states  of  Pennsvl-
vania  and  Conne<-ticut.  Failing  health  le<l  t<»  fiis
visiting  England  in  1784.  hoping  that  a  sea-voyage
would  restore  him ;  but  he  n-tumed  in  a  few  months,
and  died  soon  afterward.  Meanwhile  he  had  been
chosen  to  congress,  but  he  never  took  his  wat.
Gov.  Ueed  was  charged  with  meditating  a  tn-acher-
ous  atmndonment  of  the  American  cans*',  and  a
<letermination  in  go  over  to  the  British,  and  George
Bancroft  in  his  history  introduce<l  the  statement
on  what  appeared  tt>  U-  reliable  testimony.  A  bit-
ter controversy  ensued,  in  which  William  B.  Keed
{q.  V.)  twik  part,  and  it  was  ultimatelv  shown  that
he  had  Ijeen  confounded  with  Col.  ("harles  Head
(o.  v.).  He  published  '*  Remarks  on  (iov.  Johnstone's
Speech  in  Parliament"  (Philadelphia.  1779).  and
"  Uemarks  on  a  Late  Publication  in  the '  Independ-
ent Gazetteer.'  with  an  Address  to  the  People  of
Pennsylvania  "  (1781^).  The  latter  elicited  "  A  Re-
ply" bv  John  Cadwalader.  See  "Life  of  Joseph
Reed,"  by  Henry  Ree<l,  in  Sparks's  "American  Biog-
raphy''  (Boston,  1846).  ana  "  Life  and  Correspond-
ence of  Joseph  Reed."  by  his  grandson.  William  B.
Reetl  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia.  184  7).— His  wife.  Esther
De  Berdt,  b.  in  I^ndon,  22  Oct.,  1746:  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, 18  Sept..  1780.  became  ac(|uaintetl  with
Mr.  Reed  when  he  was  a  law  student  in  London,
and  soon  after  the  death  of  her  father  marrietl  him
in  London  in  May,  1770.  After  the  evacuation  of
Philadelphia  she  was  chosen  president  of  a  society
of  ladies  in  that  city  who  unite<I  for  the  puqiose
of  collecting,  by  voluntarj"  subscription,  additional
supplies  in  money  and  clothing  for  the  army,  which
was  then  in  great  destitution.  In  a  letter  to  Gen.
Washington  she  writes:  "The  amount  of  the  .sub-
scription is  |;200.rj80.  and  £625  68.  8d.  in  specie,
which  makes  in  the  whole,  in  pa[)er  money,  |>300,-
634."  Many  of  her  letters  to  her  husband  and  her
correspondence  with  Gen.  Washington  are  given  in
the  life  of  Joseph  Reed  mentioned  above.  .See  also
"The  Life  of  Esther  I)e  Berth,  afterward  Esther
Reed  of  Pennsvlvania "  (1853). — Their  son,  Jo-
seph, b.  in  Philmlelphia,  Pa.,  11  July,  1772;  d.
there,  4  March,  1846,  was  graduate<l  at  Princeton
in  1792,  and  then  studied  law.  From  1800  till
1809  he  was  a  prothonotarv  of  the  supreme  court,
and  then  attorney-general  of  Penn.sylvania  in
1810-'ll.  He  became  recorder  of  the  city  of  Phila-
delnhia  in  1810,  continuing  in  that  office  till  1829,
ana  published  "The  I^ws  of  Pennsylvania"  (5
vols..  Philadelphia.  1822-'4). — The  second  Joseph's
son.  »'illiani  Bradford,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa..  30  June,  180<5:  d.  in  New  York  city,  18
Feb.,  1876,  was  graduate<l  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1825,  an»l  then  accom()anied  Joel
R.  Poinsett  to  Mexico  as  his  nrivate  secn-tary.  On
his  return  he  studietl  law  ana  practisiNl  with  such
success  that,  in  1838,  he  was  electe«l  attorney-gen-
eral of  Pennsylvania.  In  IHTA)  he  was  ap|x>inted
(irofess4ir  of  American  history  at  the  University  of
'cnnsylvania,  and  in  1857  he  l»ecame  minister  to
China,' in  which  cajwcity  he  negotiatetl  the  impor-
tant treaty  of  June,  1858,  that  secured  to  the  United
States  all  the  advantages  that  had  been  acquired  bj


210


REED


REED


the  allies  from  the  Chinese.  Mr.  Reed  for  a  long
time  was  the  most  brilliant  and  effective  of  the  an-
tajjonists  of  the  Democratic  party  in  Pennsylvania,
but  on  the  nomination  of  James  Buchanan  he  be-
came his  Arm  friend  and  supporter,  even  entering
heartily  into  the  extreme  views  of  those  who  sympa-
thized with  the  south,  and  on  his  return  to  this  coun-
try in  1800  he  continued  to  act  with  the  Democratic
party.  Subsequently  ho  settled  in  New  York,  be-
came a  regular  contributor  to  the  press  of  that  city,
and  for  a  time  was  American  correspondent  of  the
London  "  Times."  Mr.  Reed  was  a  prolific  writer,
and,  besides  contributions  to  "  The  American  (Quar-
terly Review  "  and  "  The  North  American  Review,"
he  was  the  author  of  numerous  orations,  addresses,
and  controversial  pamphlets  on  historical  subjects.
Among  the  latter  were  several  relating  to  his  grand-
father. President  Joseph  Reed,  whose  reputation
was  assailed  by  George  Bancroft.  These  included
"  President  Reed  of  Pennsylvania,  a  Reply  to
George  Bancroft  and  Others ''(Philadelphia,  1867),
to  which  Mr.  Bancroft  responded  with  "  Joseph
Reed,  an  Historical  Essay  "  (New  York.  1867) ;  and
"  A  Rejoinder  to  Mr.  Bancroft's  Historical  Essay  "
(Philadelphia,  1867).  Besides  editing  the  posthu-
mous works  of  his  brother,  Henry  (o.  v.),  he  pub-
lished "  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Joseph  Reed,"
which,  according  to  Chancellor  Kent,  is  "a  most  in-
teresting and  admirable  history  of  one  of  the  ablest
and  purest  patriots  of  the  Revolution  "  (2  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1847),  and  "  Life  of  Esther  De  Berdt,
afterward  Esther  Reed  "(1853).— William  Bradford's
brother,  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  11  July,
1808 ;  d.  at  sea,  27  Sept.,  1854,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1825,  read  law,  and
in  1829  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia.
In  1831  he  war  elected  assistant  professor  of  English
literature  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  and
abandoned  the  legal  profession.  The  same  year  he
became  assistant  professor  of  moral  philosophy,  and
in  1835  he  was  made  professor  of  rhetoric  antl  Eng-
lish literature.  He  served  the  university  until  1854,
when  he  visited  Europe.  In  September  he  embarked
from  Liverpool  for  home  in  the  steamship  "  Arctic,"
in  which  he  was  lost  at  sea.  He  was  a  member  of
the  American  philosophical  society  and  a  vice-pro-
vost of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1846
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University'
of  Vermont.  He  was  early  brought  into  communi-
cation with  the  poet  Wordsworth,  and  assisted  in
the  supervision  and  arrangement  of  an  American
edition  of  his  poems  (Philadelphia,  1837).  He  was
the  author  of  the  preface  to  this  work,  and  an  elabo-
rate article  on  Wordsworth  in  the  "  New  York
Review"  (1839).  After  the  death  of  the  poet  he
superintended  the  publication  of  the  American  edi-
tion of  the  memoirs  by  Dr.  Christopher  Words-
worth (2  vols.,  Boston,  1851).  He  prepared  an  edi-
tion of  Alexander  Reid's  "Dictionary  of  the  Eng-
lish Language  "  (New  York,  1845),  and  George  F.
Graham's  "  English  Synonyms,"  with  an  introduc-
tion and  illustrative  authorities  (1847),  and  edited
American  reprints  of  Thomas  Arnold's  "  Lectures
on  Modern  History"  (1845);  Lord  Mahon's"  His-
tory of  England  from  the  Peace  of  Utrecht  to  the
Peace  of  Paris"  (2  vols.,  1849);  and  the  poetical
works  of  Thomas  Grav,  for  which  he  prepared  a
new  memoir  (Philadelphia,  1850).  He  delivered  two
"  Lectures  upon  the  American  Union  "  before  the
Smithsonian  institution  (1857),  and  several  ad-
dresses at  various  times  before  other  bodies.  He
wrote  a  life  of  his  grandfather,  Joseph  Reed,  in
Sparks's  "  American  Biography."  His  chief  com-
positions were  several  courses  of  lectures  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  of  which  collections


have  been  published  since  his  death  by  his  broth-
er, William  B.  Reed,  with  the  titles  "Lectures of
English  Literature,  from  Chaucer  to  Tennyson"
(Philadelphia,  1855);  "Lectures  on  English  His-
tory and  Tragic  Poetry,  as  Illustrated  by  Shake-
speare," to  which  is  prefixed  a  biographical  sketch
(1855) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  History  of  the  American
Union "  (1856) ;  and  "  Lectures  on  the  British
Poets"  (2  vols.,  1857). — Henry's  son,  Henrr,  au-
thor, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22  Sept.,  1846,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1865,  rea<l  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Philadel-
phia bar  in  1869.  In  November,  1886,  he  was  ap-
g minted  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
hiladelphia,  and  in  1887  was  elected  to  tne  office
for  a  term  of  years.  He  is  the  author  of  a  work
on  the  "  Statute  of  Frauds  "  (3  vols.,  1884),  and  has
published  numerous  articles  on  legal  subjects.  He
translated  "The  Daughter  of  an  Egyptian  King,"
by  George  Ebers  (Philadelphia,  1875).

REED,  Philip,  senator,  b.  in  Kent  county,  Md.,
about  1760;  d.  in  Kent  county,  Md.,  2  Nov.,  1829.
He  received  an  academical  education,  and  served
as  a  captain  in  the  Revolutionary  army.  After-
ward he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of
Robert  Wright,  resigned,  and  held  the  seat  from
29  Dec,  1806,  till  3  March,  1813.  On  his  return
home  he  commanded,  as  colonel  of  militia,  the
regiment  of  home-guards  that  met  and  defeated  at
Moorefields,  Md..  'Mi  Aug.,  1814,  a  su|)erior  British
force  under  Sir  Peter  Parker  (o.  v.),  who  was  killed
in  the  engagement.  Col.  Reed  was  elected  to  the
15th  congress,  serving  from  1  Dec.  1817,  till  3
March,  1819,  and  re-elected  to  the  17th,  having
contested  the  election  of  Jeremiah  Causden,  serv-
ing from  20  March.  1822,  till  3  March,  1823.

REED,  Rebecca  Theresa,  proselyte,  b.  in  East
Cambridge,  Mass.,  about  1813.  Her  father  was  a
farmer  in  straitened  circumstances,  who  gave  his
three  daughters  the  best  education  within  his
reach.  The  eldest,  Rebecca,  was  sent  to  a  neigh-
borhood school  for  three  years,  and  displayed  an
unusual  aptitude  for  making  lace  and  other  orna-
mental work.  She  was  a  serious,  well-behaved  girl,
and  thoughtful,  according  to  the  testimony  of  her
teachers,  beyond  her  years.  Her  attention  was
first  called  to  nuns  and  nunneries  in  the  sum-
mer of  1826,  about  which  time  an  Ursuline  con-
vent had  been  established  on  Mount  Benedict,
Charlestown,  Mass.  In  1830,  on  the  death  of  her
mother,  she  again  became  interested  in  the  sub-
ject, and  was  anxious  to  enter  the  institution  with
the  intention  of  consecrating  herself  to  a  religidos
life.  Through  the  influence  of  Roman  Catholic
friends,  and  notwithstanding  the  opposition  of
her  family,  she  was  admitted  to  the  convent  on
7  Aug.,  1831.  Although  she  remained  within  its
walls  nearly  six  months,  she  socm  became  dissatis-
fied with  the  continual  repression  of  youthful  im-
pulses, the  strict  discipline,  the  physical  discom-
forts, and  the  apparent  want  of  sympathy  of  those
in  charge.  Having  accidentally  overheard  a  con-
versation between  the  convent  authorities,  from
which  she  leamed  that  she  was  to  be  removed  to
Canada,  she  made  her  escape,  and  returned  to  her
family.  At  this  time  her  health  had  been  seriously
impaired  by  the  austerities  of  her  conventual  life.
Miss  Reed  s  escape,  and  the  statements  that  she
made  of  what  haci  occurred  during  her  stay  in  the
convent,  gave  rise  to  an  acrimonious  controversy.
Two  years  later  the  excitement  was  increased  by  the
escape  of  Sister  Mary  John  on  28  June,  1834,  and
on  tne  11th  of  the  following  August  the  convent,
fi.  large  three-story  building,  was  sacked  and  burned
by  a  mob. The  foregoing  statements  are  gathered


REKI)


RKKDKR


211


from  "Six  Monthx  in  nConvont :  or.  The  NHinitivc
of  R«hoocA  Thon'vi  RinhI,  Who  wjw  uihUt  thi'  In-
fluents of  th«'  Uoriiaii  Ciitholirs  nittnit  Two  Yi*nn«."
••tc,  ami  "Sinnilt-miMit  to 'Six  M(»nlhs  in  a  Con-
vi'iit,'  conflrnunt:  th«'  Narrative  of  Relntfa  Tho-
n"«H  RihhI  hv  till'  Testimony  of  more  than  One
lluntlpi»<l  witnesses"  (Ik>st-on,  IKtt),  See  also
"The  Memorial  llistorv  of  lioston," ctlited  by  Jus-
tin Winsor  (vol.  iii..  ftoston.  1881),  for  details  of
thf  ilestruetion  of  the  I'rsuline  e<mvenl.

RKKU,  Thoiiia.H  B.,  s(Miat(»r.  b.  in  Kentuekv:
il.  in  U-xinirtoM.  Ky..  2«  Nov..  1821).  Althoujfh  liis
early  ixlucHtiitnal  lulvantAp^s  were  limittMl,  he  was
ftble  to  study  law.  On  Iteinj;  admitted  to  the
iMr  ho  iH'can  to  practise  at  Ijexincton.  Ky.,  and
ha<l  already  acquire<l  some  ret>utation  in  his  pro-
fession U'fore  rt'movinjr  to  .Siississippi  territory.
There  he  fountl  a  wide  field  for  the  exercise  of  his
tnlent-s  in  the  solution  of  the  intricate  questions
that  aros«»  from  the  variety  of  land-tenures  and  the
difficulty  of  apnlyint;  the  rules  of  common  law  to
the  novel  conoitions  of  frontier  life.  Mr.  Reed
settle<l  at  Natchez,  and  made  his  ap|H>«rance  in  the
supreme  court  of  the  state  in  the  first  criminal  case
that  was  brought  l»efore  that  tribunal.  "  The
State  against  the  Blennerhasaetts."  which  he  argued
for  the  defence  at  the  June  term  in  1818.  His
reputation  at  the  bar  continue<l  to  increase,  and  in
1821  he  WHS  electe<l  attorney-general  of  the  state,
discharging  the  duties  of  the  office  for  four  years
with  ability.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from
Mississippi  in  the  {)lace  of  David  Holmes,  resigned,
and  served  from  1 1  March.  182«.  till  3  March.  1827.
His  legal  knowledge  and  his  familiarity  with  the
fundamental  principles  of  the  government  soon  at-
tracted attention.  His  speech  on  what  was  known
as  the  "Judiciary  question"  was  much  applauded
by  senators  and  warmly  commended  by  the  press,
rie  was  re-elected  for  the  full  term,  but  died  while
on  his  way  to  Washington  to  take  his  seat.

REED,  Thomas  Brackett,  legislator,  b.  in
IN)rtlHn(l.  Me.,  18  Oct..  IKW.  He  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  18(>(),  and  studied  law.  but  was  ap-
pointed a<-ting  assistant  paymaster  in  the  navy.  19
April.  18<54.  and  served  until  his  honorable  dis-
charge. 4  Nov.,  1865.  He  was  soon  afterwartl  atl-
mitted  to  the  l>ar,  and  began  to  practise  at  Port-
land. In  18«8-'9  he  was  a  member  of  the  lower
branch  of  the  Maine  legislature,  and  in  1870  he  sat
in  the  state  senate.  From  the  latter  year  until
1872  he  was  attorney-general,  and  in  1874-7  he
served  as  solicitor  for  the  city  of  Portland.  He  was
elected  a  memlier  of  cohgress  in  187(5.  and  has  lK»en
re-electeil  until  the  present  time  (1888).  Mr.  Reed
is  one  of  the  chief  meml»ers  on  the  Republican  side
of  the  house.  an<l  is  an  effective  debater.

REED,  WnUani,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Marble-
head.  Mass..  in  1777;  d.  there.  18  Feb.,  1837.  He
became  a  merchant  in  his  native  town,  and  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Fe<leralist.  serving  from  4
Nov.,  1811.  till  3  March,  1815.  He  was  active  in
e<lucatioiial  and  religious  matters,  acting  as  presi-
dent of  the  Sabl)ath-schof)l  union  of  Massiichusetts
and  of  the  American  tract  society,  and  as  vice-
president  of  the  Kducation  society.  He  w^as  also
one  of  the  IxMird  of  the  Andover  t)ieologieal  semi-
nary and  a  trustee  of  Dartmouth  college.  Of
$08,000  that  was  given  by  him  in  his  will  to
benevolent  objects.  $17,000  were  left  to  Dartmouth.
$10,000  to  Amherst.  $10,000  to  the  American
iKianl  of  foreign  missions.  $1(S,000  to  two  churches
in  Marblfliea4l,  and  $5,000  to  the  librarj'  of  An-
dover theological  S4'minary.

REEUER,  Andrew  Horatio,  governor  of
Kansas,  b.  in  Eaatun,  Pa.,  6  Aug^  1807;  d.  there.


^^/W^-^^i^


5  July.  1864.  He  »pont  the  greater  part  of  his  Hf«
in  h!aston.  Pa.,  where  he  nractiscd  law,  and  was
a  Dem<MTHtic  |>oliticiHn,  out  declinetl  office  till
18.VI,  when  he  was  ap[>ointe<l  the  first  governor
of  Kansas.  Gov.  R««e«ler  ha<l  come  to  the  territory
ft  firm  iK'mocrat,  but  the  e<mduct  of  the  "border
ruffians"  shook  his
|>artisanship.  He
pres<'ril>ed  distinct
and  rigid  rules  for
the  conduct  of  the
next  legislature,
which,  it  was  then
l)elieve<l,  would  de-
termine whether
Kansas  would  be-
come a  free  or  a
slave  state.  But  all
his  pn'cauiionscame
to  naught.  On  80
March.  1855,  5,000
Missourians  took
possession  of  nearly
every  election  -  dis-
trict in  the  terri-
tory. Of  the  total  number  of  votes  cast  1,410
were  found  to  be  legal  and  4.908  illepral,  5,427
were  given  to  the  pnvslavery  and  791  to  the  free-
state  candidates.  But  on  0  April,  1855.  Gov.
Reeder  issued  certificates  of  election  to  all  but  one
third  of  the  claimants,  and  the  returns  in  these
cases  he  rejected  on  account  of  pal[>able  defects  in
the  papers.  As  a  lawyer  he  recognized  that  he
had  the  power  to  question  the  legality  of  the  elec-
tion of  the  several  claimants  only  fn  those  cases
where  there  were  protests  lotlged.  or  where  there
were  palpable  defects  in  the  returns.  Notices  were
sent  tnroughout  the  territory  that  protests  would
be  receive<r and  considered,  and  the  time  for  filing
protests  was  extendeil  so  that  facilities  might  be
given  for  a  full  hearing  of  lx)th  sides.  In  nearly
two  thirds  of  the  returns  there  were  no  protests  or
official  notice  of  frauds,  and  the  papers  were  on
their  face  regular.  In  the  oj)inion  of  Gov.  Ketnler,
this  precluded  him  from  withholding  certificates,
and  he  acconlingly  issued  them,  notwithstanding
his  personal  belief  that  the  claimants  had  nearly
all  l)een  fraudulently  elected.  His  contention  al-
ways was  that  any  other  course  would  have  been
revolutionary.  This  action  endowed  the  notori-
ously illegal  legislature  with  technical  authority,
and  a  few  weeKs  later,  when  Gov.  Reetler  went
to  Washington.  D.  €..  to  invoke  the  help  of  the
administration,  the  attorney-general  refused  to
pnjsecute.  as  Reeiler's  own  certificate  pronounced
the  elections  true.  One  of  the  first  official  acts  of
this  legislature  was  to  draw  up  a  memorial  to  the

E resident  refjuesting  Gov.  Ree*ler's  removal,  but
efore  its  bearer  reached  Washington  the  governor
was  dismissed  by  President  Pierce.  He  then  be-
came a  resident  of  I^iwrence.  Kan.,  where  the  free-
state  movement  lx>gan.  Its  citizens  held  a  conven-
tion at  Big  Springs,  a  few  miles  west  of  that  town,
on  5  .Sept..  18.55,  Gov.  Reeder  wrote  the  resolu-
tions. a<ldresse<l  the  convention,  and  received  their
nomination,  by  acclamation,  for  the  post  of  terri-
torial delegate  to  congress.  The«)  resolutions  de-
clared that  "we  will  endure  no  longer  the  tyranni-
cal enactments  of  the  Inigus  legislature,  will  resist
them  to  a  bloo<Iy  issue."  and  n^commende<l  the
"formation  of  volunteer  ct>inpanies  and  the  pro-
curement of  arms."  On  9  Oct..  at  a  sejwrate  elec-
tion, Mr.  Ree<ler  was  again  chosen  dele^te  to  con-
gress. Under  the  newly  frame*!  territonal  constitu-
tion, which  was  known  as  the  Topeka  constitution.


212


REEDER


REE2SE


a  legislature  formed  of  the  free-state  party,  15  July,
1856,  elected  him,  with  James  H.  Ijane,  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  which  choice  congress  refused  to  recognize,
and  neither  senator  took  his  seat.  At  the  l)egin-
ning  of  the  civil  war  he  and  Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon
were  the  first  brigatlier-geiierals  that  were  ap-
pointed by  President  Lincoln.  But  Mr.  lleeder
declined,  on  the  plea  that  he  was  too  far  advanced
in  life  to  accept  high  office  in  a  new  profession.
He  returned  to  Kaston,  Pa.,  where  he  resided  until
his  death.  See  "  Life  of  Abraham  Lincoln,"  by
John  G.  Nicolay  and  John  Hay.

REEDER,  (Charles,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  31  Oct.,  1B17.  He  was  educated  in  pub-
lic schools  in  Baltimore,  and  has  since  devotea  his
attention  to  the  construction  of  marine  steam-en-
gines, which  have  held  a  high  rank  for  efficiency
and  durability.  Mr.  Reeder  in  this  way  became  in-
terested in  steamships,  and  in  1855  was  an  owner
of  the  "  Tennessee,"  tne  first  that  cleared  from  Bal-
timore to  a  European  port.  He  has  been  called  to
directorships  in  banking  and  other  establishments,
and  has  published  "  Caloric :  A  Review  of  the  Dy-
namic Theory  of  Heat "  (Baltimore,  1887).

REES,  Jolin  Krom,  educator,  b.  in  New  York
city,  27  Oct.,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1872,  and  at  the  School  of  mines  in  1875,
and  in  1873-'6  he  was  assistant  in  mathematics
at  the  latter  institution.  In  1876  he  was  called
to  the  professorship  of  mathematics  and  astron-
omy in  Washington  university,  St.  Louis,  where
he  remained  until  1881,  when  he  was  recalled  to
Columbia,  given  charge  of  the  department  of  geod-
esy and  practical  astronomy,  and  made  director  of
the  observatorj*.  While  he  was  in  St.  Louis  the
time  system  radiating  from  the  Washington  uni-
versity observatory  was  established  by  his  aid,  and
the  observatory  was  built.  In  July,  1878,  he  was
a  member  of  the  Fort  Worth  solar  eclipse  party,
and  contributed  a  report  to  the  publications  of  the
expedition.  Prof.  Rees  is  a  member  of  scientific
societies,  and  has  been  active  in  the  American  as-
sociation for  the  advancement  of  science,  having
been  local  secretary  at  the  St.  Louis  meeting  in
1878,  secretary  of  the  section  on  mathematics  and
physics  in  1879,  and  general  secretary  in  1880.
He  has  held  various  offices  also  in  the  Ameri-
can metrological  society  since  1883.  He  has  been
chairman  of  the  board  of  editors  of  the  "  School  of
Mines  Quarterly"  since  1884,  and  has  published
"Report  on  the  Total  Solar  Eclipse,  July,  1878,"
"Observations  of  the  Transit  of  Venus,  6  Dec,
1882,"  and,  in  addition  to  various  papers  and  lec-
tures before  the  New  York  academy  of  sciences,  has
written  cvclopa'dia  articles.

REESt),  Chauncey  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  Cana-
stota,  N.  Y.,  28  Dec,  1837;  d.  in  Mobile  Ala.,
22  Sept.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1859,  and  at  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  sent  to  Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  as  assist-
ant engineer  in  defence  of  that  work.  He  was  then
transferred  to  similar  duty  at  Washington,  D.  C,
and  became  1st  lieutenant  of  engineers,  6  Aug.,
1861.  He  rendered  valuable  service  in  the  Virginia
peninsular  campaign  from  March  till  August,  1862,
m  constructing  bridges,  roads,  and  field-works,
particularly  the  bridge,  2,000  feet  in  length,  over
the  Chickahominy.  He  became  captain  of  engi-
neers in  March,  1868,  and  was  engaged  in  the  Rap-
pahannock campaign  in  similar  service,  construct-
ing a  Ijridge  before  Fredericksburg,  defensive  works
and  bridges  at  Chancellorsville,  and  at  Franklin's
crossing  of  the  Rappahannock,  in  the  face  of  the
enemy.  He  participated  in  the  battle  of  Gettys-
burg, in  the  siege  of  Fort  Wagner,  S.  (^.,  and  was


chief  engineer  of  the  Array  of  the  Tennes-see  dur-
ing the  Atlanta  campaign,  the  subsequent  march
to  the  sea,  and  that  through  the  Carolinas.  In
December,  1864,  he  was  brevetted  major,  lieuten-
ant-colonel, and  colonel,  "  for  gallant  and  distin-
guished services  during  the  campaign  thnjugh
Georgia  and  ending  in  the  capture  of  Savannah,"
and  in  March,  1865,  he  was  orevetted  brigadier-
general  in  the  U.  S.  army  for  faithful  and  merito-
rious service  during  the  same  campaign.  He  be-
came lieutenant-colonel  in  June,  1865,  was  super-
intending engineer  of  the  constniction  of  Fort
Montgomery,  N.  Y.,  and  recorder  of  the  board  of
engineers  to  conduct  experiments  on  the  use  of
iron  in  permanent  defences  in  1865-'7.  In  March
of  the  latter  year  he  liecame  major  in  the  corps  of
engineers.  He  was  then  secretary  of  the  board  of
engineers  for  fortifications  and  narbor  and  river
obstructions  for  the  defence  of  the  United  States.

REESE,  David  Meredith,  phvsician,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1800;  d.  in  New  York  city,  12
Aug.,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  Maryland  in  1820,
and  subsequently  settled  in  New  York  city,  where
he  established  an  extensive  practice.  For  several
years  he  was  physician-in-chief  to  Bellevue  hospital,
and  he  subsequently  was  city  and  county  superin-
tendent of  public  schools.  He  published  "  Observa-
tions on  the  Epidemic  of  Yellow  Fever"  (Baltimore,
1819);  " Strictures  on  Health  "  (1828);  "The  Epi-
demic Cholera  "  (New  York,  1833);  "  Humbugs  of
New  York  "  (Boston,  1833) ;  "  Review  of  the  First
Annual  Report  of  the  American  Anti-Slavery  So-
ciety," of  which  25,000  copies  were  sold  at  once
(1834) ;  "  Quakerism  vs.  Calvinism  "  (New  York,
1834);  "  Phrenology  known  by  its  Fruits  "  (1838) ;
and  "  Medical  Lexicon  of  Modem  Terminology  "
(1855);  and  contributed  constantly  to  medical  lit-
erature. He  also  edited  the  scientific  section  of
"Chambers's  Educational  Course"  (Edinburgh,
1844),  and  American  editions  of  Sir  Astley  P.
Cooper's  "  Surgical  Diet,"  Dr.  John  M.  Good's
"  Book  of  Nature,"  J.  Moore  Neligan's  work  on
"  Medicines,"  with  notes  (1856),  and  the  "  American
3Iedical  Gazette  "  (New  York,  1850-'5).

REESE,  Jolin  James,  physician,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  16  June,  1818.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1837,  and  at  the
medical  department  in  1839,  and  began  practice  in
his  native  city.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  sur-
geon of  volunteers  in  1861,  and  was  in  charge  of  a
hospital  in  Philadelphia.  Dr.  Reese  has  continued
to  reside  in  that  city,  is  professor  of  iurispnidence
and  toxicology  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
and  is  a  member  of  foreign  and  domestic  profes-
sional societies.  He  was  president  of  the  Phila-
delphia medical  jurisprudence  society  in  1886-'7,
and  is  physician  to  several  city  hospitals.  He  has
contributed  largely  to  professional  literature,  edit-
ed the  7th  American  edition  of  Taylor's  "  Medical
Jurisprudence,"  and  published  "American  Medi-
cal Formulary"  (Philadelphia,  1850):  "Analysis
of  Physiology"  (1853);  "Manual  of  Toxicology"
(1874);  and  a  "  Text- Book  of  Medical  Jurispru-
dence and  Toxicology  "  (1884).

REESE,  Leri  ft.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Harford
county,  Md.,  8  Feb.,  1806;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
21  Sept.,  1851.  He  was  educated  in  the  public
schools  in  Baltimore,  taught  for  several  years,  and
in  1826  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Epis-
copal church.  In  the  controversy  that  resulted  in
the  formation  of  the  Methodist  I^rotestant  church,
he  joined  the  "  Union  "  society,  became  secretary
of  that  body,  and  was  the  first  pastftr  that  was  or-
dained in  that  organization. Be  was  chaplain  to


RKRSE


RKHN


213


oonfrrnw  in  1837-'8.  «nd  wm  an  nrtlcnt  temperance
rpfornitT.  Ho  publi.Hheil  a  sori«»»  c»f  (iiwourao*  on
the  "Ohli^'Hlioii!*  of  th(*  Snliliatir'  (1H20),  and
"  Th«)u>fht.«  of  nn  Itinerant  "  (1M4I).

KKKSK,  ThoniMM,  cliTtfynmn.  b.  in  IVnnttylvania
in  1742 ;  d.  nt-nr  IVndloton.  S.  (_'..  in  Aujfust,  1794.
He  was  gradimteil  at  Princeton  in  1768,  studioil
theology,  and  was  admitte<l  tu  the  ministry  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  1773.  He  then  bi-cnmc
pastor  of  Salem  church,  Sumter  «li.stricl,  S.  ('.,
where  he  oontiinMHl  until  the  Hevolutitm.  During
the  wiir  he  pri'nehiHl  in  Mwklenliurjf,  N.  ('.,  hut  in
17H'2  he  returni-*!  to  his  previous  charp*,  and  in
170'J-'.'{  he  w»i.>»  pastor  of  twochun-hes  in  IVndleton
district.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degn'e  of  I).  I),
in  1789.  Dr.  Keese  was  an  eminent  scholar  and  a
successful  teacher,  and  did  much  to  promote  the
religious  life  of  the  wdored  race  in  his  district,  to
wliom  ho  regularly  locturetl.  He  nuhlished  a  valu-
able essay  on  the  "  Influence  of  Religion  on  Civil
Society  "  (Charleston,  S.  C.,  1788),  and  three  ser-
mons in  the  "American  Preacher."

REKSE,  WiUiani  Brown,  jurist,  b.  in  Jefferson
county.  Tenn.,  29  Nov.,  1793;  «l.  near  Knoxville,
Tenn.,  7  July,  1800.  He  was  graduate<l  at  Green-
ville college  with  the  first  honors,  studied  law,  and
was  admitte<l  to  the  bar  in  1817.  In  18J^1  he  lie-
came  chancellor  of  the  state,  and  in  1835  he  was
elected  to  the  liench  of  the  supreme  court  in  Ten-
nessee, He  resigned  in  1847.  In  1 8,')0  he  was  chosen
president  of  the  University  of  VmsI  Tennessee,  which
place  he  filU>d  until  failing  health  compelled  him
to  resign.  He  was  electetl  president  of  the  East
TennesstH?  historical  society  m  1830,  and  held  the
office  until  his  death.  In  1845  the  University  of
Elast  Tennessee  conferre<l  uf)on  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  Judge  Reest»'s  oninion  in  a  case  involving
a  construction  of  the  "  rule  in  Shelly's  case"  elicit-
ed high  commendation  from  Chancellor  Kent.  He
was  a  man  of  literary  tastes  and  an  able  scholar.

REKVE,  Isaac  Van  Diizen,  soldier,  b.  in  But-
ternuts, Otsego  CO.,  N.  Y.,  29  July,  1813 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  31  l)ec.,  1890.  He  was  gra4luated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  ISSo,  was  engaged  in  the
Florida  war  in  1836-^7  and  in  1840-'2,  and  served
throughout  the  war  with  Mexico.  He  l)ecame  cap-
Uiin  in  1846.  and  received  the  brevet  of  major  and
lieutenant-colonel  for  gallant  and  meritorious  ser-
vice at  Contreras,Churubusco.  and  Molino  del  Rev.
He  commanded  the  expedition  against  the  Pinal
Apache  Indians  in  185»-'9,  l)ecame  major  in  Mav,
1861,  was  mwie  prisoner  of  war  by  (Jen.  David  fc.
Twiggs  on  9  May  of  that  year,  and  was  not  ex-
changed till  20  Aug.,  1862.  He  was  chief  muster-
ing and  disbursing  officer  in  1862-'3.  became  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  September,  1862,  and  was  in  com-
mand of  the  draft  remlezvous  at  Pittsburg.  Pa.,  in
1864-'5.  He  became  colonel  of  the  13th  infantry
in  October,  1864,  and  was  brevette<l  brigadier-gen-
eral in  the  U.  S.  army,  13  March,  186.5,  "  for  faith-
ful and  meritorious  service  during  the  civil  war."
In  Januan-,  1H71.  he  was  retire<l  at  his  own  request.

REEVE,  Tapping,  jurist,  b.  in  Rrookhaven,
li.  I.,  in  Octolier,  1744:  d.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  13
Dec.,  1823.  He  was  graduat(>d  at  Princeton  in
1768.  and  in  1767-70  was  a  tutor  there.  In  17?2
he  removed  to  Litchfield,  C«mn.,  and  began  the

1)ractice  of  law,  and  in  1784  he  established  there  a
aw-echool  that  attaine<l  to  great  reputationthrough-
out  the  country.  Many  men  that  afterward  liecame
celebrated  obtaineil  their  legal  education  there.
He  was  its  sole  instructor  till  1798.  when  he  asso-
ciated with  him  James  Oould  {q.  r.),  but  he  con-
tinued to  give  lectures  till  1820.  The  moilest  one-
story  building  wliere Messrs.  Reeve  and Gould


deiiveml  their  lectures  in  Mill  Htanding  in  a  dilapi-
dated condition.  It  has  lx*(>n  remove*!  to  the  out-
skirts of  the  town,  and  is  usmI  as  a  dwelling.  Mr.
R«»eve  was  a  judge  of  the  Connecticut  su[terior
court  from  I71W  till  1814,  when  he  l»e<'ame  chief
justice  of  the  state,  but  he  retirtnl  in  the  latter  year,
on  reaching  the  age  of  seventy.  He  was  a  Federal-
ist in  fMilitics,  and,  though  avenw  to  public  life,
served  once  in  the  legislature  and  once  in  the
council.  During  the  Revolution  he  was  an  artlent
[mtriot,  and  after  the  revenK-s  to  the  American
arms  in  1776  he  was  active  in  raising  re<-ni its,  going
as  an  officer  to  the  vicinity  of  New  York,  where
the  news  of  the  victories  at  Tn»nton  and  Princeton
matle  his  services  unnecessary.  Judge  Reeve  was
the  first  eminent  lawyer  in  this  country  that  labored
to  effect  a  change  in  the  laws  regarding  the  prop-
erty of  married  women.  He  re<-eived  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Middleburyin  1808,  and  fnmi  Prince-
ton in  1813.  He  marrietl  Sarah,  sister  of  Aaron
Burr.  Judge  Reeve  publishe<l  "The  I^wof  Baron
and  Femme ;  of  Parent  and  Child  ;  of  (iuardian
and  Ward  ;  of  Master  and  Servant,  etc."  (New
Haven,  1816;  2«I  e<l., by  Lucius  K.Chittenden,  Bur-
lington, Vt.,  1846;  with  appendix  by  J.  NV.  Allen,
1«)7;  3d  ed.,  by  Amasa  J.  Parker  aiid  C.  E.  Bald-
win, All)any.  1862):  and  "Treatise  on  the  Ijaw  of
Descents  in  the  Several  United  States  of  America"
(New  York,  1825).

REEVES,  John,  English  jurist,  b.  in  England
in  1752;  d.  there  in  1829.  He  was  educated  at
Merton  college,  Oxford,  called  to  the  bar  al>out
1780,  and  in  1791-'2  was  chief  justice  of  Newfound-
land. In  the  latter  year  he  founded  the  Ass4>ciation
for  preserving  liberty  and  proj^rty  against  I^evel-
lers  and  Republicans.  He  became  one  of  the  king's
printers  in  1800,  was  superintendent  of  aliens  in
180Ji-'14,  and  was  also  a  law-clerk  to  the  board  of
trade.  His  numerous  publications  include  "  History
of  the  English  I^aw  "  (2  vols.,  Ix>ndon.  1784-'5 ;  with
additions, 4  vols.,  1787;  completcnl,  1829);  "  History
of  the  Government  of  Newfoundland  "  (1793);  ancl
two  tracts,  showing  that  Americans  who  were  bom
before  the  war  of  independence  are  not  aliens  by
the  laws  of  England  (1814).

REEVES,  Marian  Callionn  Legare,  author,
b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  about  1854.  She  received  a
home  education,  and  began  to  write  almut  1866
under  the  pen-name  of  "  P'adette."  Her  publica-
tions include  "Ingemisco"  (New  York,  1867);
"Randolph  Honor"  (1868);  "Sea-Drift"  (Phila-
delphia, 1869);  "Wearithorne"  (18?2);  "A  Little
Maid  of  Acadie"  (New  York,  1888);  and,  with
Family  Read,  "Old  Martin  Ik>scawen's  Jest"  (New
York',  1878),  and  "Pilot  Fortune"  (Boston,  1883).

REHAN,  Ada,  actress,  b.  in  Limerick,  Ireland,
22  April,  1859.  She  came  to  this  country  at  an
early  age,  was  educated  in  the  Brooklyn  public
schools,  and  made  her  first  public  ap{>earance  on
the  stage  at  fifteen  years  of  age,  but  sul»se<juently
resumixl  her  studies  for  a  vear.  After  two  seasons
in  Mrs.  Drew's  theatre,  Philadelphia,  she  joined
Augtistin  Dalv's  company  in  New  Tork  city.  She
has  l)een  eminently  successful  in  light  comedy
roles,  such  as  Katherine  in  "Taming  of  the  Shrew,''
and  the  t)rincii>al  female  characters  in  such  plays
as  "  Cinuerella  at  SchiM>I."  ••  Nee«lles  and  Pins, '  "  A
Wooden  Spoon,"  "The  Railroad  of  lA>ve,"  "After
Business  Hours," and  "Our  English  Friend."  Miss
Rehan  met  with  great  success  and  favorable  criti-
cism when  she  8ppeare«l  in  Ix>ndon  with  Daly's
American  comjiany  in  May,  1888.

REHN,  Frank  Knox  Morton,  artist,  b.  in
Phila<lelphia,  Pa.,  12  April,  1848.  Hestudietl  under
Christian  Schussele  at  the  Pennsylvania  academy


214


REICHEL


REID


of  fine  arts,  and  for  several  years  painted  portraits
in  Philadelphia,  but  later  aevoted  himself  almost
exclusively  to  marine  and  coast  painting.  He  has
exhibited  at  the  academy,  Philadelphia,  and  since

1879  at  the  Academy  of  design,  New  York,  to  which
city  he  came  aljout  1882.  lie  was  awarded  in  1882
the  first  prize  for  marine  painting  at  the  St.  Louis
exjM)sition,  in  1885  the  first  prize  at  the  water-color
exnibition  of  the  American  art  association,  and  in

1880  a  gold  medal  at  the  Prize  fund  exhibition.
His  paintings  include  "  Looking  down  on  the  Sea
from  the  Rocks  at  Magnolia,  Mass."  (1884-'o);  "A
Missing  Vessel "  (1885) ;  "  Close  of  a  Summer  Day  " ;
and  "  Evening,  Gloucester  IIaHx)r"  (1887).

REICHEL,  Charles  Ootthold,  Moravian  bish-
op, b.  in  llermsdorf,  Silesia,  14  July,  1751  ;  d.  at
Jsiesky,  Prussia,  18  April,  1825.  He  was  educated
in  the  Moravian  college  and  theological  seminary  of
Germany.  In  1784  he  came  to  this  country  in  order
to  open  a  l)oarding-school  for  boys  at  Nazareth,
which  is  still  in  existence,  and  over  which  he  pre-
sided, as  its  first  principal,  for  sixteen  years.  Hav-
ing been  appointed  presiding  bishop  of  the  southern
district  of  the  Moravian  church,  he  was  consecrated
to  the  episcopacy  in  1801.  During  his  residence  at
Salem,  N.  C,  the  University  of  North  Carolina  con-
ferred on  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  In  1811  he  was
appointed  presiding  bishop  of  the  northern  district
of  the  clinrch,  and  removed  to  Bethlehem.  In  1818
he  attended  the  general  synod  at  Uerrnhut.  Saxony,
after  which  he  remained  in  Europe  and  retired  from
active  service. — His  son.  Levin  Theodore,  Mora-
vian bishop,  b.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  4  March.  1812 ;
d.  in  Bcrthelsdorf,  near  Uerrnhut,  Saxony,  23  May,
1878,  accompanied  his  parents  to  Germany  in  1818,
and  was  educated  at  the  Moravian  college  and
theological  seminary,  but  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1834.  He  had  charge  of  the  churches  at
Schoeneck,  Emmaus,  Nazareth,  and  Lititz,  Pa.,  and
subsequently  labored  at  Salem,  N.  C.  In  1857  he
atten(lcd  the  general  synod  at  Uerrnhut,  which
l)ody  elected  him  to  the  mission  board.  This  office
he  filled  until  his  death.  On  7  July.  1869,  he  was
consecrated  to  the  episcopacy  at  Jlerrnhut.  He
paid  oflicial  visits  to  the  Danish  West  Indies  and
to  Lal)rador.  He  was  the  author  of  "  History  of
Nazareth  Hall,  at  Nazareth,  Pa."  (Philadelphia,
1855) :  "  The  Moravians  in  North  Carolina  "  (1857) ;
and  ••  Missions-Atlas  der  Briider-Kirche  "  (Ilerrn-
hut,  1800).  An  important  history  from  his  pen  of
the  American  branch  of  the  Moravian  church  re-
mains in  manuscript. — Charles  Gotthold's  grand-
son, WnUam  CorneHiis,  author,  b.  in  Salem,  N.
C,  9  May.  1824;  d.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa..  15  Oct.,
1876,  was  the  son  of  Rev.  Benjamin  Reichel,  of
Salem  female  academy.  He  entered  Nazareth  Plall
in  1834.  and  in  1839  the  Moravian  theological  semi-
nary, where  he  was  gradiiated  in  1844,  After  serv-
ing as  tutor  for  four  years  at  Nazareth  Hall,  he
became  a  professor  in  the  theological  seminary.  In
1802  he  was  appointed  to  the  charge  of  Linden  Hall
seminary,  Lititz,  Pa.,  which  he  resigned  in  1868.
From  1808  till  1870  he  filled  the  duties  of  professor
of  Latin  and  natural  sciences  in  the  seminary  for
young  latlies  at  Bethlehem.  He  was  ordained  a
deacon  in  June,  1802,  and  a  presbyter  in  May,  1864.
Prof,  Reichel  did  more  than  any  one  else  to  eluci-
date the  early  history  of  the  Moravian  church  in
this  country.  In  addition  to  articles  in  "The  Mo-
ravian "  and  the  local  press,  and  a  sketch  of  North-
ampton county,  prepared  for  Dr.  William  H,  Egle's
"  History  of  Pennsylvania,"  he  wrote  "  History  of
Nazaretfi  Hall "  (Philadelphia,  1855 ;  enlarged  ed.,
1869);  "Historj-  of  the  Bethlehem  Female  Semi-
nary, 1785-1858"  (1858);  "Morayianism  in  New


York  and  Connecticut  "  (1860) ;  "  Memorials  of  the
Moravian  Church"  (1870);  "Wyalusing,  and  the
Moravian  Mission  at  Friedenshuetten  "  (Bethlehem,
1871);  "Names  which  the  Lenni  Lennap^  or  Dela-
ware Indians  gave  to  Rivers,  Streams,  and  Ijocali-
ties  within  the  States  of  Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,
Maryland,  and  Virginia,  with  their  Significations,"
from  the  manuscript  of  John  Heckewelder  (1872);
"  A  Red  Rose  from  the  Olden  Time,  or  a  Ramble
through  the  Annals  of  the  Rose  Inn  on  the  Barony
of  Nazareth  in  the  Days  of  the  Province"  (Phila-
delphia, 1872) ;  "  The  Crown  Inn,  near  Bethlehem,
Pa.,  174.5  "  (1872);  "The  Old  Sun  Inn  at  Ikthlehem,
Pa.,  1758  "  (Doylestown.  Pa.,  1878) ;  "  A  Register  of
Members  of  the  Moravian  Church,  1727  to  1754"
(Bethlehem,  1873) ;  and  a  revise<l  edition  of  John
Heckewelder's  "  History,  Manners,  and  Customs  of
the  Indian  Nations  who  once  Inhabited  Pennsyl-
vania and  the  Neighboring  States  "  (Philadelphia,
1876).  He  left  unfinished  "  History  of  Bethlehem  "
and  "History  of  Northampton  County,"

REID,  David  Boswell,  chemist,'  b,  in  Edin-
burgh. Scotland,  in  1805  ;  d,  in  Washington,  D.  C,
5  April,  1863.  He  was  educated  at  the  University
of  Edinburgh,  where  he  also  studied  medicine.
After  graduation  he  taught  practical  and  analytical
chemistry  for  four  years  at  the  university.  In  1882
he  erected  a  class-room  and  laboratory  larger  than
any  in  ?>linburgh,  which  he  opened  in  1838,  and
thereafter  he  had  about  300  pupils  annually  in  his
chemical  classes.  He  was  called  in  1836  to  make
such  alterations  in  the  old  house  of  commons  as
should  secure  its  l>etter  ventilation,  and  in  1839  su-
perintended similar  changes  in  the  house  of  peers.
In  1840-'5  he  had  direction  of  the  new  houses.  Sub-
sequently he  superintended  the  ventilation  of  St,
George's  Hall,  Liverpool,  and  in  1842  was  appointed
a  member  of  the  "  Health  of  towns  commission,"
In  this  capacity  he  gave  a  course  of  lectures  at
Exeter  Hall,  and  also  visited  and  superintended  the
introduction  of  improved  methods  of  ventilation
and  sewerage  in  most  of  the  cities  of  the  United
Kingdom,  In  1856  he  came  to  the  L'nited  States,
and  after  various  engagements,  including  that  of
professor  of  applied  chemistry  in  the  University  of
Wisconsin,  he  became  one  of  the  medical  inspectors
of  the  U,  S,  sanitary  commission,  Dr,  Reiu  was  a
fellow  of  the  Royal  society  of  Edinburgh,  and,  be-
sides scientific  contributions  to  iournals  in  the
United  States  and  Europe,  published  "  Introduc-
tion to  the  Study  of  Chemistry  "  (Edinburgh,  1825) ;
"  Elements  of  Chemistry  "  (1832) ;  "  Text-Book  for
Students  of  Chemistry  "  (1834) ;  "  Rudiments  of
the  Chemistry  of  Daily  Life  "  (1836);  "Outlines  of
the  Ventilation  of  the  House  of  Commons"  (Lon-
don. 1837) ;  "  Ventilation  of  the  Niger  Steamships  "
(1841);  "  Illustrations  of  the  Theory  and  Practice
of  Ventilation,  with  Remarks  on  Warming  "  (1844) ;
"Ventilation  in  American  Dwellings  "  (New  York,
1858);  and  "Short  Plea  for  the  Revision  of  Educa-
tion in  Science"  (St.  Paul,  1801),

REID,  David  Settle,  governor  of  North  Caro-
lina, b,  in  Rockingha;n  county,  N,  C.  19  April,
1813.  He  studied  law.  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  to  practise  in  1834.  In  1835  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature,  serving  continuously  until  1842,
when  he  was  elected  a  representative  to  congress  as
a  Democrat,  serving  from  4  Dec,  1843,  till  3  March,
1847,  In  1848  he  was  the  defeated  Democratic  can-
didate for  governor  of  North  Carolina,  but  he  was
afterward  successful,  and  held  the  office  in  1851-'5.
He  was  then  elected  to  the  U.  S,  senate  as  a  Demo-
crat, in  place  of  Willie  P.  Mangum,  serving  from  4
Dec,  1854,  till  3  March,  ia59.  He  was  chairman
of  the  committees  on  patents,  on  the  patent-office.


REID


REID


216


and  on  commorpf.  lie  whk  a  dt'li*>fatp  to  the  Peace
convention  that  met  in  Washington  in  Kebriiary.
1861.  (tov.  Ki'i«l  jMTve*!  in  the  ("onfe<lenite  i-on-
ffress,  and  after  the  civil  war  resided  on  his  farm
m  K<x'kingham  cuuntv.

KKI  1>,  (Ji*or|r^«  M>i<)ier,  b.  in  Ijondonderry.  N.  H.,
in  17H;J  ;  d.  there  in  Septemlx?r,  1815.  His  wlucation
was  nu'agre.  lie  Uvanie  captain  of  a  conjpany  of
minute-men  in  1775.  and  on  retvivinji  the  news  of
the  Iwttle  of  l^'xin):ton  joine<l  (ten.  John  Stark's
rejfiment  at  Mwlfonl.  and  tof»k  an  honorable  part
at  Bunker  Hill.  On  4  Nov..  1775,  he  was  ap|)ointed
lieutenant-wlonel  of  the  2d  New  Hampshire  rejri-
nient.  serve<i  as  colonel  after  the  capture  of  Nathan
Hale,  took  (tart  in  the  battle  of  Bemis  Heights  in
<K'toi»er,  1777,  and  was  pre^sent  at  the  surrenders  of
Hurgovne  and  Cornwallis.  He  was  ma«le  bripwlier-
^neral  of  New  Hampshire  militia  in  178.*),  and
sherifT  of  K<H'kiiighHMi  county,  N.  H.,  in  17JH.

REID,  Hugrh  Thompson^  soldier,  b.  in  Union
county,  Ind.,  18  Oct.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Keokuk,  Iowa,  21
Aufr.,'l874.  He  was  of  Scotch-Irish  descent,  and,
after  graduation  at  Blooraington  college,  Ind.,  stud-
ied law,  was  a<lmitted  to  the  bar,  and  removed  in
1889  to  Fort  Madison,  Iowa,j>ractising  there  until
1849,  when  he  removed  to  Keokuk  and  practise*!
occasionally.  In  184(>-'2  he  was  prosecuting  attor-
ney for  Lee,  Des  Moines,  Henry,  .k'fTers««i.  and  Van
Biiren  counties,  holding  high  rank  as  a  land  law-
yer. He  was  president  for  four  years  of  the  Des
Moines  Valley  railroatl.  He  entered  the  volunteer
«ervice  as  colonel  of  the  15th  Iowa  infantry  in
1861,  and  commanded  it  at  Shiloh,  where  he  was
shot  thn>ugh  the  neck  and  fell  from  his  horse,  but
remountetl  and  nxle  down  the  lines,  encouraging
his  men.  He  was  in  other  actions,  was  appointed
brigmlier-general  on  13  Mar(;h,  18<>3,  and  com-
mandinl  the  posts  of  Lake  Providence,  Jja.,  and
Caim,  111.,  until  he  resigned  on  4  April,  1864.

REID.  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Scotland,  13
Jan.,  1?22:  d.  in  l^ondon,  England,  6  Feb.,  1807.
He  was  the  son  of  Alexander  Robert-^n,  of  Stra-
loch,  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Etlinburgh,
and  entered  the  army  as  a  lieutenant  on  8  June,
1745.  On  3  June,  1752,  he  became  captain  in  the
42d  regiment,  and  in  1758  he  was  apixjintod  major.
He  served  under  (Jen.  James  VV'olie  and  Gen.  Jef-
frey Amherst  in  the  French  war,  and  was  wounde<l
in  the  expe<Iition  against  Martinicpie  in  1762.  and
promoted  lieutenant-colonel.  In  1763  he  was  stmt
to  the  relief  of  Fort  Pitt,  and  defeatetl  its  Indian
besiegers  in  the  well-fought  battle  of  Bushy  Run.
In  the  summer  of  1764  the  42d  again  participated
in  Col.  Henry  Bouquet's  expedition  against  the
Miiskingtim  Indians.  Lieut.-Col.  Reid  commanded
all  the  British  forces  in  the  district  of  Fort  Pitt  in
1765,  and  an  oflBcer  of  the  same  name  is  mentioned
as  commandant  at  Fort  Chartres,  111.,  in  1766.  In
1771  he  obtained  a  large  tract  of  land  in  Otter
Creek,  Vt.,  from  which  his  tenants  were  expelle<l
in  17712  by  the  peo|)le  of  Bennington.  He  Ijccamo
major-general  m  Ocrtolier,  1781,  lieutenant-general
on  12  Oct.,  1793,  and  general  on  1  Jan.,  1798.

REID,  John  Morrison,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
York  city,  30  May.  1820.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  18Ji9,
and  tiecame  principal  of  the  Mechanics'  in.stitute
-  '  "1.  holding  this  office  until  1S44.  After  grad-
II  at  Union  theological  seminary  he  was  ad-
ii...;.il  to  the  New  York  MothfMlist  Episcopal  con-
ference in  1844,  an<I  has  preachi^l  in  Connecticut,
liong  Island,  and  New  York  city.  From  1858  till
18(U  he  was  presi<lent  of  Genesee  colI«-ge.  Lima.
N.  Y..  and  he  Ufame  corresponding  secretary  of  .
the  Missionary  Miciety  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  |


church  in  1872.  The  University  of  the  city  of
New  York  gave  him  the  degree  of  I).  I>.  in  1858,
and  the  Univcniitv  of  Syracuse  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1883.  He  was  alitor  of  the  "  Western  Christian
Advocate."  Cincinnati,  in  1804.  and  of  the  "  North-
western Christian  Advocate."  Chicago,  in  18<J8.  He
is  the  author  of  numerous  tracts  and  articles,  and
of  "  Missions  and  Missionary  S<»cieties  of  the  .Meth-
o<Iist  E|»i8coi»al  Church  "  (2  vols..  New  York.  1880),
and  has  e<lite<l  "  I)o<mjed  Religions  "(1884).  Dr.
Keid  was  active  in  securing  for  the  University  of
Syracuse  the  valuable  library  of  Prof.  IxH)iM)ld  von
lianke.  the  German  historian,  which  incluuesalmut
50,(X)0  volumes,  s«ime  of  his  manuscripts,  and  sev-
eral paintings  by  German  artists.

REID.  Mayne,  author,  b.  in  Ireland  in  1818:  d.
near  Ijondoii,  England,  22  Oct.,  IKKl,  He  was  the
son  of  a  Presbyterian  clergj'man,  and  was  e<Iucated
for  the  church,  but.  preferring  adventure  to  the-
ology, came  to  this  country  in  18:i8.  He  engaged
in  hunting  and  trading  exfteditions  on  Hed  and
Missouri  nvers,  and  travelled  through  nearly  every
state  of  the  Union.  Sulisequently  he  settled  in
Philadelphia,  where  he  wrote  for  magazines  and
journals  until  the  lK>ginning  of  the  Mexican  war.
when  he  became  a  caj)tain  in  the  U,  S.  service,  and
was  present  at  Vera  Cruz  and  Chapulteijcc.  where
he  letl  the  forlorn  hope  and  was  woundeil.  In  1849
he  raise<l  a  company  in  New  York  to  aid  the  Hun-
garian revolutionists,  but  when  he  reache«l  Paris  the
insurrection  in  Austria  had  l)een  suppresMMl.  He
then  settled  in  London,  and  devoted  his  life  to
writing  tales  of  atlventure  for  boys.  His  numerous
stories,  in  which  he  usually  incorporated  much  in-
formation on  natural  historj',  and  which  numljer
about  fifty  volumes,  include  "  The  Rifle  Rangers  "
(Ijondon,  1850);  "The  Scalp-Hunters"  (1851);
"  The  Quadroon  "  (ia55) ;  "  Osceola  "  (IKW) ;  "  The
Maroon"  (1862);  "The  Cliff -Climbers"  (1864):
"Afloat  in  the  Forest  "  (1866);  "The  Castaways"
(1870) ;  and  "  G wen-Wynne  "  (1877).  A  c<jllective
edition  of  his  works  was  publisheil  in  New  York
(15  vols.,  1868).  Ijate  e<litions  of  his  works  have
l)een  published  in  Ixmdon  in  1875  and  1878.  In
1869  ne  established  in  New  York  a  short-lived
journal,  called  "  Oiiwanl."

REID,  Robert  Raymond, governor  of  Florida,
b.  in  Prince  William  parish.  S.  C..  8  Sept..  1789;  d.
near  Tallahassee.  Fla..  1  July,  1841.  In  early  years
he  removed  to  Georgia,  where  he  studie<l  law,  was
admitted  to  the  Imr,  and  practise<l.  From  1810  till
1819,  and  again  from  1823  till  182.5,  he  was  a  judge
of  the  state  sujHjrior  court,  serving  in  the  interval
in  c«mgress  fn)m  18  Feb.,  1819,  till  3  Marc-h,  1823.
having  been  chos<»n  as  a  Democrat.  At  the  close
of  his  term  he  was  electetl  mayor  of  Augusta,  Ga.,
and  in  18!i2  he  was  apiMiinted  judge  of  the  su|»erior
court  for  the  eastern  district  of  P'lorida,  and  while
holding  this  office  he  wa.s  a  meml)er  of  thec«mven-
tion  that  formed  a  state  constitution,  of  which  Ixxly
he  was  als<j  president.  From  18;i9till  1841  he  wajs
governor  of  Florida.

REID,  Haniuel  Chester,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Norwich,  Conn.,  25  Aug..  1783;  d.  in  New  York
city,  28  Jan.,  1861.  He  was  the  son  of  Lieut.  John
Reid  of  the  British  navy,  who  was  taken  prisoner
in  a  night  lx>at  expedition  at  New  Lomlon,  Conn.,
and  afterward  resigned  his  commissi«»n.  At  the
age  of  eleven  the  son  went  to  sea,  was  captured  by
a  French  privateer  and  confined  six  months  at
Basseterre,  Guadelou|>e.  Sulw^Kjuently  he  served
as  acting  midshipn>an  in  the  "  Baltimore"  in  Com.
Thomas  Tnixton's  West  India  s<|ua<iron,  and  dur-
ing the  war  of  1812  he  commanded  the  privateer
brig  "  General  Armstrong,"  with  which  he  fought


216


REID


REID


5*KA,ooo.>JL, O/WisJ


one  of  the  most  remarkable  naval  battles  on  record
at  Fayal,  in  the  Azores  islands,  26  and  27  Sept.,
1814.  Wliile  at  anchor  in  a  neutral  port  his  snip
was  attacked  by  a  Hritish  squadron,  consisting  of
the  flag-ship  "  Plant^genet,"  of  74  guns,  tlie  frigate
*'  Rota,"  of  44  guns,  and  the  brig  "  Carnation,  of
18  guns,  and  Ix'aring  more  than  2,000  men.  The
"General  Armstrong"  carried  7  guns  and  90  men.

In  a  .series  of  en-
counters Reid  de-
feated the  enemy,
and  in  his  account
of  the  engage-
ment he  wrote :
"  About  3  A.  M.  I
received  a  mes-
sage from  the
American  consul
requesting  to  see
me  on  shore, where
he  informed  me
the  governor  had
sent  a  note  to
Capt.  Lloyd,  beg-
ging him  to  desist
from  further  hos-
tilities. To  which
Capt.  Lloyd  sent
for  answer  that
he  was  now  deter-
mined to  have  the
privateer  at  the  risk  of  knocking  down  the  whole
town ;  and  that,  if  the  governor  suffered  the
Americans  to  injure  the  privateer  in  any  manner,
he  should  consider  the  place  an  enemy's  port,  and
treat  it  accordingly.  Finding  this  to  be  the  case,
I  considered  all  hope  of  saving  our  vessel  to  be  at
an  end,  I  therefore  went  on  board  and  ordered
all  our  wounded  and  dead  to  be  taken  on  shore
and  the  crew  to  save  their  effects  as  fast  as  pos-
sible. Soon  after  this  it  became  daylight,  when
the  enemy's  brig  stood  close  in  and  commenced  a
heavy  fire  on  us  with  all  her  force.  After  several
broadsides  she  hauled  off,  having  received  a  shot
in  her  hull,  her  rigging  much  cut,  and  her  fore-
top-mast  wounded.  She  soon  after  came  in  again
and  anchored  close  to  the  privateer.  I  then  or-
dered the  '  General  Armstrong '  to  be  scuttled  to
prevent  the  enemy  from  getting  her  off.  She  was
soon  afterward  boarded  by  the  enemy's  boats  and
set  on  fire,  which  soon  completed  her  destruction.
They  also  destroyed  a  number  of  houses  in  the
town  and  wounded  some  of  the  inhabitants."  The
British  lost  120  men  killed  and  180  wounded,  while
the  Americans  lost  but  two  killed  and  seven
wounded.  A  letter  written  from  Payal,  by  an  Eng-
lishman who  witnessed  the  scene,  describes  the  sec-
ond attack:  "At  midnight,  it  being  about  full
moon,  fourteen  large  launches,  containing  about
forty  men  each,  were  discovered  to  be  coming  in
rotation  for  a  second  attack.  When  they  got  with-
in gun-shot  a  tremendous  and  effectual  discharge
was  made  from  the  privateer,  which  threw  the  boats
into  confusion.  They  now  returned  a  spirited
fire,  but  the  privateer  kept  up  so  continual  a  dis-
charge it  was  almost  impossible  for  the  boats  to
make  any  progress.  They  finally  succeeded,  after
immense  loss,  to  get  alongside  of  her,  and  at-
tempted to'  board  at  every  quarter,  cheered  bv  the
officers  with  a  shout  of  '  No  quarter ! '  which  we
could  distinctly  hear,  as  well  as  their  shrieks  and
cries.  The  termination  was  near  about  a  total  mas-
sacre. Three  of  the  boats  were  sunk,  and  but  one
poor  solitary  officer  escaped  death  in  a  l>oat  that
contained  fifty  souls ;  he  was  wounded. The  Amer-


icans fought  with  great  firmness.  Some  of  the
boats  were  left  without  a  single  man  to  row  them  ;
others  with  three  and  four.  The  most  that  any
one  returned  with  was  alx)ut  ten.  Several  boats
floated  on  shore  full  of  dead  bodies.  .  .  .  This
bloo<ly  and  unfortunate  contest  lasted  about  forty
minutes.  At  daylight  next  morning  the 'Carna-
tion '  hauled  in  alongside  and  engaged  her,  when
the  '  Armstrong'  continued  to  make  a  most  gallant
defence,  causing  the  *  Carnation  '  to  cease  firing
and  to  haul  off  to  repair.  .  .  .  We  may  well  say
'God  deliver  us  from  our  enemies'  if  this  is  the
way  the  Americans  fight."  The  defeated  vessels
were  part  of  an  expedition  concentrating  at  Ja-
maica for  a  descent  upon  New  Orleans,  and  their
crippled  condition  prevented  their  immediate  union
with  Admiral  Sir  Thomas  Cochrane,  Earl  of  Dun-
donald,  and  consequently  the  expedition  did  not
reach  New  Orleans  until  four  days  after  Gen.  An-
drew Jackson's  arrival,  which  saved  Louisiana  from
British  conquest.  After  burning  the  abandoned
wreck,  Capt.  van  Lloyd  informed  the  governor  that,
unless  the  gallant  little  crew  he  had  failed  to  cap-
ture should  be  given  to  him  as  prisoners,  he  would
send  a  force  of  500  men  to  capture  them.  This
was  refused,  and  Reid  and  his  men  then  took  pos-
session of  and  fortified  an  old  convent,  declaring
that  they  would  defend  themselves  to  the  last ;  but
they  were  not  molested.  The  attack  upon  the
"General  Armstrong"  led  to  a  protracted  diplo-
matic correspondence,  from  1815  to  the  adminis-
tration of  President  Zachary  Taylor,  who  took
measures  to  compel  Portugal  to  assert  the  inviola-
bility of  its  neutral  port,  and  indemnify  the  claim-
ants for  the  loss  of  the  vessel ;  but  after  his  death
the  case  was  submitted  to  the  arbitration  of  Louis-
Napoleon,  who  decided  against  the  Americans.
The  British  government  afterward  apologized  for
the  violation  of  the  neutrality.  Congress  final-
ly paid  the  claim  in  1882.  On  his  return  to  the
tinited  States  Capt.  Reid  landed  at  Savaimah,  and
in  travelling  to  the  north  receiveil  many  honors.
The  legislature  of  New  York  gave  him  their  thanks
and  a  sword  on  7  April,  1815.  He  was  appointed
a  sailing-master  in  the  navy,  and  held  this  post  un-
til his  death,  serving,  meanwhile,  as  harbor-master
and  warden  of  the  port  of  New  York.  He  invent-
ed and  erected  the  signal  telegraph  at  the  Battery
and  the  Narrows,  and  regulated  and  numbered  the
pilot-boats  of  New  York,  and  established  the  light-
ship off  Sandy  Hook.  He  was  also  the  designer
of  the  present  form  of  the  United  States  flag,  pro-
posing to  retain  the  original  thirteen  stripes  and
to  add  a  new  star  whenever  a  new  state  should
be  admitted  to  the  Union.  This  suggestion  was-
adopted,  and  a  flag  conforming  to  his  design  was
first  raised  over  the  hall  of  representatives  in
Washington  on  13  April,  1818.  See  "The  Origin
and  Progress  of  the  U.  S.  Flag  in  the  United
States  of  America."  by  George  if.  Preble,  U.  S.  N,
(Albany,  1872). — His  son,  Sam  Chester,  lawyer,  b,
in  New  York  city,  21  Oct.,  1818,  shipped  before  the
mast  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  in  1838  was  attached  to
the  U.  S.  survey  of  Ohio  river,  and  in  1839  settled
in  Natchez,  Miss.,  where  he  studied  law  under  Gen.
John  A.  Quitman,  and  was  appointed  U.  S.  deputy
mai-shal.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Missis-
si[)pi  in  1841,  to  that  of  Louisiana  in  1844,  to  the
U.  S.  supreme  court  in  1846,  and  served  in  the
Mexican  war  in  Capt.  Ben  McCuUoch's  company
of  Texas  rangers,  being  mentioned  for  "  meritorious
services  and  distinguished  gallantry,"  at  Monterey.
In  1849  he  was  attached  to  the  "New  Orleans  Pica-
yune." and  in  1851  he  was  a  delegate?  to  the  Na-
tional railroad  convention  in  Memphis  Tenn.,  to


REID


RRin


217


decide  upon  a  line  to  the  Pacific.  In  18ff7  he  de-
clined tlio  appointment  of  V.  S.  miniMt«>r  to  Home.
He  n'|K»rtf«i  the  prot-tHMlinp*  <»f  the  l/ouisiuiin  se-
ceiutiun  convention  in  IWH,  ancl  during  tlie  civil
war  was  the  ConfiMlentte  war  com>«>|)ontlent  for  a
large  numlior  of  sMtuthern  news|»ai>er!«.  In  1H05  he
resumed  hi«  law-pra<*tice,  and  in  1H(J7  he  delivennl
an  "  Aihln'won  the  lU'storation  of  Southern  Tnwle
and  Commerce  '*  in  the  princi{>Hi  citicj*  of  tlie  south.
IleeiitahlishiHl  and  incoriMtratiMl  in  1H74  the  Misttis-
»ippi  VaUey  and  Mni/il  steamshi|>  comjMinv  in  St.
Louiti,  Mo,  He  pres«-nteii  the  Imttle-Mworu  of  his
father  to  the  Tnite*!  .States  in  1HH7.  .Mr.  Kei«l  is
the  author  of  "The  V.  S.  Bankrupt  Law  of  1841,
with  a  Syno|»8i8  and  Notes,  and  the  Ijoenl'mg  Ameri-
can and  Kn^lish  Decisions"  (Natchez.  1H42);  "Tiie
Scouting  KxfKHlilions  of  McCuIliK-h's  Texa.*i  Ran-
gers" (Phil»«leiphia,  1H47):  "The  IJaltleof  t'hica-
roauga,  a  Concise  History  of  Events  from  the
Evacuation  of  Chattanooga"  (Mobile,  1KU:{);  and
'*The  During  Itaid  of  Uen.  John  H.  Morgan,  in
Ohio,  his  Capture  and  Wonderful  HxcajX)  with
Capt.  T.  Henrj'  Hines"  (Atlanta,  1864):  and  re-

g)rte<l  and  edited  "  The  Case  of  the  Private-arme<l
rig-of-War  'General  Armstrong,'  with  the  Brief
of  Pacts  and  Authorities  on  International  I>aw,
and  the  Argiiments  of  Charles  O'Conor,  Sam  C.
Reid,  and  P.  Phillips,  before  the  V.  S.  Court  of
Claims  at  Washington,  I>.  C,  with  the  Decision  of
the  Court"  (New  York,  1857).  He  also  prepared
"  The  Life  and  Times  of  Col.  Aaron  Burr  in  vin-
dication of  Burr's  character,  but  the  manuiicript
was  destrove<l  by  fire  in  1850.

REID,  \\'hitelaw,  jounialist,  b.  near  Xenia,
Ohio,  27  (X't.,  IKH.  IIo  was  gruduateil  at  Miami
university  in  1856,  tf>ok  an  active  interest  in  jour-
nalism and  jx)litic8  before  attaining  his  majority,
made  sf)eeches  in  the  Fremont  cam[)aign  on  the
Republican  side,  and  soon  became  editor  of  the
Xenia  "  News."  At  the  ofx-ning  of  the  civil  war
he  was  sent  into  the  field  as  correspondent  of  the
Cincinnati  "  Gazette,"  making  his  heatlquarters  at
Washington,  whence  his  letters  on  current  politics
(under  tlie  signature  of  "Agate")  attracted  much
attention  by  their  thorotigh  information  and  pun-
gent style.  From  that  jxjint  he  made  excursions
to  the  army  wherever  there  was  a  pros{)ect  of
active  operations.  He  served  as  aido-de-camp  to
Gen.  William  S.  Rosecrans  in  the  western  Virginia
campaign  of  1861,  and  was  present  at  the  Imttle  of
Shiloh  and  the  Imttle  of  Gettysburg.  He  was
elected  librarian  of  the  house  of  representatives  in
1868,  serving  in  that  capacity  three  years.  He
engaiged  in  cotton-planting  in  Ijouisiaiia  after  the
oloM  of  the  war,  and  emlMnlied  the  results  of  his
obeervations  in  the  south  in  a  book  entitled  "After
the  War"  (Cincinnati,  1866);  then  returning  to
Ohio,  he  gave  two  years  to  writing  "Ohio  in  the
War  "  (2  vols.,  Cincuuiati.  1868).  This  work  is  by
far  the  most  imnortant  of  all  the  state  histories  of
the  civil  war.  It  contains  elalK>rate  biogninhies  of
most  of  the  chief  generals  of  the  armv.  and  a  com-
plete history  of  the  state  from  1861  till  1865.  On
the  conclusion  of  this  lal>or  he  came  to  New  York
at  the  invitation  of  Horace  Greeley,  and  l)ecame
an  editorial  writer  ujxm  the  "Tribune."  On  the
death  of  Mr.  Greeley  in  1872,  Mr.  Reid  succeeded
him  as  editor  and  princi{>al  owner  of  the  paper.
In  1878  he  was  chosen  by  the  legislature  of  New
York  to  Ik?  a  regent  for  life  of  the  university.
With  this  exception,  he  has  de<>liniMl  all  public  em-
ployment. Ho  was ofTerecl  by  President  Hayes  the
post  of  minister  to  Germany,  and  a  similar  appoint-
ment by  President  Garfield.  He  is  a  director  of
numerous  financial  and  charitable  corporations,


and  has  been  for  many  yearn  pmiident  of  the  Lotos
club.  Mr.  R<«id  has  tfavelle<l  extensively  in  this
country  and  in  Kuro|)e.  B4>Hide.H  the  works  men-
tioned altove  and  his  contributions  to  iwriodical
literature,  he  has  publisheil  "Schools  of  Journal-
ism "(New  York,  1871):  "The  Scholar  in  Politita"
(1873):  "Some  NewsjMiiwr  Tenilencies"  (1879);
anil  "Town-Hall  Suggi-stions "  (IHHI).

REin,  Sir  William,  governor  of  Bermuda,  b.
in  Kinglassie,  P'ifeshire,  S<-otland,  in  1791 ;  d.  in
liondon.  Kngland.  21  Oct..  1858.  He  was  eilucated
at  the  Royal  military  aca<lemy.  Woolwich,  and,
entering  the  army  in  1809.  servj-<|  in  the  peninsula
in  this  country  during  the  war  of  1812,  and  in
Belgium  in  1815.  He  became  major-general  in
1856,  and  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society
in  1839.  Ho  was  appfiinted  governor  of  Bermuda
in  ISW,  imprr)Vi«d  the  agriculture  of  the  islan<l,
which  was  in  a  de[)lorable  condition,  and  thrr>ugh
his  efforts  intnxluceil  its  products  into  the  markets
of  New  York.  His  many  interests  for  their  wel-
fare greativ  endeared  him  to  the  islanders,  who
rememlK'r  him  as  the  "good  governor."  In  1846
he  was  anpointe<l  governor  of  the  Wimlwanl  isl-
ands, ana  in  1848  he  returneil  to  Kngland  and
was  made  commanding  engineer  at  W«)olwich.  In
SeptemlHjr,  1851.  he  was  knighte<l  and  ap|M>inte<l
governor  f>f  Maltii.  which  jKjst  he  held  through  the
Crimean  war.  returning  to  Kngland  in  1858.  His
interest  in  meteorology  first  t<M)k  a  definite  form  in
1831,  when  he  was  detailed  to  superintend  the  re-
pairs of  the  injury  that  had  been  done  in  Barliadoes
bv  a  severe  hurricane.  His  eorrespon<lence  with
William  C.  Redfield  (<f.  v.),  in  thre<'  folio  volumes,
was  pre.sentetl  to  the  librarv  of  Yale  university  by
John  H.  Redfield.  Gen.' Reid  published  "An
Attempt  to  develop  the  Law  of  Storms  by  Means
of  Facts,  arranged  according  to  Place  and  Time  "
(liondon,  1838:  8d  ed..  1850).  and  "The  Progress
of  the  Development  of  the  Ijaw  of  Storms  "  (1849).

REID,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Alierdeen-
shire,  Scotland,  in  1816.  He  was  educated  at
King's  college,  Aberdeen,  where  he  receivetl  the
degree  of  M.  A.  in  18Ji3.  afterward  .studied  in
Divinity  Hall,  in  the  same  city,  and  was  license<l  as
a  preacher  in  1KJ9.  In  Atigust  of  that  year  he
was  sent  to  Canada  as  a  missionary  of  the  estab-
lishe<l  church  of  Scotland,  and  in  January.  1840,
he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  congregation  of
Graton  and  Colbt)rne,  L'pper  Canada.  After  the
disruption  of  1843  Mr.  Reid  cast  in  his  lot  with
the  Free  church,  and  was  one  of  the  foun<lers  of
the  Presbyterian  church  of  Canada.  In  1849  Mr.
Reid  became  minister  of  the  church  in  Picton,
alx)ut  the  same  time  became  clerk  of  the  svnod,
and  soon  afterward  general  agent  of  all  the
schemes  of  the  church,  and  e<litor  of  the  "  Eccle-
siastical and  Missionary  Reconl."  of  which  he  has
had  charge  ever  since.  He  was  ele<'te<l  m<Hlerator
of  the  general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church
of  Canada  in  1851,  of  the  Canada  Presbyterian
church  in  1873,  and  of  the  general  iiss«'inb|y  of  the
Prest)yterian  church  in  Canada  in  1879.  In  1876
he  rec"eive<l  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  (Queen's  uni-
versity. Kingston.

RElD,  William  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  South
Argyle.  Washington  co.,  N.  Y..  17  Aug..  1884.  He
was'gra«luatetl  at  Union  college  in  1855.  and  at
Alleghany  union  theological  seminary  in  1862.
Since  that  date  he  hius  served  as  (mstor  of  the  Ist
Presbvterian  church  in  Pittsburg.  Pa.,  and  since
1875  he  has  been  principal  clerk  of  the  general
assembly  of  the  Vnitetl  Pri'sbyterian  church.
From  11^68  till  1872  ho  was  com«|M)nding  secre-
tary of  the  United  Presbytenan  board  of  home


218


REILLY


REINIIART


missions.  Monmouth  college.  111.,  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1874.  In  addition  to  sermons
ana  paniphlots,  he  has  published  "  Lectures  on  the
Revelation  "  (Pittsburg,  1878),  and  "  United  Pres-
bvterianism  "  (1881 ;  new  ed.,  1882).

'REILLY,  James  W.,  soldier,  b.  about  1842.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1863,  apj)ointed  1st  lieutenant  of  ordnance,
and  serve<l  as  assistant  ordnance  officer  at  Wa-
tertown  arsenal,  Mass.,  from  24  July,  1863,  till
24  Feb.,  1864,  as  inspector  of  ordnance  at  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  from  March  till  July,  1864,  and  as  as-
sistant ordnance  officer  of  the  Department  of  the
Tennessee  from  11  July  till  11  Nov.,  1864,  being
engaged  in  the  battles  of  Atlanta,  22  and  29  July,
1864.  He  was  chief  of  ordnance  of  the  Department
of  the  Ohio  from  11  Nov.,  1864,  till  April,  1865,
participating  in  the  battles  of  Franklin,  30  Nov.,
1864,  and  Nashville,  15-16  Dec,  1864,  after  which
he  was  on  sick  leave  of  absence.  He  was  made
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  30  July.  1864,
resigning  on  20  April,  1865.  In  May,  1866,  he  was
assistant  ordnance  officer  in  the  arsenal  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  and  he  was  afterward  assistant  offi-
cer at  Watervliet  arsenal,  N.  Y.

REILY,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Leeds,  England,  12
April,  1752;  d.  in  Myerstown.  Lebanon  co.,  Pa.,  2
May,  1810.  He  emigrated  with  his  father,  Benja-
min, to  Pennsylvania,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  just  before  the  Revolution.  He
was  commissioned  as  captain  in  the  12th  Pennsyl-
vania regiment,  and  was  transferred  to  the  3d
regiment  in  1778,  and  severely  wounded  at  Bon-
hamton,  N.  J.  Returning  to  his  home,  he  recov-
ered. He  was  not  a  brilliant  orator,  but  was  a
polished  writer,  and  left  several  manuscripts.  He
published  "  A  Compendium  for  Pennsylvania  Jus-
tices of  the  Peace,"  which  was  the  first  work  of  its
character  printed  in  this  country  (Harrisburg,
1795).  He  married  Elizabeth  Mver,  daughter  of
the  founder  of  Myerstown,  Pa.  One  of  their  sons,
Luther,  practised  medicine  in  Harrisburg,  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  4
Sept.,  1837,  till  3  March,  1839,  and  died  soon  after
the  expiyation  of  his  term.

REILY,  William  McClellan,  clergyman,  b.  in
York,  Pa.,  8  Aug.,  1837.  After  graduation  at  Penn-
sylvania college,  Gettysburg,  in  1856,  he  studied  at
Princeton  theological  seminarv  and  at  Berlin  and
other  German  universities,  tie  was  ordained  in
the  German  Reformed  church,  held  pastorates  in
Lewisburg  and  Jonestown,  Pa.,  was  professor  of
languages  at  Palatinate  college.  Pa.,  its  president
in  1883,  and  is  now  (1888)  president  of  the  Allen-
town,  Pa.,  female  college.  He  is  the  author  of
"The  Artist  and  his  Mission  "  (Philadelphia,  1881).

REIMEN8NYDER,  Junius  Benjamin,  clergy.
man,  b.  in  Staunton,  Va.,  24  Feb.,  1841.  He  was
graduated  at  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in
1861,  and  at  the  theological  seminary  there  in  1865.
Meanwhile  he  served  in  the  131st  regiment  of
Pennsylvania  volunteers  from  1  Aug.,  1862,  till  26
May,  i863.  Immediately  after  his  ordination  in
1865  he  became  pastor  in  Philadelphia,  where  he
remained  until  1874.  Afterward  he  was  pastor  in
Savannah,  Ga.,  in  1874-'80,  and  then  in  New  York
city,  where  he  still  (1888)  remains.  In  1880  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Newberry  college,
Newberry,  S.  C.  His  published  works  are  "  Heav-
enward, or  the  Race  for  the  Crown  of  Life  "(Phila-
delphia, 1874) ;  "Christian  Unit v,"  a  sermon  (Sa-
vannah, Ga.,  1876);  "Doom  Eternal— The  Bible
and  the  Church — Doctrine  of  Everlasting  Punish-
ment" (Philadelphia,  1880);  and  "The  Six  Days
of  Creation ;  The  Fall  and  the  Deluge  "  (1886).


REINAGLE,  Hugh,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  about  1790 ;  d.  near  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  May,
1834.  He  studied  under  John  J.  Holland,  and  be-
came known  as  a  landscape-painter,  working  in  oil
and  water-colors.  For  many  years  he  was  engaged
as  a  scene-painter  in  New  York,  and  produced  also
a  panorama  of  New  York,  which  was  exhibited  in
that  city.  In  1830  he  went  to  New  Orleans,  where
he  died  of  cholera  four  years  later.  He  was  one  of
the  original  thirty  members  of  the  National  acad-
emy of  design,  and  exhibited  there,  in  1831,  a
"  View  of  the  Falls  of  Mount  Ida."  His  "  Mao-
donough's  Victor)'  on  Lake  Champlain  "  was  en-
graved by  Benjamin  Tanner  in  1816.

REINA  MALDONADO,  Pedro,  Cuban  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  the  latter  half  of  the
16th  century ;  d.  in  Santiago  de  Cuba  in  1661.  He
was  canon  of  the  church  of  Truxillo,  afterward
vicar-general,  and  next  was  transferred  to  Mexico,
where  he  held  high  ecclesiastical  appointments.
He  went  to  Spain  in  1659  and  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Santiago  de  Cuba.  His  works  include
"  Declaracion  de  las  Reglas,  que  pertenecen  &  la
Sintaxis  para  el  uso  de  los  Nombres  y  construccion
de  los  verbos,  con  exposicion  del  Lib'ro  quinto  para
la  cantidad  de  las  silabas"  (Madrid,  1622);  "Suma
de  los  Sacramentos  para  uso  de  los  ordenados  y
ordenandos,  con  las  ceremonias  de  la  Misa  "  (1623) ;
"Resunta  del  Vasallo  leal"  (1647);  "Apologia  en
favor  de  la  Iglesia  de  Truxillo  pidiendo  la  fuese
a  gobernar  su  electo  Obispo  D.  Pedro  de  Ortega
Sotomayor  " ;  "  Discurso  defensorio  de  la  facultad

?ue  tiene  el  Prelado  de  dejar  Gobemador  en  su
glesia,  cuando  pasa  al  gobiemo  de  otra"  (1648);
and  "  Norte  claro  de  un  Perfecto  Prelado  "  (1653).
REINHART,  Benjamin  Franklin,  artist,  b.
near  Wavnesburg,  Pa.,  29  Aug.,  1829 ;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, 3  May,  1885.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  had
some  lessons  at  Pittsburg,  in  the  use  of  oil-colors,
and  subsequently  he  studied  at  the  National  acad-
emy. New  York,  for  three  years.  After  visiting
several  of  the  western  cities  and  painting  many
portraits,  he  went  to  Europe  in  1850.  F'or  the
next  three  vears  he  studied  in  Paris  and  DQssel-
dorf,  with  the  intention  of  devoting  himself  more
to  historical  and  genre  painting.  He  followed  his
profession  in  New  York  and  other  cities  until  1860,
and  then  went  to  England,  where  he  remained  un-
til 1868.  After  his  return  he  settled  in  New  York.
In  1871  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy,  where  he  had  first  exhibited  in  1847.
Among  his  works,  many  of  which  have  been  en-
graved, are  "Cleopatra"  (1865);  "Evangeline'";
"  Pocahontas  "  (1877) ;  "  Katrina  Van  Tassel  "
(1878) ;  "  Washington  receiving  the  News  of  Ar-
nold's Treason  " ;  "  Consolation  ;  "  After  the  Cru-
cifixion." (1875);  "Nymphs  of  the  Wood"  (1879);
"  Young  Franklin  and  Sir  William  Keith  ";  "  The
Regatta  " ;  "  The  Pride  of  the  Village  " ;  and  "  Cap-
tain Kidd  and  the  Governor  "  and  "  Baby  Mine"
(1884).  His  numerous  portraits  include  "those  of
the  Princess  of  Wales,  the  Duchess  of  Newcastle,
the  Countess  of  Portsmouth,  Lady  Vane  Tempest,
Lord  Brougham,  John,  Phillip,  R.  A.,  Thomas  Car-
lyle.  Lord  Tennyson.  Mark  Lemon,  Charles  O'Con-
or,  George  M.  Dallas,  James  Buchanan,  Edwin
M.  Stanton,  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  John  C.  Breckin-
ridge, Stephen  A.  Douglas,  and  Samuel  Houston.
—  His  nephew,  Charles  Stanley,  artist,  b.  in
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  16  May,  1844,  went  to  Paris  in  1867
and  studied  for  about  a  year  at  the  Atelier  Suisse.
In  1868  he  went  to  Munich,  where  he  became  a
pupil  at  the  Royal  academy.  In  January.  1870,  he
entered  the  establishment  of  Harpeivan((  Brothers,
New  York,  where  he  remained  until  July,  1876.


REINKE


REMINGTON


219


After  Ave  ymnof  indeiioiulcnt  work  in  New  York,
during;  which  time  ho  iimde  lirawtiif^s  for  various
{mblixhiti);  hoUM's.  lie  n'iK-wi>(l  tiis  oontrfU't  with
the  llHr|>iTs  i«»  1H81.  The  suiiie  year  he  went  to
Paris,  when*  he  still  (1888)  n-sidpji.  Ho  Ls  well
known  for  his  cxi-elleiit  work  in  black  and  white
for  book  and  n)ai|:azino  illustration.  He  has  ex-
hibitoil  in  Paris,  Munich,  and  various  cities  of  the
United  States,  and  is  a  ineinljcr  of  tho  Water-color
society  and  various  other  art  ass4H-iations.  His
works  in  oil  include  "  C'learinjr  I'p"  and  "Caueht
Nappinjf"  (1875);  " Reconnoitrinjj "  (187«5);  "Re-
buke *'  (1877) :  "  September  MomiuK' "  (187})) ;  "Old
Life  Ik)at "  ( 1880) ;  "  Coast  of  Normandy  "  (1882) ;
"In  a  (tanlen"  (1883);  "Mussel  Fisherwoman"
and  "Plats  at  Villerville"  (1884);  "Sunday"
(1885);  "English  Uanlen"  and  "Fishermen  of
Villerville"  (1880);  "Washed  Ashore"  (1887),
which  gained  honorable  mention  at  the  salon  of
1887  and  the  Temple  gold  me<lal  at  the  academy,
Philadelphia,  in  1888;  and  "Tide  coming  In"
(1888).  Among  his  water-coloi-s  are  "Gathering
Wootr'  and  "Close  of  Day"  (1877);  "At  the
Fern-  "  (1878);  and  "Spanish  Barber."

RtDINKE,  Samuel,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in
Lititz,  Pa.,  12  Aug.,  1791  ;  d.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,
21  Jan.,  1875.  He  was  one  of  the  first  three  gradu-
ates of  the  American- Moravian  theological  semi-
nary. After  serving  as  pastor  of  various  churches,
he  wa.s  consecrated  to  the  episcopacy  in  1858.  Two
years  later  he  became  blind,  and  was  obliged  to
retire  from  active  service.  An  operation  partially
restonni  his  sight,  after  which  he  frequently
preacheti  and  ordained  ministers.  His  last  official
act,  when  he  was  seventy-nine  years  old,  was  to
assist  ill  the  consecration  of  his  son  to  the  episco-
pacy. He  was  a  [H)werfnl  and  original  preacher.
— If  is  son,  Amadens  Abraham,  Moravian  bishop,
b.  in  Ijancasler,  Pa..  11  March,  1822;  d.  in  Herrn-
hut,  Germany,  12  Aug.,  1889.  He  was  gratluated
at  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  went  as  a  missionary  to  the
West  Indies,  and  subsequently  engaged  in  a  mis-
sionary exploratory  tour  on  the  Mosquito  coast.
On  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  was  luistor
successively  of  the  churches  at  Graceham,  Md.,  at
New  Dorp,  Staten  island,  in  Philadeli)hia,  and  in
New  York  city,  where  he  residwl  for  twenty  years.
He  was  consecrated  to  the  episcojMicy  in  1870.

REiS.  Francisco  Sotero  dos  (ri-ees).  Brazilian
journalist.!),  in  Maranhao. 22  April,  1800;  d.  there.
16  Jan.,  1871.  He  studied  philosophy  and  rhetoric
in  the  monastery  of  Our  Lady  of  Carmo,  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  Ijatin,  and  was  director  of  the
orphan  asylum  of  Santa  Thereza  from  1804  till
1870.  He  wlited  the  "  Argos  da  Lei "  and  "  Maran-
hense"  (1825);  the  "Constitucional"  (1*31);  the
"Investigator  de  Maranh^"  (1836);  the  "Re-
vista"  (1840);  the  "Observador"  (1854);  and  in
185*5  obtainetl  the  editorship  of  the  official  |)ai)er
"  Publicwlor  Maranhense."  In  1801  he  alMiiidoried
his  journalistic  career.  He  published  "  Postillas
de  grammatica  geral  applicada  &  lingua  Portu-
gueza  pela  analyse  dos  classicos"  (Kio  Janeiro,
1802);  "Grammatica  Portugueza  accomnuMlada
aos  principios  geraes  da  |>alavra  seguidos  da  im-
mediata  applicavilo  pratrtica "  (1800);  "Os  com-
mentario  de  Caius  Julius  C'esar."  translated  into
Portuguese  (1809) ;  and  "  Cureo  de  Literatura  Por-
tugueza «'•  Bra/.ileira  "  (1870).

RKLF,  Saiuiiel,  journalist,  b.  in  Virginia,  22
March.  1770:  d.  there.  14  Feb.,  1823.  Ho  was
bnmirht  to  Philadelphia,  when  a  child,  by  his
mother,  and  early  r)ecame  connecte<l  witli  the
"National  Gazette,"  of  which  he  was  for  many
years  the  editor  and  its -owner  until,  in  1819,  be


became  financially  involved  thnmffb  friends.  His
writings  wen'  highly  esteemed.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  a  novel  eiititktl  "  Infidelity,  or  the  Vic-
tims of  S'litimeiit  "  (Philadelphia,  1797).

RKMKS.41i,  Antonio  de  (rav-may-sal), Si«nish
clergyman,  b.  in  Alariz,  (ialicia,  in  1570;  d.  in
Maclrid  in  UiiiQ.  He  studied  in  the  University  of
Salamanca,  was  graduate*!  as  doctor  of  divinity,
and  unitcHJ  with  the  Dominicans.  In  1013  he  was
electwl  visitor  of  the  missions  of  Central  America,
ami  during  his  sojourn  in  the  country  in  161!i-'17
colliK-'tc*!  the  materials  for his  "  Historia de  las

grovincias  de  Chiapa  y  (hiatemala"  (Madrid,  1619).
[e  also  j)ublislied  purelv  ^>ccle^iastical  works.
REMINGTON,  JoHeuli  Price,  pharmacist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  20  March,  1847.  He  was
educate<l  in  private  sehfxdsand  at-ademiesin  Phila-
delphia, and  graduated  at  the  Philadelphia  collie
of  pharmacy  in  IHOO.  In  1874  he  succeeded  to  tne
professorship  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  phar-
macy in  the  Philadelphia  college,  which  chair  he
has  since  held,  and  in  1877  he  became  director  of
the  pharmaceutical  lalxiratory.  Prof.  Hemington
has  invented  various  appliances  that  have  had  an
extended  use,  among  which  are  a  still,  a  pill-com-
pressor, and  an  apparatus  for  percolation.  He  was
first  vice-president  of  the  committee  of  revision  in
1880  of  tne  "U.  S.  Pharmacopceia,"  and  had  the
preparation  of  several  classes  of  com^xjunds  for
that  book  under  his  immediate  sufHTvision.  The
honorary  degree  of  ma.ster  in  pharmacy  was  con-
ferred on  him  by  the  Philadelphia  college,  and  in
1880  he  was  electe<l  the  first  president  of  the  coun-
cil of  the  American  pharmaceutical  association,
which  office  he  held  for  six  years.  Besides  being
a  fellow  of  the  Chemical,  Linna>an,  and  Phaniia-
ceutical  societies  of  London,  he  is  active  in  the
national  assfx-iations  in  the  United  States,  and  is
an  honorary  meml)er  of  many  of  the  state  phar-
maceutical as$(x;iations.  He  has  been  a  volumi-
nous writer  on  all  subjects  pertaining  to  the  sci-
entific advancement  of  pharmacy,  as  well  as  a  flu-
ent, a  forcible,  and  interesting  speaker.  Prof.
Remington  is  pharmaceutical  eclitor  of  the  "  U.  S.
Dis|)ensatory"  (Philadelphia,  188^3),  and  is  the  au-
thor of  "The  Practice  of  Pharmacy"  (1886),  two
standard  authorities.

REMINGTON,  Philo,  inventor,  b.  in  Litch-
field, N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,  1810.  His  father,  Kliphalet
Remington  (1793-1861),  as  a  boy  obtained  from
a  country  blacksmith  the  privilege  of  using  his
forge  on  rainy  days  and  winter  evenings,  and  with
such  tools  and  appliances  as  his  own  ingenuity
suggested  pro<luce<l  a  gun.  It  proved  so  satisfac-
tory that  he  was  encouraged  to  continue,  and  soon
established  his  own  forge,  with  trip-hammer  and
lathe,  from  which  has  developed  the  great  factory
now  known  as  the  Remington  annory.  Philo  was
educated  at  common  schcxjls  and  at  Caaenovia  semi-
nary, after  which  he  entered  the  factory.  Inherit-
ing his  father's  mechanical  genius,  he  was  most
carefully  trained  in  the  use  of  every  tool  that  is
employed  in  the  manufacture  of  fire-arms,  and  in
time  be<'ame  me<-hanical  sujH^rintendent  of  the  fac-
tory. With  his  bmthers,  Samuel  and  Kliphalet.  the
firm  of  E.  Remington  antl  Sons  was  established,  and
for  upwar«l  of  twenty-five  years  he  continued  in
charge  of  the  me<;hanical  department.  In  the
course  of  this  experience  his  firm  prolmblv  manu-
factunxl  a  greater  variety  of  fire-arms  than  any
other  like  establishment,  and  their  arms  have  a
high  reputation.  The  breech  -  loading  rifle  that
Itears  the  name  of  Remington,  t)f  which  millions
have  been  maile  and  sold,  is  the  best  known  of
the  guns  that  are  made  under  their  supervisioa.


220


REMINGTON


RftMY


One  of  the  early  inventors  of  the  type-writer  placed
his  crude  model  in  the  hands  of  this  firm,  and  un-
der their  care  the  machine  became  the  most  suc-
cessful instrument  in  use.  In  1886  the  Remingtons
disposed  of  their  tyt)e-writing-machine  manufac-
turmg  business,  and  soon  afterward  the  firm  of
E.  I^mington  and  Sons  went  into  liquidation.
Since  then  Mr.  Remington  has  lived  in  retirement,
Philo  Remington  was  for  nearly  twenty  years
pr^ident  of  the  village  of  Ilion,  and  witli  his
Drother  has  given  Syracuse  university  sums  aggre-
gating f  250.()()0.

REMINGTON,  Stephen,  clerevman,  b.  in  Bed-
ford. Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  May,  1803 ;  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  23  March,  1869.  He  held  revival
meetings  when  sixteen  years  old,  and  was  admitted
to  the  New  York  M.  E.  conference  in  1825.  While
preaching  to  large  congregations  in  Brooklyn  and
Albany,  N.  Y.,  Boston,  Mass.,  and  other  cities,  he
pursued  the  study  of  medicine,  obtained  the  degree
of  M.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1845,  and  practised  inci-
dentally with  success.  In  1845,  while  he  was  pastor
of  a  church  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  he  withdrew  from
the  Methodist  communion  and  joined  the  Baptists.
He  subsequently  held  pastorates  in  New  York,
Philadelphia,  Boston,  and  Brooklyn.  His  "  Rea-
sons for  Becoming  a  Baptist "  (1849)  was  translated
into  various  foreign  languages.  It  was  followed  by
"  A  Defence  of  Restricted  Communion,"  which  also
had  a  wide  circulation.

REMSEN,  Ira,  chemist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
10  Feb.,  1846.  He  studied  at  the  College  of  the  city
of  New  York,  and  was  graduated  at  the  College  of

E)hysicians  and  surgeons  of  Columbia  in  1867.  Se-
eding chemistry  as  his  profession,  he  went  to  Mu-
nich, where  he  spent  a  year,  and  then  to  Gottingen,
where  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  1870.  Dr.
Remsen  then  went  to  Tubingen  at  the  invitation  of
Prof.  Rudolph  Fittig,  and  continued  as  assistant
in  the  laboratory  of  that  university  for  two  years.
In  1872  he  returned  to  the  United  States,  and  ac-
cepted the  professorship  of  chemistry  and  physics
at  Williams.  At  that  time  there  was  no  chemical
laboratory  in  the  college,  but  in  the  course  of  a
year  facilities  were  obtained  and  investigations  on
the  action  of  ozone  on  carbon  monoxide,  on  phos-
phorus trichloride,  and  researches  on  parasulpho-
oenzoic  acid  were  completed.  In  1876  he  was
called  to  fill  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  Johns  Hop-
kins university,  then  just  founded,  and  since,  with
facilities  that  are  unexcelled  in  the  United  States,
he  has  carried  on,  without  interruption,  systematic
scientific  researches.  Among  these  are  studies  on
"  The  Oxidation  of  Substitution-Products  of  Aro-
matic Hydrocarbons"  that  have  led  to  results  of
special  interest ;  researches  "  On  the  Relations  be-
tween Oxygen,  Ozone,  and  Active  Oxygen  " :  an
investigation  "  On  the  Chemical  Action  in  a  Mag-
netic Field,"  in  which  positive  evidence  is  fur-
nished for  the  first  time  that  in  some  cases  chem-
ical action  is  influenced  by  magnetism ;  and  studies
"  On  the  Sulphinides,"  a  new  class  of  organic  com-
pounds, some  of  which  have  remarkable  proper-
ties. One,  discovered  in  his  laboratory,  has  come
into  prominence  under  the  name  of  saccharine.
It  is  about  250  times  sweeter  than  ordinary  sugar,
and  is  not  injurious  in  its  action  upon  the  sys-
tem. Another  substance,  belonging  to  the  same
class  as  saccharine,  is  fully  as  sweet,  another  is
intensely  bitter,  and  two  others  have  been  inves-
tigatetl,  each  of  which  tastes  sweet  when  applied
to  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  and  bitter  at  the  base  of
the  tongue.  The  results  of  other  investigations
are  given  in  papers  "  On  a  New  Class  of  Coloring
Matters  known  as  Sulphon-Pluoresceins,"  "  On  the


Decomposition  of  Diazo-Compounds  by  Alcohol,"
and  "  On  the  Relative  Stability  of  Analogous  Halo-
gen Substitution-Products."  In  1881  he  was  in-
vited by  the  city  council  of  Boston  to  look  into  a
peculiar  condition  of  the  city  water,  which  was  un-
fit for  use,  owing  to  a  disagreeable  taste  and  odor.
Dr.  Remsen  showed  that  the  trouble  was  due  to  a
large  quantity  of  fresh-water  sponge  in  one  of  the
artificial  lakes  from  which  the  water  was  drawn.
He  has  also  been  intrusted  with  special  researches
by  the  National  board  of  health,  among  which
were  "  An  Investigation  of  the  Organic  Matter  in
the  Air "  and  "  On  the  Contamination  of  Air  in
Rooms  heated  by  Hot-Air  Furnaces  or  by  Cast-
iron  Stoves."  He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies
at  home  and  abroad,  and  in  1882  was  elected  to  the
National  academy  of  sciences,  on  whose  committees
he  has  served,  notably  on  the  one  that  investigated
the  glucose  industry  of  the  United  States  (1884),
and  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee  to  consider
the  practicability  of  a  plan  to  relieve  manufactu-
rers from  the  tax  on  alcohol  by  adding  to  it  wood
spirits,  with  the  object  of  making  it  unfit  for  use
as  a  beverage.  In  1879  he  founded  the  "  American
Chemical  Journal,"  and  he  has  since  edited  that
periodical,  in  which  his  papers  have  appeared.  He
has  published  a  translation  of  Fittig s  "Organic
Chemistry"  (Philadelphia,  1873);  "The  Principles
of  Theoretical  Chemistry"  (1877;  enlarged  ed.,
1887),  of  which  FJnglish  and  German  editions  have
appeared  ;  •'  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Com-
pounds of  Carbon,  or  Organic  Chemistry  "  (1885),
of  which  English,  German,  and  Italian  editions
have  been  published  ":  "  Introduction  to  the  Study
of  Chemistry  "  (New  York,  1886),  of  which  English
and  German  editions  were  made ;  and  "  The  Ele-
ments of  Chemistry  "  (1887).

R^MY,  Jules  (ray-me),  French  traveller,  b,  in
Livry,  near  Chalons-sur-Marne,  France,  2  Sept.,
1826.  After  temporarily  occupving  the  chair  of
natural  history  at  the  College  Rollin  from  1848
till  1850,  he  set  out  in  1851  on  along  journey,  dur-
ing which  he  visited  the  Canary  islands,  Brazil,
Chili,  Bolivia.  Peru,  and  also  the  Marquesas  and
Society  islands.  He  devoted  three  years  to  the
Sandwich  islands,  where  he  came  near  dying  from
the  effects  of  poison  that  was  administered  by  a
native  fanatic.  He  succeeded  in  collecting  much
material  bearing  on  their  history,  language,  bot-
any, and  ethnography.  King  Kamehameha  III.  be-
came greatly  interested  in  M.  Remy,  and  made
fruitless  efforts  to  induce  him  to  remain  perma-
nently at  Honolulu  as  a  member  of  the  government.
After  leaving  Oceania,  he  sailed  for  California,
every  part  of  which  he  explored  in  company  with
an  English  traveller  named  Brenchley.  After
spending  three  months  at  Salt  Lake  City,  M.  Remy
returned  to  San  Francisco.  He  then  traversed
Mexico.  New  Grenada,  and  the  plateau  of  the
equatorial  Andes  as  far  as  Quito.  After  ascend-
ing Pichincha  and  Chimborazo,  he  again  visited
Peru,  Bolivia,  and  Chili,  and  embarked  at  Panama
for  the  United  States,  where  he  travelled  exten-
sively. He  then  returned  to  France,  and  busied
himself  in  arranging  and  publishing  the  mass  of
information  he  had  collected.  In  1863  he  visited
central  Asia  and  parts  of  Thibet  and  the  Hima-
layas. He  has  since  resided  at  Livry.  Among
other  works  he  has  published  "  Analecta  Boliviana,
sen  genera  et  species  plantarum  in  Bolivia  crescen-
tium  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1846-'7) ;  "  Monognifia  de  las
compuestas  de  Chile"  (Paris,  1849,  with  atlas);
"Ascension  du  Pichincha"  (Chalons-sur-Marne,
1858);  "Recits  d'un  vieux  sauvage'pour  servir
k  I'histoire  ancienne  de  Hawaii"  (1859);  "Voyage


KftMY


RENO


221


au  pAjs  dcs  Mormons"  (3  vols.,  PaHk,  1860;  Eng-
lish tranHlfttion,  1H(K)):  "On  the  Uoligioiis  Move-
ment in  the  I'nitwl  States"  (I/Hiilon,  1M<H):  "  K*
MiM)lelo  IlttWHii:  llistoirv  de  rarchi|M>l  liavaiien."
text  an«l  translation,  with  an  "  IntriMiuction  on  the
Physical.  Moral,  and  Political  Condition  of  the
Country  "  (Paris,  1863);  and  "  Pelerina^d'un  curi-
eux  au  monastdre  bouddhique  de  Pemmiantsi "
(Chalons,  IHHO).  M.  Il6my  has  also  translatc<l  into
French  several  German  works  of  travel,  esjiwially
thosi'_  of  Ilernmnn  Wapner.

KKMY,  Paul  Kdoiiard,  French  author.  Ii.  in
Ija  Uochclle  in  1711;  d.  there  in  17H4.  He  was
for  several  vears  in  the  navy  defiartment  at  Paris,
and,  l)«comlnjf  afterward  one  of  the  kw'iters  of  the
state  arc-hives,  made  historical  reseiirches  amouK
the  state  |>a(H>rs  there,  lie  was  ohiifreil  to  publish
his  works  in  Amst«rdam  anonvmously,  as  before
the  French  revolution  the  publication  of  state
papers  was  an  un|>ardf)nable  offence.  They  include
"  Mcmoire  pour  faire  connoitn^  I'esprit,  laconduite,
et  les  operations  de  la  Com^wf^ii^)  d"  Mississipi  "
(Amstenlam,  1759);  '*  Memoire  .sur  retablissement
du  commerce  au  Canada"  (1761);  "  LK'tail  de  la
colonie  de  la  Louisiane  "  (1762);  "Considerations
sur  I'lnlit  d'etablissement  de  la  Compagnic  des
Indes  (Vcidentales  "  (1771);  "  Histoire  natun>lleet
veritable  des  mocurs  et  productions  <lu  pays  de  la
Nouvelle  France  Meridionale.  ap|)elee  commune-
ment  Guiane  "  (1783);  and  "  Detail  sur  I'etat  pre-
sent de  IVplise  et  de  la  colonie  de  Hie  de  Saint
rXuninpue"  (1784).

RKNARD,  Gnstave  Henri  (reh-nar),  French
explorer,  b.  in  Evreux,  in  1673;  d.  in  Rouen  in
1741.  He  followed  the  sea,  foujjht  under  Dugay-
Trf^uin  in  the  expedition  against  Rio  de  Janeiro,  6
OcL,  1711.  and  became  in  1714  lieutenant  of  the
king  in  Santo  Domingo.  In  1717  he  was  given  by
the  regent  a  mission  to  explore  the  northern  prov-
inces of  South  America,  with  the  permission  from
King  Philip  V.  of  Spain.  He  visitecl  Central  Amer-
ica, the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  New  Granada,  and
the  Guianas  in  1718-'24,  and  returned  with  valu-
able collections  in  natural  history.  These  became
afterwanl  the  proj)erty  of  the  Academy  of  sciences,
which  presented  them  to  the  Royal  Ijotanical  gar-
den. Renard's  works  include  "  Choix  de  plantes
nouvelles  et  peu  connues  de  TAmerique  du  Sud  "
(3  vols.,  Paris,  1T29) :  "  Voyages  d'explorations  k
travers  les  forfits  vierges  de  la  Guiane"  (Rouen,
1780);  "Traite  des  fougeres  de  rAmcrique  du  Sud
et  en  particulier  du  bassin  de  rOrenorjue  "  (2  vols.,
I~i2);  "  De  naturalibus  Antillonim "  (2  vols.,
1789);  and  "Histoire  et  description  de  Hie  Es-
pagnole  ou  de  Saint  Domingue.  et  de  Tile  de  la
Tortue  ou  des  Iwuccaniers  "  (a  vols.,  1740).

RENAUI),  Pierre  Fran<;ol8  (reh-no),  Flemish
missionary,  b.  in  Liege  in  1041 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,
in  1703.  He  united  with  the  Jesuits,  was  sent  to
South  America  about  1670,  lalwred  about  twenty
years  among  the  Indians  of  the  basin  of  Amazon
river,  and  liecame  afterward  professor  in  the  Col-
lege of  Lima.  While  he  was  m  Siouth  America  he
wrote  to  his  family  and  friends  interesting  letters,
describing  the  Indians  and  the  country,  which  were
afterwanl  collectetl  and  published  under  the  title
"  Ex|)eriences  et  tribulations  du  Pere  Pierre  Re-
naud  dans  les  deserts  de  TAmazonie  en  TAm^^rique
du  Sud  "  (AmsU-rdam,  1708).

RENATLD.  C#»ar  Aiiruste  (reh-no).  West  In-
dian iK>et.  b.  near  Fort  Royal.  Martinique,  about
1701  ;  d.  in  that  city  in  1734.  He  was  a  negro
slave,  and  at  festivities  and  dances  sang  mehMiies
of  his  own  composition.  An  ofDcial  of  the  colony
heard  him  and  reported  to  the  governor,  who  sent


for  C^sar,  and,  ascertaining  that,  notwithstanding
his  total  want  of  education,  he  conifMMied  cnnlitabla
vemes,  enfranchiseil  him  and  sent  him  to  France
in  1720,  when^  he  nn-eivwl  considerable  attention.
In  1722  he  n-rited  Vers4>>i  U-fore  the  regent,  who
gave  him  an  annual  |H'nsioii  df  200  livres.  and  or-
(iennl  that  he  should  l>e  taught  to  read  and  writ«.
Towanl  172.'5  Ct^r,  who  ha4l  adopttxl  the  name  of
Itenauld,  returne<l  to  Martinique,  and  was  admitted
into  the  household  of  the  governor,  where  he  after-
ward live<l.  His  [>oems  were  c-ollectt>d  after  his
death  ami  publLslieil  under  the  title  "  Komances  et
melcKlies  du  poete  n«>gn»  (V'sar  Auguste  dit  R«-
nauld  "  (Fort  Koval.  1701).

RENAULT,  Philip  Francois  (reh-no),  colonist,
b.  in  Picardy,  France;  d.  in  France  after  1744.  He
was  the  principal  agent  of  the  ( 'omi>any  of  St.  Philip,
and  8aile<l  from  trance  for  Illinois  in  1719  with
2(X)  mechanics  and  miners.  This  w»mpany  was  a
branch  of  the  Western  company,  or  "Mississippi
scheme,"  organized  in  Paris  in  1717  at  the  instiga-
tion of  John  I^w  (q.  v.).  The  head<juarters  of  the
company  was  establisheil  at  Fort  Chartres.  alwut
sixteen  miles  north  of  Kaskaskia  in  1718.  The  wall
of  the  fort,  which  contained  four  acres,  wa*  made  of
hewn  stone,  and,  notwithstanding  a  large  portion  of
it  has  been  destroyed  by  encroachments  of  the  Mis-
sissippi river,  the  remnant  that  is  left  is  a  magnifi-
cent ruin.  Renault's  company  was  organized  in
Paris  for  the  express  puriK)se  of  mining.  In  the
West  Indies  he  bought  500  negro  slaves  for  miners,
who  were  the  ancestors  of  the  slaves  in  Illinois  and
Missouri.  He  obtained  large  grants  of  land  for
raining  purposes,  and  established  the  first  smelt-
ing-funtaces  for  lead  in  the  Mississippi  valley.
He  returned  to  France  in  1744.

REN<iINO,  Luis  (ren-ge-no),  Mexican  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Mexico  alx)ut  1520;  d.  there  about
1580.  He  entered  the  Dominican  order  in  his
native  city  in  1545,  l)ecame  known  as  a  linguist
and  a  successful  missionary,  and  was  appointed
definer  of  the  provincial  chapter  of  his  order.  He
wrote  "Sermones  y  tratados  doctrinales  en  diver-
sas  Icnguas  de  los  Indios  de  la  N.  E."  (Mexico,
1565),  which  has  the  text  in  Sjianish,  Aztec.  Mis-
tec,  ZajKitec.  Mije,  Chocho,  and  Tarasco,  and  is
now  extremely  nirt^.

RENOj  Jense  Lee  (r«'-no  ),  soldier,  b.  in  Wheel-
ing, W.  Va.,  20  June,  1823;  d.  on  South  Mountain,
Md.,  14  Sept,  1862.
He  was  appointed
a  cadet  in  the  U.S.
militarv  academy
from  Pennsylva-
nia, where  he  was
graduated  in  1846,
and  at  once  pro-
mote«l  brevet  2d
lieutenant  of  ord-
nance. He  served
in  the  war  with
Mexico.  taking
part  in  the  Itattles
of  Cerro  Gordo,
Contreras.  Churu-
busco,  and  Chapul-
tepec,  and  in  the
siege  of  Vera  Cruz.
He  was  commis-
sione<l  2<l  lieuten-
ant. 3  March.  1847,  brevettod  1st  lieutenant,  18
April,  for  gallant  con«luct  in  the  first-named  en-
gagement, and  ca()tain.  13  .Sept..  for  bravery  at
Chapultepec,  where  he  commanded  a  howitzer  bat-
tery, and  was  severely  wounded. He  was  assistant


c^  ^  /uA\yO


222


RENO


RENWICK


firofessor  of  mathematics  at  the  military  academy
rom  January  till  July,  1849,  secretary  of  a  boari
to  prepare  a  "  system  of  instruction  for  heavy  artil-
lery" in  1849-'50,  assistant  to  the  ordnance  board
at  Washinjrton  arsenal,  I).  C  in  1851-'3,  and  on
topographical  duty  in  Minnesota  in  1853-'4.  He
wius  chief  of  ordnance  in  the  Utah  expedition  in
18o7-'9,  and  in  command  of  Mount  Veninn  arsenal,
Ala.,  from  1859  until  its  seizure  by  the  Confederates
in  January,  1861.  On  1  July,  1860,  he  was  promot-
ed captain  for  fourteen  years'  continuous  service.
From  2  Feb,  till  6  Dec,  1861,  he  was  in  charge  of
the  arsenal  at  Leavenworth,  Kan.  After  being  made
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  12  Nov.,  1861,  ne  was
in  command  of  the  2d  brigade  during  Gen.  Ambrose
E.Burnside's  expedition  into  North  Carolina,  being
engaged  in  the  capture  of  Roanoke  island,  where
he  led  an  attack  against  Fort  Bartow,  and  the  bat-
tles of  New  Berne  and  Camden.  From  April  till
August,  1862,  he  was  in  command  of  a  division  in
the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  and  on  18  July
he  was  commissioned  major-general  of  volunteers.
In  the  campaign  in  nortnern  Virginia,  in  the  fol-
lowing month,  he  was  at  the  head  of  the  9th  army
corps,  and  took  part  under  Gen.  John  Pope  in  the
battles  of  Manassas  and  Chantilly.  Still  at  the
head  of  the  9th  corps.  Gen.  Reno  was  in  the  ad-
vance at  the  battle  of  South  Mountain,  where  he
was  conspicuous  for  his  gallantry  and  activity
during  the  entire  day.  Early  in  the  evening  he
was  killed  while  leading  an  assault.

RENO,  Mnrcns  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  Illinois  about
1835;  d.  in  Washington,  I).  C,  29  March,  1889.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1857,  and  assigned  to  the  dragoons.  After
serving  on  the  frontier  and  being  made  lieutenant,
he  was  commissioned  captain,  12  Nov.,  1861.  Sub-
sequently he  took  part,  among  other  engagements,
in  the  battles  of  Williamsburg,  Gainess  Mills,
Malvern  Hill,  Antietam,  and  the  action  at  Kelly's
Ford,  Va.,  17  March,  1863,  where  he  was  wounded,
and  was  brevetted  major  for  gallant  and  meritorious
conduct.  He  was  also  present  at  Cold  Harbor  and
Trevillian  Station,  and  at  Cedar  Creek  on  19  Oct.,
1864,  when  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel.
From  January  till  July,  1865,  as  colonel  of  the
12th  Pennsylvania  cavalry,  he 'was  in  command
of  a  brigade  and  encountered  Mosby's  guerillas  at
Harmony.  Va.  On  13  March,  1865,  he  was  bre-
vetted colonel  in  the  regular  army  and  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  for  meritorious  services
during  the  civil  war.  After  serving  as  assistant
instructor  of  infantry  tactics  in  the  U,  S.  military
academy,  and  in  the  Freedmen's  bureau  at  New
Orleans,  he  was  assigned  to  duty  in  the  west.  On
26  Dec,  1868,  he  was  promoted  major  of  the  7th
cavalry,  and  in  1876  he  was  engaged  with  Gen.
George  A.  Custer  (o.  v.),  in  the  expedition  against
the  hostile  Sioux  Indians.  His  conduct  in  that
campaign  led  to  a  court  of  inquiry,  but  he  was
held  blameless.  For  other  causes  he  was  dismissed
the  service,  1  April,  1880.

RENSHAW,  William  Bainbrid^e,  naval  of-
ficer, b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  11  Oct.,  1816;  d.  near
Galveston,  Tex.,  1  Jan.,  1863.  He  was  appointed
a  midshipman  on  22  Dec,  1831,  passed  the  exami-
nation for  advancement  in  1837,  and  was  promoted
lieutenant  on  8  Sept.,  1841,  and  commander  on  26
April,  1861.  He  was  assigned  the  steamer  "  West-
field,"  of  Admiral  David  G.  Farragut's  squadron,
and  was  by  him  placed  in  command  of  the  gun-
boats blockading  Galveston,  which  place  he  capt-
tured  on  10  Oct.,  1862.  The  city  and  island  were
held  as  a  landing-place  for  future  operations  by  the
gun-boats  alone,  until  in  the  latter  part  of  De-


cember, 1862,  a  detachment  of  troops  arrived.  Be-
fore others  could  follow,  the  Confederate  Gen.
John  B.  Magruder  attacked  and  captured  the
town.  As  the  action  began,  the  "  Westfield,"  in
taking  position,  ran  aground  on  a  sand-bank.  Af-
ter the  defeat.  Commander  Renshaw  determined  to
transfer  his  crew  to  another  of  the  gim-boats  and
blow  up  his  own  vessel,  on  which  there  was  a  large
supply  of  powder.  After  his  men  had  been  placed
in  the  boats,  he  remained  behind  to  light  the  fuse,
but  a  drunken  man  is  supposed  to  have  ignited  the
match  prematurely,  and  in  the  explosion  the  com-
mander was  killed,  together  with  the  boat's  crew
that  was  waiting  for  him  alongside.

RENWICK,  James,  physicist,  b.  in  Liverpool,
England,  30  May,  1790;  d,  in  New  York  city,  12
Jan.,  1863.  He  was  bom  during  his  parents'  re-
turn from  a  visit  to  Scotland,  where  nis  mother,
formerly  a  Miss  Jeffrey,  the  daughter  of  a  Scottish
clergyman,  had  been  a  famous  beauty.  Bums  cele-
brated her  in  three  of  his  songs.  James  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1807,  standing  first  in  his  class,
and  in  1813  became  instructor  in  natural  and  exper-
imental philosophy  and  chemistry  in  that  college.
In  1820  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  these  sciences,
which  he  then  held  until  1853,  when  he  was  made
professor  emeritus.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  service  in
1814  as  topographical  engineer  with  the  rank  of
major,  and  spent  his  summers  in  this  work.  In
1838  he  was  appointed  by  the  U.  S.  government  one
of  the  commissioners  for  the  exploration  of  the
northeast  boundary-line  between  tne  United  States
and  New  Brunswick.  From  1817  till  1820  he  was
i  a  trustee  of  Columbia,  and  in  1829  he  received  the
i  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  that  college.  Prof.  Ren-
wick  was  a  vigorous  writer  and  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  the  first  '*  New  York  Review,"  and  on
the  establishment  of  the  "  Whig  Review  "  he  be-
came one  of  its  most  valued  writers,  also  contribut-
ing to  the  "American  Quarterly  Review."  He
translated  from  the  French  Lallemand's  "  Treatise
on  Artillery"  (2  vols..  New  York.  1820),  and  edited,
with  notes,  American  editions  of  Parkes's  "  Rudi-
ments of  Chemistry  "  (1824) ;  Lardner's  "  Popular
Lectures  on  the  Steam-Engine "  (1828):  Daniell's
"Chemical  Philosophy"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1832);  and  Moseley's  "Illustrations  of  Practical
Mechanics  "  (New  York,  1839).  His  own  works  in-
clude, besides  official  reports,  lives  of  "  David  Rit-
tenhouse  "  (1839) ;  "  Robert  Fulton  "  (1845) :  and
"Count  Rumford"  (1848),  in  Sparks's  "Library
of  American  Biography  " ;  also  "  Outlines  of  Natu-
ral Philosophy,"  the  earliest  extended  treatise  on
this  subject  published  in  the  United  States  (2  vols.,
New  York.  l822-'3) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Steam-En-
gine "  (1830),  which  was  translated  into  several  lan-
guages; "Elements  of  Mechanics"  (Philadelphia,
1832) ;  "  Applications  of  the  Science  of  Mechanics
to  Practical  Purposes "  (New  York,  1840) ;  "  Life
of  De  Witt  Clinton,  with  Selections  of  his  Letters  "
(1840) ;  "  Life  of  John  Jay  [with  Henry  B.  Ren-
wick]  and  Alexander  Hamilton"  (1841);  "First
Principles  of  Chemistry"  (1841);  and  "First  Prin-
ciples of  Natural  Philosophy  "  (1842).  Prof.  Ren-
wick  printed  privately  for  the  use  of  his  classes
"  First  Principles  in  Chemistry  "  (1838),  and  "  Out-
lines of  Geology"  (1838),  and  a  synopsis  of  his
lectures  on  "  Chemistry  Applied  to  the  Arts,"  taken
down  bv  one  of  his  class,  was  printed. — His  son;
Henry  ferevoort,  engineer,  b.  in  New  York  city,
4  Sept.,  1817.  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1836,
and  became  assistant  engineer  in  the  U.  S.  service.
He  served  as  first  assistant  astronomer  of  the  U.  S.
boundary  commission  in  1840-'2,  and  in  1848  was
appointed  examiner  in  the  U.  S.  patent-office. In


RRNWICK


RESTRKPO


223


1858  he  beonme  V.  S.  inspwtor  of  .stoamlioAt  en-
gines for  the  (listrict  of  New  York,  niid  since  hix
rotiren)ent  from  that  olTiee  ho  has  devotwl  himself
to  consultation  practice  in  the  s|M>cialtv  of  me-
chanical engineering,  in  which  branch  he  is  ac-
cept e<l  as  one  of  the  best  authorities  in  the  United
States.  Mr.  Kenwick  was  H.ss4K-iHte4l  with  his  fa-
ther in  tlio  ]>rc|>aration  of  "Life  of  .John  .lav"
(New  York.  1841).— Another  son.  JailieM,  archi-
tect, b.  in  Bloomingdale  (now  part  of  New  York
citv).  3  Nov.,  1818,  wjis  gra<luate<l  at  Columbia  in
185(j.  He  inherite<l  a  fondness  for  architecture
from  his  father.  At  first  he  served  as  an  engineer
in  the  F>ie  niilway.  and  then  he  Ix'came  an  assist-
ant engineer  on  the  Croton  a«pUHluct,  in  which
capacity  he  superintended  the  construction  of  the
distributing  res«'rvoir  on  Fifth  avenue  l)etween
Fortieth  and  Forty-second  streets.  Soon  after-
ward he  vojun-
teere<I  to  fur-
nish a  plan  for
a  fountain  in
Union  square,
which  was  ac-
cepted by  the
proj>erty-own-
ers.  who  had
decided  toerect
one  at  their  ex-
pense. When
the  vestry  of
Grace  church
purchased  the

firopcrty  on
i  road  way  at
11th  street  Mr.
Renwick  sub-
niitte<l  designs
for  the  new
edifice,  which
were  accented.
The  building,
which  is  purely  Gothic,  was  completed  in  1845.  All
of  the  designs  and  working  drawings  were  made
by  him.  Subsequently  he  was  chosen  architect  of
Calvary  church  on  Fourth  avenue,  and  also  of  the
Church  of  the  Puritans,  formerly  on  Union  square,
was  selected  by  the  regents  of  the  Smithsonian
institution  to  prepare  plans  for  their  building,  and
als<i  built  the  Corconui  gallery  in  Washington.  In
1853  he  was  reouested  to  make  designs  for  a  Roman
Catholic  catheural  to  be  built  on  Fifth  avenue  Ih?-
tween  Fiftieth  and  Fifty-first  streets.  His  plans
were  accepted,  and  on  15  Aug.,  1858,  the  corner-
stone of  St.  Patrick's  cathetlnil,  seen  in  the  accom-
panying illustration,  was  laid.  Its  architecture  is
of  the  decorated  or  geometric  style  that  prevailed
in  Europe  in  the  13tn  century,  of  which  tne  cathe-
drals of  Rheiins,  Cologne,  and  Amiens  are  typical,
and  it  is  built  of  white  marble  with  a  base  course
of  granite.  On  25  Mav.  1879,  the  cathedral  was
dedicate<l  by  Canlinal  McCloskey.  and  in  1887  the
complt'ti(»n  of  the  two  towers  was  undertaken.
Meanwhile  residences  for  the  archbishop  and  the
vicar-general  have  been  built.  It  is  estimated  that
upwanl  of  |;2,500.000  will  be  expende<l  l)efore  the
group  of  buildings,  as  originally  designetl,  will  Ihj
complete<l.  Ijater  he  plannetl'  the  buiUling  for
Vassar  college,  St.  Barttiolomew's  church,  and  the
Church  of  the  Covenant,  New  York,  the  last  two
in  the  Byzantine  style.  Besides  churches  in  vari-
ous cities,  including  St.  Ann's  in  Br(K)klyn,  he
planned  the  Ituildingof  the  Young  men's  Christian
association  in  1800,  and  Booth's  theatre  in  the  same
year,  and  other  public  edifices  in  New  York  city.


—Another  son,  Kdnaril  Sahlne,  exfiert.  b.  in
New  York  city, 3  .Jan..  1823,  was  graduated  at  Co-
lumbia in  lH:)i),  and  then,  turning  his  attention  to
civil  and  mechanical  cnginei-ring,  became  the  sn-
i»erintendent  of  large  iron-works  in  Wilkesbarre.
Pa.,  but  since  1849  has  lieen  engagi*d  mainly  as  an
exfM-rt  in  the  trials  of  pat^-nt  caites  in  the  U,  S.
courts.  In  18(]2,  in  connection  with  his  Virother,
Henry  B.  Renwick,  he  devise<l  meth<Mls  for  the  re-
pair of  the  steamer  "Great  Kaxtern  "  while  afloat,
and  successfully  accom[)lished  it,  rc[ilating  a  frac-
ture in  the  bilge  82  feet  long  and  al»out  10  feet
broad  at  the  widest  place,  a  feat  which  ha<l  \wen
prfmounced  im{>ossible  by  other  exiwrts.  He  has
invented  a  wrought-iron  railway-chair  for  connect-
ing the  ends  of  rails  (1850),  a  steam  cut-off  for
beam  engines  (185(3),  a  system  of  side  pn)pulsion
for  steamers  (18<i2),  and  numerous  impn>vement8
in  incubators  and  broo<lers  (1877-'80).  arul  was  one
of  the  original  inventors  of  the  self-binding  reap-
ing-machine (1851).  He  has  published  a  work  on
artificial  inculmtion  entitled  "The  Thermostatic
Incul)ator"(New  York,  1883).

REQUIER,  AugiiHtiis  JiiHan,  poet,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  27  Mav,  1825;  d.  in  New  York
city.  19  March.  1887.  l"lis  father  was  a  native  of
Marseilles,  and  his  mother  the  daughter  of  a  French
Haytian  planter,  who  fletl  to  the  United  States  dur-
ing the  servile  insurrection.  The  son  received  a
classical  education,  wrote  a  successful  play  at  the
age  of  seventeen,  and  at  nineteen  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  He  began  practice  in  Charleston,  but  soon
removed  to  Marion  Court-House,  and  in  Octolier,
1850.  to  Mobile,  Ala.  In  1853  he  was  appointed
U.  S.  district  attornev,  in  which  office  he  was  con-
tinued by  President  liuchanan,  and  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  was  judge  of  the  superior
court.  He  was  district  attorney  under  the  Confed-
erate government.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  set-
tled in  Neyv  York  city,  became  an  active  member  of
the  Tammany  political  society,  and  was  ap(>ointed
assistant  corporation  counsel,  and  later  a.ssistant  dis-
trict attorney.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to
perimiicals.  His  drama  of  "The  S[)anish  Exile,"
m  blank  verse,  after  Ix^ing  producetl  on  the  stage  in
Charleston  and  other  places,  was  published.  It  was
followed  by  a  romance  entitled  "  The  Old  Sanctu-
ary," the  scene  of  which  was  laid  in  Charleston  be-
fore the  Revolution  (lioston,  1846).  While  living
in  Marion  and  Mobile  he  com|)ose(l  many  pit»ces  in
verse  and  prose,  including  a  tragetly  entitled  "  Mar-
co Bozairis,"  an  "  Ode  to  Shakespeare,"  and  a  long
poem  called  "Christalline."  The  poems  were  sub-
sequently published  in  b<K)k-form  (Philadelphia,
1859).  f)uring  the  war  he  wrote  many  pm-ms  in
praise  of  the  Confederate  cause,  including  an  dab-
orate  "Ode  to  Victory."  An  allegorj'  entitled
"  The  Legend  of  Tremaine  "  was  composed  for  an
English  publication  in  18(M.  "Ashes  of  Glory,"
a  martial  lyric,  was  written  as  a  reply  to  Father
Abram  J.  Ryan's  "Conquered  lianner."  His  later
{Miems  have  not  been  collected.  A  sj>eculative
treatise  on  the  lost  science  of  the  races  of  antiquity
was  left  in  manuscript.

RKSTREPO.  Jos^  Mannel  (res-tray -po),  Co-
lombian  historian,  b.  in  Envigmlo,  Anti<M{uia.  in
1780:  d.  in  Bogota  alnnit  1860.  He  studied  in  Bo-
gota under  the  direction  of  his  cousin.  I>r.  Felix
Restrepo,  and  was  there  graduated  in  law,  but
gave  hnnsclf  with  enthusiasm  to  the  study  of  his-
tory. In  the  revolution  of  1810  he  es|K)usetl  the
patriot  cause,  and  in  1814  was  deputy  to  the  con-
gress of  the  uniteil  pn)vinces  of  New  Granada,
and  electetl  a  member  of  the  executive  junta  at
Tunja. He  was  ap|)ointed  in  1819  governor  of  his


224


REULINQ


REVERE


native  province,  in  1821  was  deputy  to  the  con-
stituent congress  of  Cucuta,  and  in  1823  a  member
of  the  cabinet  in  Bogota  as  secretary  of  the  inte-
rior. Later  he  was  secretary  of  state  and  an  inti-
mate friend  of  Simon  Bolivar,  and  after  the  parti-
tion of  Colombia  into  the  three  republics  of  Vene-
zuehi.  New  Granada,  and  Ecuador,  was  appointed
director  of  the  mint  in  Bogota.  In  his  leisure
hours  he  entirely  rearranged  his  historical  work,
which  had  first  appeared  in  1827.  He  wrote  "  En-
sayo  sobre  la  geografia.  producciones,  industria  y
poblacion  de  la  provincia  de  Antioquia"  (El  Seina-
nario,  1819;  reprinted  in  Bogota,  1824),  and  "  His-
toria  de  la  Revoiucion  de  Colombia  "  (10  vols.,  Paris,
1827 :  Bogota,  1858).

RE  U  LIN  (J,  (]ieoi*ge  (roy'-ling),  physician,  b.  in
Romrod,  Germany,  11  Nov.,  1839.  He  studied
medicine  at  Giessen  from  1860  till  1865,  and  after
graduation  studied  ophthalmology  at  Berlin  under
Karl  F.  von  Graefe,  and  in  Vienna  under  Ferdi-
nand von  Ardt.  He  was  military  surgeon  in  the
Prussian  array  during  the  war  with  Austria,  then  as-
sistant at  the  eye  hospital  at  Wiesbaden  in  1866-'7,
and,  after  studying  for  a  year  longer  at  Paris  under
Liebreich,  De  Wecker,  and  Meyer,  came  to  the
United  States,  and  established  himself  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  as  a  specialist  in  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear.
In  1869  he  was  appointed  physician-in-chief  of  the
Eye  and  ear  infirmary  in  that  city. He  was  chosen

grofessor  of  ophthalmology  in  the  University  of
ialtimore.  and  in  1871-3  he  was  professor  of  eye
and  ear  surgery  in  Washington  university.  Dr.
Reuling  has  invented  a  microtome  for  microscopi-
cal sections,  and  a  ring-shaped  silver-sling  for  the
extraction  of  cataract  within  the  capsule.  He  has
written  on  "  Detachment  of  the  Choroid  after  Ex-
traction of  Cataract "  (1868),  "  Extraction  of  Cata-
ract within  the  Capsule,"  and  "  Destruction  of  a
Cyst  of  the  Iris  by  Galvano-Cautery  "  (1887).

"revels,  Hiram  R.,  senator,  b.  in  Fayette-
ville,  N.  C,  1  Sept.,  1822.  He  is  a  quadroon,  the
son  of  free  colored  parents.  After  receiving  his
education  at  the  Friends'  seminary  in  Liberty,  Ind.,
whither  he  removed  in  1844,  and  completing  a
theological  course  in  Ohio,  he  was  ordained  a  min-
ister in  the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
and  became  a  popular  preacher  and  lecturer  among
the  colored  people  of  Ohio,  Illinois,  Indiana,  and
Missouri.  Before  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  settled  in  Baltimore,  Ohio,  as  a  minister  and

grineipal  of  the  high-school  for  colored  students.
[e  assisted  in  organizing  the  first  colored  regi-
ment in  Maryland,  went  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  as  a
teacher,  and  aided  in  raising  the  first  one  there,
which  he  accompanied  as  chaplain  to  Vicksburg,
where  he  rendered  assistance  to  the  provost-marshal
in  re-establishing  order  and  industry  among  the
f  reedmen.  He  followed  the  army  to  Jackson,  Miss.,
preaching  and  lecturing  among  the  emancipated
slaves,  and  organizing  churches.  He  spent  two
years  in  the  same  way  in  Missouri  and  Kansas.
He  was  elected  to  the  Mississippi  senate  by  a  large
majority  on  the  reconstruction  of  the  state  gov-
ernment, and,  when  the  legislature  assembled,  was
chosen  by  81  votes  against  38  to  be  Gen.  Adelbert
Ames's  colleague  in  the  U.  S.  senate.  He  took  his
seat  on  25  Feb.,  1870,  and  served  till  3  March,
1871,  when  his  terra  expired. He  was  afterward

Eastor  of  a  church  at  Holly  Springs,  Miss.,  until
e  reraoved  to  Indiana,  and  took  charge  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  Richmond,  Ind.
Revels  was  the  first  man  of  his  race  to  sit  in  the
U.  S.  senate.  From  the  close  of  his  senatorial  term
till  1883  he  was  the  president  of  Alcorn  agricul-
tural university,  Rodney,  Miss.


<iJcUyt£ t/uUJ


■tAJU


REVERE,  Paul,  patriot,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  1
Jan.,  1735:  d.  there,  10  May,  1818.  His  grand-
father, a  Huguenot,  emigrated  from  Sainte-Foy,
France,  to  the  island  of  Guernsey,  whence  his
father  removed  to  Boston,  and  there  learned  the
trade  of  a  goldsmith.  The  son  was  trained  in  this
business,  and  became  skilful  in  drawing  and  en-
graving designs  on

silver plate. He

took  part  in  the
expedition  of  1756
to  capture  Crown
Point  frora  the
French,  being  ap-
pointed a  lieuten-
ant of  artillery,  and
stationed  at  Fort
Edward,  near  Lake
George.  On  his  re-
turn to  Boston  he
married,  and  began
business  for  himself
as  a  goldsmith.  He
also  practised  cop-
per-plate engraving,
m  which  he  was
self-taught,  and  pro-
duced a  portrait  of
Rev.  Dr.  Jonathan  Mayhew,  followed  in  1766  by  a
picture  emblematical  of  the  repeal  of  the  stamp-act,
and  next  by  a  caricature  entitled  "  A  Warm  Place
— Hell,"  in  which  are  represented  the  seventeen
members  of  the  house  of  representatives  who  voted
for  rescinding  the  circular  of  1768  to  the  provincial
legislatures.  In  1770  he  published  a  print  repre-
senting the  Boston  massacre,  and  in  1774  one  rep-
resenting the  landing  of  British  troops  in  Boston.
He  was  one  of  the  grand  jurors  that  refused  to
serve  in  1774  in  consequence  of  the  act  of  parlia-
ment that  made  the  supreme  court  judges  inde-
pendent of  the  legislature  in  regard  to  their  sala-
ries. In  1775  he  engraved  the  plates  for  the  paper-
money  that  had  been  ordered  by  the  Provincial
congress  of  Massachusetts,  made  the  press,  and
printed  the  bills.  He  was  sent  to  Philadelphia  to
learn  the  process  of  making  gunpowder,  and  the
proprietor  of  the  mill  there  would  only  consent  to
show  him  the  works  in  operation,  but  not  to  let
hira  take  memoranda  or  drawings.  Nevertheless,
on  his  return,  he  constructed  a  mill,  which  was
soon  put  into  successful  operation.  He  was  one
of  the  prime  movers  of  the  "  tea-party  "  that  de-
stroyed the  tea  in  Boston  harbor.  In  the  auturfin
of  1774  he  and  about  thirty  other  young  men,
chiefly  mechanics,  formed  a  secret  society  for  the
purpose  of  watching  the  movements  of  the  British
soldiers  and  detecting  the  designs  of  the  Tories,
which  they  reported  only  to  John  Hancock.  Dr.
Charles  Warren,  Samuel  Adams,  and  two  or  three
others,  one  of  whora  was  the  traitor.  Dr.  Benjamin
Church,  who  coraraunicated  the  transactions  of  the
society  to  Gen.  Thoraas  Gage.  They  took  turns  in
patrolling  the  streets,  and  several  days  before  the
battle  of  Lexington  they  observed  suspicious  prepa-
rations in  the  British  barracks  and  on  the  ships  in
the  harbor.  On  the  evening  of  18  April  they  ap-
prised the  Whigs  that  the  troops  had  begun  to
move.  Dr.  Warren,  sending  for  Revere,  desired
him  to  set  out  at  once  for  Lexington  in  order  to
warn  Hancock  and  Adams  in  time.  Crossing  to
Charlestown  by  boat,  he  procured  a  horse,  and
rode  through  Medford,  rousing  the  minute-men  on
the  way,  and,  after  barely  escaping  capture  by
sorae  British  officers,  reached  Lexington  and  de-
livered his  message. With  Dr.  Samuel  Prescott


REVERE


RKXFORD


220


and  William  Dawoii  ho  pushml  nn  for  the  purpose
of  rousinjj  the  |MH)plc  of  C'otuttnl  and  swiirinj?  the
military  stores  there.  Thev  awakened  the  miniite-
men  on  the  route,  but  at  Lincoln  they  were  sitopi»e<l
by  «  P»rty  of  British  oHleers.  exeeptirJK  I*re«cott,
who  esoKped  capture  l>y  lea[>in^  a  wall,  and  rcMle
on  to  Concord,  where  he  alanne<l  the  inhabitants,
while  Revere  and  Dawes  were  tAken  by  their  cap-
tors back  to  lA>xinf;ton,  and  there  ri'lensed.  Henry
W.  Ivonjffellow  h»is  made  the  midnight  ride  of
Paul  Revere  the  subjiH.!  of  a  namitive  |KMjm-  Re-
vere was  the  messenger  that  was  usually  employinl
on  difficult  business  by  the  committee  (»f  safety',  of
which  Joseph  Warren  was  president.  He  repaired
the  cannon  in  Fort  Independence,  which  the  Hrit-
ish,  on  leaving  Boston,  had  sought  to  render  use-
less by  breaking  the  trunnions,  but  which  he  ma<le
serviceable  by  devising  a  new  kind  of  carriage.
After  the  evacuation  a  regiment  of  artillery  whs
raised  in  Biiston,  of  which  he  was  made  major,  and
afterward  lieutenant-colonel.  He  took  part  in  the
unsuccessful  Penobscot  expedition  of  1779.  After
the  war  he  resumed  the  business  of  a  gold-  and
silver-smith,  and  subsequently  erected  a  foundry
for  casting  church-l)ells  and  bronze  cannon.  When
copper  bolts  and  spikes  began  to  be  used,  instead
of  iron,  for  fastening  the  timbers  of  vessels,  he  ex-
perimented on  the  manufacture  of  these  articles,
and  when  he  was  able  to  make  them  to  his  satisfac-
tion he  built  in  1801  large  works  at  Canton,  Mass.,
for  rolling  copper,  which  are  still  carried  on  by  the
Revere  copper  company.  He  was  the  first  in  this
country  to  smelt  copper  ore  and  to  refine  and  roll
copper  into  bolts  and  sheets.  As  grand-master  of
the  masonic  fraternity  he  laid  the  corner-stone  of
the  Ik)ston  state-house  in  1795.  In  that  year  he
aided  in  the  establishment  of  the  Massachusetts
charitable  mechanic  association,  of  which  he  was
the  first  president.  He  was  a  munificent  contribu-
tor to  enterprises  of  benevolence,  and  at  the  time
of  his  death  was  connected  with  numerous  chari-
ties.— His  grandson,  Joneph  Warren,  soldier,  b.
in  Boston,  Mjiss.,  17  May,  1812;  d.  in  Hoboken,
N.  J..  20  April,  1880.  He  was  made  a  midshipman
in  the  U.  S.  navy.  1  April,  1828,  l)ecame  a  passed
midshipman  on  4  June,  \Sii4,  and  lieutenant  on  25
Feb.,  1841.  took  part  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  re-
signed from  the  navy  on  20  Sept.,  1850.  He  then
entered  the  Mexican  service.  For  sanng  the  lives
of  several  Spaniards  he  was  knighted  by  Queen  Isa-
bella of  Spain.  He  was  made  colonel  of  the  7th
regiment  of  New  Jersey  volunteers  on  31  Aug..  18(81,
and  promoted  brigadier-general  of  U.  S.  volunteers
on  2o  Oct..  1862.  He  led  a  brigade  at  Fredericks-
burg, was  then  transferred  to  the  command  of  the
Excelsior  brigade  in  the  2d  division,  fought  with  it
at  Chancellorsville,  and  after  the  engagement  fell
under  the  censure  of  his  su|»enor  officer.  In  May.
1863,  he  was  tried  by  court-martial,  and  dismisseid
from  the  military  service  of  the  United  States.  He
defended  his  conduct  with  great  earnestness,  and
on  10  Sept.,  1864.  his  dismissal  from  the  army  was
revoke<l  by  President  Lincoln,  and  his  resignation
was  accepted.  His  "Keel  and  Siuldle"  (Boston,
1872)  relates  many  of  his  persfmal  adventures. —
Another  grandson,  Edward  Hutchinson  Rob-
bins,  physician,  b.  in  lioston,  Mass.,  2:{Julv.  1827;
d.  near  Sharpsliurg.  Md.,  17  Sept.,  1862.'entereci
Harvard,  but  left  in  1846,  pursued  the  course
in  the  rae<lical  school,  and  receive<l  his  diploma
in  1849.  He  pnictisc<l  in  lioston.  and  on  14  .Sept.,
1861,  was  appointed  assistant  surgeon  of  the  20th
Massachusetts  volunteers.  At  Ball's  Bluff  he  wa-^
captured  by  the  enemy's  cavalry,  and  was  kept
•8  a  prisoner  at  Leesburg,  and  afterward  at  Ricn-

VOL.  V. — 15


I  mond.  Va.,  till  22  Feb..  1862,  when  he  was  releaaed
on  jtarole.  He  was  exchangiii  in  April,  1863,  and
servwl  with  his  regiment  through  the  jH-ninsular
camfMiign  and  Gen.  John  Po|m>'!*  cam|»iign  on  the
Ran|>ahannock,  was  pn's<>nt  at  Chantilly,  and  was
killed  at  thelmttleof  Antietam.— A  brother  of  I-M-
ward  H.  R.,  Paul  Joneph,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Maxs.,  10  .S«'i)t.,  1KJ2;  d.  in  Westminster,  Md.,  4
July.  18<W.  was  gnMluated  at  Harvanl  in  1852,  and
at  the  l)eginning  of  the  civil  war  entered  the  Xa-
ticmal  army  as  major  of  the  20th  Massjichusetts  vol-
unteers. At  Ball's  Bluff  he  was  wounded  in  the  leg
and  taken  prisoner,  and  he  was  confined  in  liibby
prison  until  he  and  six  other  officers  were  selected
as  hostages  t()  answer  with  their  lives  for  the  safety
of  Confedenite  privateersmen  who  had  been  con-
victe<i  of  piracy  in  the  U.  S.  court.  They  were
transferriHl  to  the  Henrico  county  prison,  aiid  con-
fined for  three  months  in  a  felon's  cell.  Maj.
Revere  was  paroled  on  22  Feb.,  1862.  and  in  the
beginning  or  the  following  May  wa**  exchanged.
He  was  engaged  in  the  peninsular  cam|iaigii  until
he  was  taken  sick  in  Julv.  On  4  Sept..  1862,  he
was  made  a  lieutenant-colonel,  and  served  as  as-
sistant inspector-general  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
Edwin  V.  Sumner.  At  Antietam.  where  he  dis-
played great  gallantry,  he  received  a  wound  that
compelled  him  to  retire  to  his  home.  On  his  re-
covery he  was  aptwinted  colonel  of  his  old  regi-
ment,' 14  April.  186:3.  and  returnetl  to  the  field  in
May.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers for  bravery  at  Gettysburg,  where  he  re-
ceived a  fatal  wound  in  the  second  dav's  battle.

R£VILLE,  Albert  (rav-vil),  French  Protestant
theologian,  b.  in  I)iepi)e,  I'''rance,  4  Nov.,  1826.  He
studied  at  Geneva  and  Stmsburg.  was  pastor  of  the
Walloon  church  in  Rotterdam  in  1851 -'72,  and  in
1880  became  professor  of  the  history  of  religions  in
the  College  of  F'rance.  In  1886  he  was  made  presi-
dent of  the  section  for  religious  studies  in  the  Ecole
des  hautes  etudes  at  the  Sorbonne.  Besides  nu-
merous other  works,  he  has  published  '*  Theodore
Parker,  sa  vie  et  ses  oeuvres"  (Paris,  1869),  and
"  Les  religions  de  Mexique,  de  I'Amerique  centrale,
et  du  Perou"  (Paris,  1884),  an  English  transktion
of  which  was  published  in  the"  Hibbert  Ijectures"
(Lond(.n,  1884).

REVOIL,  B^n^dict  Henry  (ray-vwol),  French
author,  b.  in  Aix,  Bouches  du  Rhone,"France,  16  Dec.,
1816.  He  is  the  son  of  the  painter,  Pierre  Henri
Revoil,  of  Lyons,  who  died  in  1842.  lientnlict  was  for
several  years  connecte<l  with  the  department  of  pub-
lic instruction  and  with  the  manuscript  section  of
the  Bibliotheque  royale.  Just  after  his  father's  death
he  visited  the  United  States,  where  he  remained
nine  years.  During  this  perio<l  he  collecteil  the
material  for  many  of  his  works.  Among  these  are
"  Chasseset  j)eche8  de  I'autre  monde  "  (Paris,  1856);
"  La  fille  des  Comanches"  (1867) ;  "  Les  Parias  du
Mexique"  (1868):  and  manv  translations  from  the
English  and  German  into  t^rench.  Of  the  latter
the  best  known  are  "  Les  harems  du  nouveau
monde"  (1856);  "Les  pirates  du  Mississippi"
(1857);  "Les  prairies  du  Mexique"  (1865);  and
"  Le  fils  de  I'Oncle  Tom  "  (1866).  During  his  stay
in  New  York  city  M.  Revoil  wrote  and  placed  on-
the  stage  the  plays  "  New  York  as  it  Is  and  as  it
Was,"  "  Nut-\  er-Stick."  a  Chinese  "  fantasy."  and
"  Iloratius  Trelay,  or  Fourierisni."  He  also"  wrote,
in  French,  the  libretto  of  the  "  Vaisseau  Fant«nne,"
a  two-act  opera,  and  has  contributetl  fre«iuently  to
both  the  Fn»nch  and  American  press.

REX  FORD,  Ebon  Engene,  poet.  b.  in  Johns-
burg,  Warren  co.,  N.  Y..  16  July,  1848.  He  waa
educated  at  Lawrence  university,  Appleton,  Wis.,


226


REY


REYNOLDS


and  began  to  write  at  the  age  of  seventeen,  con-
tributing poems  and  stories  to  magazines.  He  has
published  in  book-form  a  poem  entitled  "  Brother
and  Lover"  (New  York,  1887);  "Grandmother's
Garden "  (C'hicago,  1887) ;  and  a  story  entitled
"John  Fielding  and  His  Enemy"  (1888).  He  has
written  several  popular  songs,  among  which  the
best-known  are  "  Silver  Threads  among  the  Gold  "
and  "  Only  a  Pansy-Blossom."  Since  1885  Mr.  Rex-
ford  has  given  much  attention  to  floriculture,  con-
ducting departments  that  are  devoted  to  that  sub-
ject in  several  magazines.

RE¥,  Anthony,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lyons,  France,
19  March,  1807;  d.  near  Ceralvo.  Mexico,  in  1846.
He  removed  to  Switzerland  at  an  early  age,  and
prepared  himself  for  a  commercial  career,  but  after-
ward entered  the  Jesuit  college  of  Frilx)urg,  and
united  with  the  order  in  1827.  After  his  ordina-
tion he  was  appointed  professor  in  the  institution.
In  1840  he  was  sent  to  the  United  States,  became
professor  of  metaphysics  and  ethics  in  Georgetown
college,  and  was  transferred  to  St.  Joseph's  church,
Philadelphia,  in  1843.  In  1845  he  was  made  as-
sistant to  the  Jesuit  provincial  of  Maryland,  and
also  at  the  same  time  vice-president  of  Georgetown
college  and  pastor  of  Trinity  church  in  that  place.
He  was  appointed  chaplain  in  the  U.  S.  ai'my  in
1846,  and  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Zachary  Tay-
lor. When  a  part  of  the  1st  Ohio  regiment  entered
Monterey,  he  was  always  in  the  most  exposed  po-
sitions walking  about  with  a  small  cross  while  the
shells  were  bursting  around  him,  and  stopping
wherever  the  wounded  and  dying  needed  his  ser-
vices. After  the  siege  was  over  he  remained  with
the  army  in  the  city,  but  devoted  his  spare  time
to  the  "  ranchos "  in  the  neighborhood,  and  was
making,  as  he  believed,  successful  efforts  to  reclaim
the  half-civilized  rancheros.  He  set  out  to  visit
Matamoras,  accompanied  by  a  single  servant,
against  the  advice  of  the  officers  in  Monterey,
trusting  to  his  clerical  character  and  to  the  influ-
ence he  thought  he  had  acquired  over  the  Mexicans.
He  reached  Ceralvo  in  safety,  and  preached  to  a
mixed  audience  of  Americans  and  Mexicans.  This
was  the  last  that  was  heard  of  him  until  his  body
was  discovered,  a  few  days  afterward,  pierced  with
lances.  It  was  supposed  that  he  was  killed  by  a
band  under  a  guerilla  leader  named  Canales.

REYNOLDS,  Alexander  W.,  soldier,  b.  in
Clarke  county,  Va.,  in  August,  1817;  d.  in  Alex-
andria, Egypt,  26  May,  1876.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1838,  served  in
the  Florida  war,  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1889,  be-
came captain  in  1848,  and  was  dismissed  in  1855.
He  was  reappointed,  with  his  former  rank,  in  1857,
but  joined  tne  Confederate  army  in  1861.  and  was
made  captain  of  infantry.  He  became  colonel  of
the  50th  regiment  of  Virginia  infantry  in  July  of
the  same  year,  and  brigadier-general.  14  Sept.,
1863,  his  brigade  being  composed  of  North  Caro-
lina and  Virginia  troops.  He  went  to  Egypt  after
the  civil  war,  received  the  appointment  of  briga-
dier-general in  the  khedive's  army  in  1866,  and
served  in  the  Abyssinian  war,  but  subsequently
resigned,  and  resided  in  Cairo,  Egypt.

REYNOLDS,  Daniel  H.,  soldier,  b.  near  Cen-
treburg,  Knox  co.,  Ohio,  14  Dec.,  1832.  He  was
educated  at  Ohio  Wesleyan  university,  settled  in
Somerville,  Fayette  co.,  Tenn.,  in  1857,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1858.  He  removed
to  Arkansas  in  May,  1858,  settling  at  Lake  Village,
Chicot  county.  On  25  May,  1861,  he  was  elected
captain  of  a  company  for  service  in  the  Confed-
erate army,  and  ne  sensed  in  the  campaigns  in
Arkansas  and  Missouri  until  April,  1862,  when  his


regiment  was  ordered  to  the  eastern  side  of  Missis-
sippi river,  and  fell  back  to  Tupelo,  Miss.  He  was
(iromoted  brigadier-general,  5  March,  1864.  Gen.
leynolds  participated  in  many  of  the  battles  of
the  western  Confederate  armies  from  Oak  Hills,
Mo.,  to  Nashville,  Tenn.  Ho  was  .several  times
wounded,  and  lost  a  leg.  He  was  state  senator  in
Arkansas  in  1866-'7.

REYNOLDS,  Elmer  Robert,  ethnologist,  b.  in
Dansville,  Livingston  co,,  N.  Y..  30  July,  1846.  He
emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Wisconsin  in  1848,
and  was  educated  in  the  public  schools  and  at  the
medical  school  of  Columbian  university,  Washing-
ton, D,  C.  He  served  in  the  10th  Wisconsin  bat-
tery in  1861-5,  participated  in  the  battles  of  Cor-
inth, Stone  River,  Knoxville,  Resaca,  Jonesboro,
Atlanta,  Bentonville,  and  numerous  minor  engage-
ments, and  at  the  end  of  the  civil  war  entered  the
U.  S.  navy  as  school-teacher,  serving  in  the  Medi-
terranean'fleet  in  1867,  and  in  the  W  est  Indies  and
Yucatan  in  1868,  Since  1877  he  has  been  in  the
U.  S.  civil  service.  His  last  twenty  years  have  been
devoted  to  the  exploration  of  aboriginal  remains  in
the  valleys  of  the  Potomac.  Piscataway,  Wicomico,
Patuxent,  Choptank,  and  Shenandoah  rivers,  his  re-
searches embracing  their  mortuary  mounds,  shell-
banks,  copper  and  soapstone  mines,  cemeteries,
burial-caves,  and  ancient  camps  and  earthworks.
He  was  a  founder  of  the  Anthropological  society  of
Washington,  D.  C,  and  its  secretary  in  1879-'81,
received  a  silver  medal  from  Don  Carlos,  crown
prince  of  Portugal,  in  1886,  in  recognition  of  his
scientific  researches,  was  knighted  by  King  Hum-
bert of  Italy,  in  1887,  "  for  distinguished  scientific
attainments,"  and  is  a  member  of  numerous  scien-
tific societies.  His  publications  include  "  Aborigi-
nal Soapstone  Quarries  in  the  District  of  Colum-
bia "  (Cambridge,  1878) ;  "  The  Cemeteries  of  the
Piscataway  Indians  at  Kittamaquindi,  Md,"  (Wash-
ington, D,  C,  1880);  "A  Scientific  Visit  to  the
Caverns  of  Luray,  and  the  Endless  Caverns  in
the  Massanutton  Mountains  "  (1881) ;  "  Memoir  on
the  Pre-Columbian  Shell-Mounds  at  Newburg,  Md.,
and  the  Aboriginal  Shell-Fields  of  the  Potomac
and  Wicomico  Rivers"  (Copenhagen.  Denmark,
1884);  "The  Shell-Mounds,  Antiquities,  and  Do-
mestic Arts  of  the  Choptank  Indians  of  Maryland  "
(1886);  and  "  Memoir  on  the  Pre-Columbian  Ossu-
aries at  Cambridge  and  Hambrook  Bay,  Md."  (Lis-
bon, Portugal,  1887).  He  has  also  a  large  amount
of  similar  material  in  manuscript.

REYNOLDS,  Igrnatius  Aloysins,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Nelson  county,  Ky.,  22  Aug.,  1798;  d.  m
Charleston,  S.  C,  9  March,  1855.  His  parents  emi-
grated from  Maryland  and  settled  on  a  farm  near
Bardstown,  Ky.  The  son  entered  the  diocesan
seminary  of  St.  Thomas,  but  was  transferred  to  the
Sulpitian  seminary  of  Baltimore  in  1819,  On  the
completion  of  his  theological  course  he  was  or-
dained priest  by  Archbishop  Marechal  on  24  Oct.,
1823,  and  returned  to  Kentucky,  where  he  was  em-
ployed till  1827  in  teaching  and  missionary  work.
In  the  latter  year  he  was  appointed  president  of
Bardstown  college,  which  he  freed  from  debt.  In
1830  he  was  apjwinted  pastor  of  the  cathedral,
Bardstown,  ana  in  1834  he  was  made  pastor  of  the
only  Roman  Catholic  church  in  Louisville,  where
he  remained  till  1840.  founding  an  orphanage  and
parochial  schools.  He  was  sent  to  Europe  in  1840
on  business  relating  to  the  affairs  of  the  diocese,
and  returned  in  1841,  In  1842  he  was  appointed
vicar-general  of  the  diocese  of  Louisville.  He  was
nominated  successor  to  Bishop  England  in  the  see
of  Charleston  in  May,  1843,  by  the  5th  provincial
council  of  Baltimore,  and  consecrated  by  Bishop


REYNOLDS


RKYNOLDS


227


r


Piirocll  in  the  cathedral,  Cincinnati,  on  10  March,
1K44.  He  itMKt'wkHl  at  once  to  Charlpxton,  and
niiuii*  a  vi!*itHtion  of  every  part  of  hJH  di«x»»e,
which  he  rei)eiite<l  annually.  The  nnmber  of
linnian  Cat  holier  in  tlie  thnH>  Htatus  under  his  ju-
riwliction  wai«  not  hir^e.  but  the  |M)|>ulHrity  of  l)r.
Kn);lHiid  amon^  all  cla-HM'sand  cH'jmis  hml  prepared
the  way  for  his  conliiil  rweption,  and  hecontinuo<l
the  ini'th<Nls  of  his  pre<lwes.sor.  in  1H4.')  he  went
to  Kun>|»e  to  obtain  jfecuninr)'  aid.  and  in  ItJOO  laid
the  foundation  of  the  catht><lral  of  St  Kinbar.  which
was  conipletiHl  and  consecrattnl  in  1854.  Durinf;
the  eleven  years  of  his  episeo[>atc  ho  took  part  in
all  the  national  and  provincial  councils  of  the
lioman  Catholic  church  in  the  United  States,  and
his  learninf;  and  elo<iuence  counteil  for  much  in
«hapin;;  the  «li*crees  of  these  IxKlies,  But  his  lal>ors
gradually  exlmustisl  his  constitution,  which  was
never  stninj;,  and  after  a  short  visit  to  his  native
«tale  in  1854  he  returned  broken  in  health.  In  a
letter  to  the  councils  of  the  propajjation  of  the
faith  in  Kuroi)e  in  May,  1855,  the  bishops  of  the
flth  council  or  Baltimore  said  that  he  hati"worn
himsi'lf  out  in  the  service  of  his  church."  He  edit-
ed the  "  Works"  of  Bishop  John  England  (5  vols.,
Baltimore.  1H49).

REYNOLDS.  John,  British  naval  officer,  b,  in
England  alxnit  1700;  d.  there  in  January,  1776.
He  entered  the  navy  at  an  early  age,  and  rose
through  successive  ranks  to  rear-admiral  of  the
blue.  While  holding  the  rank  of  captain  in  the
royal  navj',  he  was  appointed  the  first  coloniaigov-
•enjor  of  (leorgia  on  0  Aug.,  1754,  under  the  plan
for  the  civil  government  of  the  province  that  had
recently  Ix'cn  framed  bv  the  commissioners  for
trade  and  plantations,  fie  landed  at  Savannah  on
"29  Oct..  1754.  and  on  7  Jan.,  1755,  called  together
the  first  legislative  assembly  of  the  province.  Capt.
Reynohls  secured  the  friendship  oi  the  Indians,  es-
tablished courts  of  law,  and  set  in  operation  the
new  charter,  but  resigne<l  in  February,  1757.  on  ac-
count of  a  disagreement  with  the  council.  He  se-
curetl  the  friendship  of  the  Indian  tribes  of  the
state,  established  courts  of  iudicature,  and  on  8
Jan.,  1755,  called  together  the  first  legislature  of
Georgia.

REYNOLDS,  John,  governor  of  Illinois,  b.  in
Montgomerv  countv.  Pa.,  26  Feb.,  1789 ;  d.  in  Belle-
ville, 111..  8  May,  1865.  He  was  of  Irish  descent,
and,  with  his  parents,  emigrated  in  childhoo<i  to
Kaskaskia,  III.,  where  he  obtained  a  common-school
education,  and  was  adtnitted  t«  the  bar.  He  served
as  a  scout  in  the  campaigns  against  the  Western
Indians  in  1812-13,  8ul)sequently  practised  law  in
Cahokia,  III.,  became  a  justice  of  the  state  supreme
court  in  1818,  served  for  many  years  in  the  legisla-
ture, and  was  speaker  of  the  house  in  1853-'4.  He
was  governor  of  Illinois  in  1832-'4,  commanded  the
state  volunteers  during  the  Black  Hawk  war  in
May  and  June  of  the  former  year,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1835-'7.  and  again  in  18!i9-'4^}.
having  l»cen  electe<l  as  a  Democrat.  Heedite«l  the
**  P^gle,"  a  daily  pa|)cr  in  Belleville,  for  several
years,  and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Pioneer  History  of
Illinois"  (IWleville,  III.,  1848);  "A  Glance  at  the
Crvstal  Palace  and  Sketches  of  Travel "  (1854) ;  and
"  .\ly  Life  and  Times"  (1KV5).

REYNOLDS,  John  Parker,  agriculturist,  b.  in
lit'banon.  Ohio.  1  March.  1K20.  lie  was  graduat«>d
at  Miami  university  in  18:i8,  and  in  1850  removed
to  Winneliago  county.  111.,  and  engaged  in  farm-
ing and  thoroughbred  et«x'k-raising.  In  1860-'71
he  was  secretary  of  the  State  agricultural  s<x:iety.
In  1868  he  remov'il  from  Springfield  to  Chicago,
&ud  the  next  year  he  became  first  editor  of  the


"  National  Lire-Stock  Journal."  In  1878  he  was
called  u|K>n  to  amist  in  organizing  an  aiwociation
for  the  promotion  of  indu!*try.  science,  and  art,
and  the  erection  of  an  ex|Mmition  building  in
Chicago.  He  was  elected  secretary  of  the  awvK'is-
tion,  which  post  he  now  (1888)  holds.  On  9  Oct.,
1873}.  in  commemoration  of  the  great  fire  of  1H7I,
the  exhibit itm  was  formally  o|»en<*<l,  and  every  year
since  has  l»een  very  suj-cessful,  largely  owing  to'  the
efforts  of  Mr.  Kevnolds.

REYNOLDS,  ^oneph  JoneH,  Mildier.  b.  in  Klem*
ingsburg.  Ky.,  4  Jan.,  1822.  He  was  graduatetl  at
the  U.  S.  militar)'  ac^emy  in  184^1.  8erve«l  in  the
military  occu|>ation  of  Texas  in  1845-'6.  became  1st
lieutenant  in  1847,  ami  was  principal  tfsistant  pro-
fess<^>r  of  natural  and  ex|>enmi'ntal  philosophy  in
the  U.  .S.  military  acailemy  from  1K49  until  his
resignation  from  tlie  army  in  1856.  He  was  then
pn>fessor  of  mechanics  and  enginwring  in  Wash-
ington university,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  till  1860,  returned
to  the  army  as  colonel  of  the  10th  Indiana  volun*
teers  in  April,  1861,  l)ecan)e  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  the  next  month,  and  was  engaged  in  va-
rious skirmishes  and  in  the  action  at  G re<m  Brier
river.  3  Oct.,  1861.  He  resignwl  in  Janiuirv.  1862,
served  without  a  commi-ssion  in  organizing  Indiana
volunteers,  l)ecame  colonel  of  the  75th  Indiana  regi-
ment. 27  Aug..  1862,  and  brigadier-genentl.  17  SepL
of  that  year.  He  was  in  the  cam|)aign  of  the  Army
of  the  Cumberland  in  1862-'3,  biK-ame  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers  in  November,  18<)2,  and  was  en-
gaged at  Hoover's  Gap,  24  June,  18fti,  and  Chicka-
mauga,  19-20  Sept..  186:1.  He  was  chief  of  staff  of
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  fnmi  10  Oct.  to  5
Dec.  of  that  year,  and  participate*!  in  the  Iwttle  of
Chattanooga.  He  commandeu  the  defences  of  New
Orleans,  La,  from  January  till  June,  1864,  com-
manded the  19th  army  corps,  and  organizecl  forces
for  the  capture  of  Mobile.  Fort  Gaines,  and  Fort
Morgan  in  June  and  August.  He  was  in  charge  of
the  UeiMirtment  of  Arkan.sasfrom  Novemljer,  1864,
till  April.  1866.  musteri'd  out  of  volunteer  service,
1  Sept.,  1866.  and  reappointed  in  the  U.  .S.  army
as  colonel  of  the  26th  infantry,  28  July.  1866.  He
received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general,  U.  S.
army,  2  March,  1867,  for  gallant  and  meritorious
service  at  the  battle  of  Chickamauga,  and  that  of
major-general,  U.  S.  army,  at  the  .same  date  for
Mission  Ridge.  During  tlie  reconstruction  jteriod,
in  1867-'72,  he  was  in  command  of  the  5th  mili-
tary district,  comprising  Ijouisiana  and  Texas,  was
elected  U.  S.  senator  fmm  the  latter  state  in  1871,
but  declined,  commanded  the  Department  of  the
Platte  in  1872-'().  and  in  June.  1877,  he  was  retired.

REYNOLDS,  Joseph  Smith,  soldier,  b.  in  New
Lenox,  III.,  3  Dec.  18:59.  He  went  to  Chicago  in
1856,  was  graduated  at  its  high-school  in  July,
1861.  and  in  Au^.st  of  that  year  enliste<I  in  the
<Wth  Illinois  regiment.  He  was  ccmimis-sioned  2d
lieutenant  on  31  Dec.,  and  was  in  active  service
three  vears  and  ten  months.  He  took  jiart  in  seven-
teen battles,  was  wounded  three  times,  and  for
"gallant  and  meritorious  service  "  was  promotwl  to
a  captaincy,  subsequently  to  colonel.  On  11  July,
1865,  he  was  brevetttnl  brigadier-general  of  v«tlun-
teers.  He  then  began  the  study  of  law,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  law  de|>artment  of' Chicago  university
in  1866.  a<lmitte<l  to  the  bar.  an«l  has  since  practised
his  profession  in  Chi<'ago.  Gen.  Reynolds  has  been
elected  as  representative  and  senator  to  the  Illinois
legislature,  was  a  commissioner  from  Illinois  to  the
Universal  exiK)sition  at  Vienna  in  1878,  and  has
held  other  omc«>s.

REYNOLDS.  William,  naval  ofTlcer.  b.  in  Un-
caster,  Pa,  18  Dec.,  1815;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,


228


REYNOLDS


REYNOLDS


6  Nov.,  1879.  He  was  appointed  midshipman  in
the  U.  S.  navy  in  1831,  served  on  Capt.  Charles
Wilites's  exploring  exjwdition  in  1838-'42,  was  com-
missioned lieutenant  in  1841,  and  was  placed  on
tlie  retired  list  in  consequence  of  failing  health  in
1851.  He  was  then  assigned  to  duty  in  the  Sand-
wich islands,  where  he  was  instrumental  in  effecting
the  Hawaiian  treaty  of  reciprocity.  He  returned
to  active  service  in  1861,  was  made  commander  in
1862,  with  the  charge  of  the  naval  forces  at  Port
Royal,  became  captain  in  1866,  senior  officer  of  the
ordnance  board  in  1869-'70,  and  commodore  in  the
latter  year.  He  served  as  chief  of  bureau  and  act-
ing secretary  of  the  navv  in  187:3  and  again  in  1874,
became  rear-admiral  in  December,  1873,  and  in  De-
cember, 1877,  was  retired  on  account  oif  continued
illness.  His  last  service  was  in  command  of  the
U.  S.  naval  forces  on  the  Asiatic  station.  Of  Ad-
miral Revnolds's  services  the  secretary  of  the  navy,
Richard  \V.  Thompson,  in  the  order  that  announced
his  death,  said :  "  In  the  administration  of  the  du-
ties committed  to  him,  he  did  much  to  improve  the
personnel  and  efficiency  of  the  enlisted  men  of  the
navy,  and  in  the  discharge  of  all  the  duties  de-
volving on  him,  during  a  long  career  in  the  ser-
vice, he  exhibited  zeal,  mtelligence,  and  ability,  for
all  of  which  he  was  conspicuous."  See  '*  Reynolds
Memorial  Address,"  by  Joseph  G.  Rosengarten
(Philadelphia.  1880).— His  brother,  John  Fniton,
soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  20  Sept.,  1820 ;  d.  near
Gettysburg,  Pa.,  1  July,  1863,  was  graduated  at

the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy
in  1841,  became
1st  lieutenant
inl846,received
the  brevet  of
captain  in  June
of  that  year  for
his  service  at
Monterey,  and
was  given  that
of  major  for
Buena  Vista  in
January,  1847.
He  became  cap-
tain in  1855,  was
mentioned  in
general  orders
for  his  services
in  the  expedi-
tion against  the
Rogue  river  In-
dians in  Ore-
gon, took  part  in  the  Utah  expedition  under  Gen.
Albert  Sidney  Johnston  in  1858,  and  in  1859  became
commandant  of  cadets  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy. He  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
14th  infantry  in  May,  1861,  and  on  20  Aug.  briga-
dier-general of  U.  S.  volunteers,  and  was  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  1st  brigade  of  Pennsylvania
reserves.  He  was  appointed  military  governor  of
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  in  May,  1862,  and  was  engaged
at  the  battles  of  Mechanicsville,  Gaines's  Mills,  and
Glendale,  where  he  was  taken  prisoner.  So  great
was  his  popularity  in  Fredericksburg  that  the  mu-
nicipal autnorities  went  to  Richmond  and  solicited
his  exchange.  During  his  captivity  he  prepared  a
careful  report  of  the  operations  of  his  command
under  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan.  He  rejoined  the
army  on  his  exchange,  8  Aug.,  1862,  was  engaged  in
the  campaign  of  northern  Virginia,  and  commanded
his  division  at  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run.  At
a  critical  time  in  that  battle,  when  his  brigade,  un-
able to  hold  the  enemy  in  check,  fell  back  in  con-


fusion, observing  that  the  flag-staff  of  the  2d  regi-
ment had  been  broken  by  a  bullet,  he  seized  the  flag-
from  the  color-bearer  and,  dashing  to  the  right,
rode  twice  up  and  down  the  line,  waving  it  and
cheering  his  men.  The  troops  rallied,  and  Gen.
Georgell.  Gordon,  in  his  "  Army  of  Virginia,"  says :
"  Reynolds's  division,  like  a  rock,  withstood  the  ad-
vance of  the  victorious  enemy,  and  saved  the  Union
army  from  rout."  He  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  the  state  militia  in  defence  of  Pennsyl-
vania during  the  Maryland  campaign,  and  on  29
Sept..  1862,  received  the  thanks  of  the  legislature
for  his  services.  He  was  commissioned  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1862,  succeeded  Gen.
Joseph  Hooker  in  command  of  the  1st  corps  of  the
Array  of  the  Potomac,  was  engaged  on  the  left  at
the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  and  was  promoted
colonel  of  the  5th  U.  S.  infantry,  1  June,  1863.  On
the  opening  day  of  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  1  July,
1863,  where  he  was  in  command  of  the  left  wing —
the  1st,  the  3d,  and  the  11th  corps,  and  Bufonl's
cavalry  division — he  encountered  the  van  of  Lee's
army,  and,  after  making  disposition  of  his  men  in
person,  and  urging  them  on  to  a  successful  charge,
ne  was  struck  by  a  rifle-ball  that  caused  instant
death.  A  sword  of  honor  was  awarded  him  by  the
enlisted  men  of  the  Pennsylvania  reserves  at  the
close  of  the  peninsula  campaign.  The  men  of  the
1st  corps  erected  a  bronze  heroic  statue  of  him,  by
John  Q.  A.  Ward,  on  the  field  of  Gettysburg,  and
subsequently  placed  his  portrait,  by  Alexander
Launie,  in  the  library  of  tne  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy, and  the  state  of  Pennsylvania  placed  a  gran-
ite shaft  on  the  spot  where  he  fell  at  Gettysburg.
On  18  Sept.,  1884,  the  Reynolds  memorial  asso-
ciation unveiled  in  Philadelphia  a  bronze  eques-
trian statue  of  Gen.  Reynolds,  by  John  Rogers,  the
gift  of  Joseph  E.  Temple.  See  "  Reynolds  Me-
morial Address,"  by  Joseph  G.  Rosengarten  (Phila-
delphia, 1880),  and  "  The  Unveiling  of  the  Statue
of  Gen.  John  F.  Reynolds,  by  the  Reynolds  Me-
morial Association  "  (1884).

REYNOLDS,  WiUiam  Morton,  clergyman,  b.
in  Favette  county,  Pa.,  4  March,  1812;  d.  in  Oak
Park,  111.,  5  Sept.,  1876.  His  father,  George  Rey-
nolds, was  a  captain  in  the  Revolutionary  war,
and  a  relative  of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  After
graduation  at  the  theological  seminary  at  Gettys-
burg, Pa.,  in  1828,  and  at  Jefferson  college.  Pa.,
in  1832,  he  became  principal  of  the  preparatory
department  in  the  newly  established  Pennsylvania,
college,  afterward  was  made  professor  of  La^in
in  the  college  department,  and  in  1835  acted  as
financial  agent  of  the  new  college.  Licensed  to
preach  in  1835,  he  became  pastor  of  the  Lutheran
congregation  at  Deerfield,  N.  J.,  was  ordained  to
the  ministry  in  1836,  and  recalled  as  professor  of
Latin  to  Pennsylvania  college,  serving  until  1850.
In  1850-'3  he  was  president  of  Capitol  univer-
sity, Columbus,  Ohio,  and  in  1853-'7  successive-
ly principal  of  a  female  seminary  in  Easton,  Pa.,
and  the  classical  academy  at  Allentown,  Pa.
He  was  president  of  Illinois  state  university  in
1857-'60,  after  which  he  became  principal  of  &
female  seminary  in  Chicago,  111.  He  took  orders
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1864,  and
served  parishes  in  that  church  until  his  death.
In  1850  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Jef-
ferson college.  Dr.  Reynolds  was  a  thorough  in-
vestigator in  the  early  history  of  the  Lutheran
church  in  America,  an  accomplished  hymnologist,
and  an  able  writer.  He  founded  the  "  Evangelical
Magazine"  in  1840,  and  in  1849  the  "Evangelical
Review,"  of  which  he  was  editor  until  1862.  He
was  also,  in  1845,  editor  of  the  "  Linnseau  Record


KEYNOSO


lUIETT


229


aijd  Jt)urnal."  All  tin-so  journals  wcrp  niililiiihod
at  (Jettynlmrjf,  but  have  hinjf  nincf  ceaswl  t<i  «'xi!*l.
AinoiiK  l»i»  uumeroui*  publishwl  works  an*  "  AiiH«r-
icaii  Liti'mturv/'  an  mltlntMs  ((iutlybburK,  I'u.,
1845);  "The  L'aptivi  of  l'lautu^"  with  inttiHluc-
tion  and  not«8  (lK4(t):  "  Innupiml  Addrt-ss  an
Prosidfut  of  Capitol  rniversity  '  (Cxhunbus.  Uhii),
1S.V»);  "  Mistorirnl  Address  Ix'fon*  tlie  Historical
ivH'ii'tvof  the  Lutheran  I'hureh  "  (1848);  "  Inaujfu-
ral  Address  as  I'ri'sident  of  Illinois  State  Univer-
sity "  (Snrinjrfield,  IS-W);  and  "History  of  New
Sw'eden.  by  Israel  Acrelius,  tmnslate*!,  with  Intro-
duction and  Noti*s"  (Philadelphia,  1H74).  He  was
the  chief  e<litor  of  the  hymn-l)ook  of  the  ^-neral
synod  (IS-V)),  and  for  many  years  an  active  member
of  its  liturgical  committee.

RKYNOSO.  Alvaro  (ray-no'-so),  Culmn  scientist,
b.  in  I)uriin.  C'ul)a,alKiut  1820.  He  studied  in  Ha-
vana, and  went  to  France  in  1847  and  in  18.'»4,
where  he  was  awanltnl  a  first  nrize  by  the  Acatle-
roie  ties  scieni'es  of  Paris  f»>r  nis  exwrimcnts  on
chloroform.  He  was  graduated  as  doctor  of  sci-
ences by  the  academy,  and  retununl  to  his  native
country'in  1857.  In  1865  he  went  ajjain  to  France
to  make  exixriments  on  an  apparatus  that  he  had
devis«'d  for  the  pur|)ose  of  making  the  supir-cane
pnxluco  80  jHT  cent,  of  sugar.  He  has  published
**Estudios  sobre  materias  cientificas"  (Havana,
1861) ;  "  Ensayo  sobre  el  cultivo  de  la  cafia  de  azii-
car"  (1862);  "Apuntes  de  varioscultivoscul)anos"
<Paris.  1867):  "AgriculturadelosindigenasdeC'uba
V  Hayti "  (1881);  "  Cultivo  de  la  cafia  de  azucar  en
iBspaha"  (1882);  "Memoire  sur  la  pn'sence  du
Sucre  dans  les  urines"  (188Ii);  and  numen)U3  con-
tribjitions  to  French  and  Spanish  pericnlicals.  He
is  a  MiemU'r  of  various  scientific  st)cieties.

K£Z£,  Froderick  (ray-zay),  li.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Ilildesheiiii.  Germany,  in  1797;  d.  there,  27  Dec.,
1871.  He  entered  the  military  service  at  an  early
age,  and  fought  as  a  dragoon  in  the  battle  of
Waterloo.  Soon  afterward  he  went  to  Rome  to
prepare  himself  for  the  nriesthiHKl,  and,  after
studying  in  the  College  of  the  proj^mganda,  he  wjis
ordained  and  sent  to  labor  in  Africa.  On  his  re-
turn to  (Jermany  he  accepted  an  invitation  from
Bishop  F'enwick  to  come  to  the  United  States,  and
was  appointed  his  secretary.  He  went  to  Europe
in  18z7  to  procure  priests,  and  was  successful  m
st>nding  several  missionaries  to  the  l'nite«l  States.
The  Ijcopoldine  society  for  helping  p<M)r  n)issions
in  this  country  was  foundwi  in  Austria  princijwilly
through  his  exertions.  He  returned  to  Ohio  in
182H,  and  devote«l  himself  with  energy  and  success
to  the  revival  of  Catholicity  among  the  Indian
tribes  in  that  state  and  in  Michigan.  On  his  re-
turn he  was  appointetl  vicar-general.  In  1833  the
see  of  Detroit  was  created,  embracing  the  present
states  of  Michigan  and  Wisconsin,  and  Dr.  Reze
was  consecrated  its  first  bishop  on  6  Oct.  He  at-
tended the  deliberations  of  the  2d  j)rovincial  coun-
cil of  Baltimore  a  few  weeks  afterwanl.  There
were  only  about  a  dozen  churches  attended  by  ten

(iriests  in  the  diocese.  Bishop  Koze  found*"*!  a  col-
ege  in  Detroit  and  establisheu  academies  there  and
in  Green  Bay,  which  he  placed  under  the  control
of  the  onler  of  Poor  Clares.  He  gave  s|>ecial  at-
tention to  the  spiritual  and  teni|>oral  interests  of
the  Indians,  ami  oj)ene<l  schools  for  their  benefit.
But  faults  of  tem]H'r  pn>vented  his  administration
from  being  entirely  succi>ssful,  and  he  resigned  his
see  in  1KJ7,  and  lived  for  several  years  in  Home,
but  finally  retire<l  to  Ilildesheim,  where  he  s]H>nt
the  remainder  of  his  davs.

KHEES,  Morxan  /ohn,  clergyman,  b.  in  Gla-
morganshire, WaLs,  8  IX>c.,  1760;  d.  in  Somerset,


!  Pa..  17  S«'[it.,  1804.  He  reoeive*!  an  excellent  wlu-
i  cation,  and  devotee]  hiniMdf  to  tenching.  but,  after
I  uniting  with  the  Baptist  church,  he  entered  the
I  college  of  that  denomination  in  Bristol,  with  a  view
I  of  pre|>aring  for  the  ministry.  On  the  completion
I  of  Ids  courst'  ho  was  ordaint'd  over  the  church  of
Penv-gani,  but,  l>ecoming  intereste<l  in  the  cause
of  the  Fren<-h  revolution,  he  n-signtMl  his  charge
and  went  to  France.  He  soon  retume<i  to  Wales,
and  there  established  "The  Welsh  Treasury,"  in
which  he  attacktHl  the  iiolicy  of  the  English  minis-
try; but,  being  com|K-lle<l  t<>  give  this  up,  he  ccd-
lected  several  of  his  friends  and  came  to  this  coun-
try. At  first  he  travelle<|  extensively  through  the
southern  and  western  states,  pn*aching  and  search-
ing for  a  suitable  |(K-atioti  for  his  colony,  but,  find-
ing noru",  he  returne<l  to  Philiulelphia.  Two  years
later  he  purchased  a  large  tract  of  land  in  Pennsyl-
vania, which  he  calle<l  Cambria.  He  lo<>ate<l  and
plannetl  the  capital,  which  ho  c»11(h1  Beulah,  and
thither  in  1798 he  removed  his  own  family,  accom-
panied by  a  Ixnly  of  Welsh  colonists.  He  was  oc-
cupied for  several  years  with  the  charge  of  his  pas-
torate and  hisduti(>sasa  large  land***!  pn)prietor,but
finally  was  persuade«l  to  wttle  in  .Sjmerset,  where
he  sfx-'Ut  the  remainder  of  his  life.  He  was  the
author  of  s<icre<l  lyrics  atid  other  |K)etical  pieces
that  he  published  in  Wales,  and  of  several  orations
and  discourses  that  aj»j)oared  in  Pennsylvania. — His

?Tands*)n,  WUHaui  Jones,  bibliographer,  b.  in
'hiladelphia.  Pa..  13  Man-h,  18JiO,  was  etlucatinl  in
Philtulelphia,  and  graduated  at  the  Central  high-
school  in  1847.  From  October.  18.50,  to  June,  1852,
he  ha<l  charge  of  the  social  statistics  and  other  du-
ties in  connection  with  the  7th  census  at  the  de-
partment of  the  interior,  and  he  was  sec-retary  of
the  central  executive  committee  in  Wa.shington  of
the  World's  fair  in  London  in  1851.  In  July,  1852,
he  became  chief  clerk  of  the  Smith.s«)nian  itistitu-
tion,  which  oflice  he  still  (1888)  hoMs.  and  for  sev-
eral months  each  year,  during  1884-'7.  he  was  by
appointment  acting  secretary  of  the  institution,
while  Pn)f.  Sjx-ncer  F.  Baird  was  al>sent  on  duti(>8
connected  with  the  U.  S.  fish  commission.  His
duties  include  the  general  charge  of  the  jiublica-
tions  of  the  Smithsonian  institution,  an<l  he  has
l)een  its  executive  oflicer.  under  the  secretary,  since
his  apj>ointment,  Mr.  Rhees  hjis  lKK?n  active  in
etlucational  interests,  and  was  a  tni.stee  o{  the  pub-
lic schwis  of  Washington  in  1862-'8,  1873-'4,  and
1878-'9.  He  has  also  been  an  active  raemlx'r  and
president  of  the  Young  men's  Christian  as-socia-
tion.  In  1856  he  organize*!  a  !<'cture  bureau  for
securing  the  services  of  eminent  .s|H>akers  to  lecture
in  different  parts  of  the  country,  and  he  had  char^
of  Prof.  John  Tyndall's  lectures  in  this  ctmntrv  m
1872.  He  inventei!  and  patented,  in  1868.  the  Rhees
ruler  and  jK'ncil-oase  slate,  which  lias  nveivetl  the
approUttion  of  various  sch<K)I-lM)anls.  He  has  etl-
ited  many  of  the  .Sniiths<mian  publications,  aixl
has  published  "  Manual  of  Public  Librarii^,  Insti-
tutions, and  S<H'ieties  in  the  Unite*!  .Stat*'s  and
Briti.sh  Provinces  of  North  Ameri«'a"  (Phila<!el-
phia  1859);  "(Juide  to  the  Smiths*>nian  Instituti*>n
and  National  Mus<,'um"(VVashingt*Mi,  1859);  "List
of  Publications  *)f  the  Smithsonian  Instituti<m"
(1862;  nth  et!.,  1888);  "  Manual  .)f  Public  Sch.xds
of  Washin^jt*)!!"  (186:j-*6);  "The  .Smithstmian  In-
stitution :  I)<K'uments  Relative  to  its  Origin  and
History  "(1879);  "  The  Scientific  Writings  of  James
Smith.son,"*'dited(1879);  "  James Smithson  and  his
Be*|uest"  (1880):  and  "Catalogue  of  Publicati*m8
of  the  Sn)ith.S4)nian  Institution  "  (1882).

KHETT, Robert  Uarnwell,  |H>litician,  b.  in
Beaufort,  S.  C,  24  Dec.,  1800 ;  d.  in  St.  James  por-


230


RHETT


RHOADS


ish,  La.,  14  Sept.,  1876.  He  was  the  son  of  James
and  Marianna  Smith,  but  in  1837  adopted  the
name  of  Hhett,  which  was  that  of  a  colonial  ances-
tor. He  studied  law,  was  elected  to  the  legislature
in  1826,  and  in  18:32  became  attorney-general  of
South  Carolina.  During  the  nullification  contro-
versy he  was  an  ardent  advocate  of  extreme  state-
rights  views.  He  served  six  successive  terms  in
congress,  from  1837  till  1849,  having  been  elected
as  a  Democrat,  and  on  the  death  of  John  C.  Cal-
houn he  was  chosen  to  fill  the  latter's  seat  in  the
U.  S.  senate,  which  he  took  on  6  Jan.,  1851.  In
congress  he  continued  to  uphold  extreme  southern
views,  and  in  1851-'2,  during  the  secession  agita-
tion in  South  Carolina,  he  advocated  the  immediate
withdrawal  of  his  state  from  the  Union,  whether
it  should  be  accompanied  by  others  or  not.  On
the  defeat  of  his  party  in  the  latter  vear,  he  re-
signed from  the  senate,  and  after  the  death  of  his
wife  in  the  same  year  he  retired  to  his  plantation,
taking  no  part  in  politics  for  many  years.  He  was
an  active  member  of  the  South  Carolina  secession
convention  of  December,  1860,  and  prepared  the  ad-
dress that  announced  its  reasons  lor  passing  the
ordinance.  Subsequently  he  was  a  delegate  to  the
provisional  Confederate  congress  at  Montgomery,
Ala.,  in  1861,  and  presided  over  the  committee  that
reported  the  Confederate  constitution.  He  was
afterward  a  member  of  the  regular  Confederate
congress.  Mr.  Rhett  was  for  some  time  owner  of
the  Charleston  "Mercury,"  the  organ  of  the  so-
called  "  fire-eaters,"  in  which  he  advocated  his  ex-
treme views.  During  the  war  it  was  conducted  by
his  son,  Robert  Barnwell  Rhett,  Jr.  After  the
civil  war  Mr.  Rhett  removed  to  Louisiana,  and  was
seen  no  more  in  public  life,  except  as  a  delegate  to
the  Democratic  national  convention  in  1868.

RHETT,  Thomas  Grimk^,  soldier,  b.  in  South
Carolina  about  1825  ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  28  July,
1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1845,  assigned  to  the  ordnance  corps,
and  served  at  Washington  arsenal  till  1846,  when  he
was  transferred  to  the  mounted  rifles  and  ordered
to  Mexico.  He  was  brevetted  captain,  12  Oct.,
1847,  for  gallantry  in  the  defence  of  Puebla,  and
after  the  war  was  on  frontier  duty,  becoming  cap-
tain in  1853,  and  pavraaster,  with  the  rank  of  ma-
jor, 7  April,  1858.  Me  resigned  on  1  April,  1861,
and  reported  to  the  provisional  Confederate  gov-
ernment at  Montgomery,  but,  not  receiving  the  rec-
ognition to  which  he  thought  himself  entitled,  re-
turned to  his  native  state,  and  was  commissioned
major-general  by  Gov.  Francis  W.  Pickens.  He  was
chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston  till  June,
1862,  when  he  was  orderea  to  the  trans-Mississippi
department.  After  the  war  Gen.  Rhett  was  colo-
nel of  ordnance  in  the  Egyptian  army  from  1870
till  1878,  when  he  had  a  paralytic  stroke,  and  re-
signed. He  remained  abroad  till  1876,  but  found
no  relief  from  his  malady.

RHIND,  Alexander  Colden,  naval  officer,  b.
in  New  York  city,  31  Oct.,  1821.  He  entered  the
navy  as  midshipman,  from  Alabama,  3  Sept.,  1838,
became  passed  midshipman,  2  Julv.  1845 ;  master,  21
Feb.,  1853;  and  lieutenant,  17  March,  1854.  He
served  in  the  "John  Adams,"  of  the  Pacific  squad-
ron, in  1855-"6,  and  in  the  "  Constellation,"  on  the
coast  of  Africa,  in  1859-61.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  commanded  the  steamer  "  Cru-
sader," on  the  South  Atlantic  blockade,  and  partici-
§ated  in  a  series  of  operations  in  Edisto  sound,
.  C.,  for  which  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  navy
department  in  1861-'2.  He  was  commissioned  lieu-
tenant-commander on  16  July,  1862,  and  had  charge
of  the  "  Seneca  "  in  1862,  and  the  monitor  "  Keo-


kuk "  in  1863-'3.  Previous  to  the  attack  on  the
forts  at  Charleston  he  buoyed  the  channel  on  the
bar,  and  in  the  attack  the  next  day,  7  April,  1863,
took  the  "  Keokuk  "  within  550  yards  of  Fort  Sum-
ter, becoming  the
special  target  of  all
tne  forts.  His  vessel
was  hit  ninety  times
and nineteen shot

1)enetrated  at  or  be-
ow  the  water-line.
She  withdrew  from
action  sinking,  but
Rhind  kept  the  ship
afloat  till  next  morn-
ing, when  she  sank,
but  the  crew  were
saved.  He  was  com-
m  issioned  com  mand-
er,  2  Jan.,  1863,
continued  on  duty
off  Charleston,  com-

the  flag-ship  "  Wa-
bash," and  participated  in  engagements  with  Fort
Wagner  and  other  forts  in  1863-'4.  In  the  attack,
18  July,  1863,  he  commanded  the  division  of  gun-
boats. He  was  given  the  gun-boat  "  Agawam,"  of
the  North  Atlantic  squadron,  in  1864-'5,  was  in
James  river  from  May  till  October,  1864,  co-operat-
ing with  Grant's  army,  and  bombarded  forts  and
batteries,  especially  Howlett's,  for  which  he  received
the  thanks  of  the  navy  department.  In  the  attack
on  Fort  Fisher  he  was  selected  to  command  the-
"  Louisiana  "  with  a  volunteer  crew  from  his  vessel.
She  was  loaded  with  215  tons  of  gunpowder  and
bombs,  fitted  with  fuses  set  to  explode  by  clock-
work, and  towed  to  within  200  yards  of  the  beach
and  400  yards  from  the  fort.  The  perilous  under-
taking, suggested  by  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  wa»
successful,  but  did  not  iniure  the  fort.  Commander
Rhind  was  recommended  for  promotion,  was  com-
missioned captain,  2  March,  1870,  commanded  the
"  Congress,"  on  the  European  station,  in  1872,  was
light-house  inspector  in  1876-'8,  and  was  commis-
sioned commodore,  30  Sept.,  1876.  He  was  on  spe-
cial duty  and  president  or  the  board  of  inspection
from  1880  till  1882,  became  a  rear-admiral  on  30"
Oct.,  1883,  and  on  the  following  day  was  placed
on  the  retired  list.

RHINE,  AHce  Hyneman,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  31  Jan.,  1840.  She  is  a  daughter  of
Leon  Hyneman,  and  has  gained  a  reputation  as  a
writer  of  prose  and  verse  for  the  periodical  press.
She  has  contributed  numerous  articles  to  the
"  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  the  "  North  American
Review,"  and  the  "  Forum,"  and  has  edited  an  illus-
trated work  on  "  Niagara  "  (New  York,  1885).

RHOADS,  Samuel,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1711 ;  d.  there,.
7  April,  1784.  His  father,  John  Rhoads,  and  grand-
father, of  the  same  name,  were  Quaker  colonists
from  Derbyshire,  England.  Samuel  was  appren-
ticed to  the  carpenter's  trade,  and  became  a  wealthy
builder.  In  1741  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the
city  council,  but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  held
office  again  till  1761,  when  he  was  chosen,  with
Benjamin  Franklin,  to  the  assembly,  to  which  he
was  again  elected  in  1762-'4  and  1771-4.  In  1761
he  was  chosen  by  the  assembly  a  commissioner  to
attend  a  noted  conference  with  the  western  Indians
and  the  Six  Nations  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  and  in  1774
he  was  elected  by  the  assembly  a  d^egate  to  the
Continental  congress. During  this  year  he  was-


RHODKS


IlIBAUT


231


aim  ploctMl  mayor  of  Phila4lolphia.  lie  waa  one
of  the  founders  of  the  I'enn^ylvnnia  hoMpital,  and
bwarne  a  nnMnlK>r  of  its  first  boanl  of  niana^cent.
which  {N>st  he  filled  until  his  death,  a  (K'ri(Hl  of
thirty  years.  He  was  one  of  the  early  nienilN.*rs  of
the  .American  philosophical  stH-iety,  and  for  many
years  a  din'<'ti>r  nf  the  I'hiliulelphia  liltrar>'.

KHODKS,  Albert,  author,  I.,  in  I'ittslAirK,  I'a.,
1  Fi'l).,  1H4U.  He  was  islucatcd  mniidy  at  the
academy  of  Klder's  Kidge  in  the  villuge  of  that
name  in  Indiana  county,  I'a.  lie  has  si>cnt  most
of  his  tinie  abnuid.  Ho  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Jeru-
salem during  the  miministration  of  President  John-
son, consul  at  liottenlam  and  charge  d'affaires  at
the  Hague  under  President  Grant,  and  consul  at
Rouen,  France,  and  at  Klljerfeld,  Germany,  from
1877  till  IBM.  He  has  been  a  frequent  c<mtributor
to  American,  French,  and  British  iH'ri(Hlicals,
largely  on  the  characteristics  of  life  ana  people  on
the  European  cnmtinent.  Since  IbWS  he  has  liyed
in  Paris.  His  liooks  are  "  Jerusalem  as  it  Is  "(Lon-
don, 1867);  "The  P'rench  at  Home"  (New  York,
1875):  and  "Monsieur  at  Home"  (Ix>ndon,  1886).

RHODES,  Mosheim,  clergyman,  b.  in  Williams-
burg, Pa,,  14  April,  1887.  Ills  educational  facili-
ties in  early  life  were  limited,  but  by  persevering
industry  he  acquiretl  a  fine  classical  education.
He  was  graduated  in  theology  at  Missionary  insti-
tute, Selinsgrove,  Pa.,  in  1861,  onlaine<l  to  the
ministry  in  1862,  and  in  1877  received  the  degree
of  D.  D.  from  Wittenberg  college,  Springfield,  Ohio.
Immediately  after  his  ordination  he  became  pastor
of  the  Lutheran  congregation  at  Sunbury,  and
from  this  date  until  1874  he  served  as  pastor  in
Lelmnon  and  Columbia,  Pa.,  and  Omaha, \'eb.  In
1874  he  removed  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  has
built  up  a  flourishing  English  Lutheran  congre-
gation. He  was  president  of  the  general  syno<l  in
1885-'7.  is  the  president  of  that  body's  l)oard  of
education,  and  m  1887  was  elected  president  pro
tempore  of  Midland  college,  Atchison,  Kan.  Dr.
Rhodes  is  an  acceptable  pulpit  orator  and  lecturer,
and  a  [>opular  author,  lie  is  a  frequent  contribu-
tor to  the  periotlicals  of  his  church,  and  many  of
his  review  articles  and  lectures  have  Wen  published
separately  in  pamphlet-form.  Among  his  pul)-
lished  works  are  "  Sermon  on  the  Assassination  of
President  Lincoln"  (Sunbury.  Pa.,  1865);  "The
Proper  Observance  of  the  Lord's  Day  "  (St.  Ix»uis,
1874) ;  "  Life  Thoughts  for  Young  "Men  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1879);  "Recognition  in  Heaven  "  (1881);
"Exi>ository  Lectures  on  Philippians"(1882);  "Life
Thoughts  for  Young  Women"  (1883);  "Vital
Questions  PerUiining  to  Christian  Belief  "(1886) ;
and  "  The  Throne  of  (Jrace  "  (1887).

RI.\LL,Sir  Phineas,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Eng-
land about  1769;  d.  in  Paris.  France,  10  Nov.,
1851.  He  cnteretl  the  British  army  as  ensign  in
January,  1794,  and  was  promoted  through  the  dif-
ferent grades  to  that  of  major  in  the  same  year.
He  was  re<luced  in  1797,  and  remained  on  the  re-
serve list  till  1804.  He  commanded  a  brigade  in
the  West  Indies  in  180H-'10,  taking  imrt  in  the  ex-
peditions against  Martinique  and  Saintes,  and  in
the  capture  of  Guadalou|)e,  became  a  colonel  on  25
July,  1810,  and  on  4  June,  1813,  was  made  a  major-
gi'neral.  After  serving  for  a  few  months  on  the
stall  in  England,  he  was  oniere<l  to  Canada  to
take  part  in  the  war  lietween  En^^land  and  the
United  States.  He  serve<l  on  the  Niagara  frontier,
disijlaying  energy  and  valor,  but  committing  many
military  mistakes.  He  was  wounde<l  at  Chij>i>ewa,
where  he  was  chief  in  command,  as  also  at  tne  bat-
tle of  Lundy's  Ijane.  On  18  Feb.,  1816,  he  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  the  island  of  Grenada,  where


he  remaininl  for  several  vearK.  He  was  pnjmoted
lieutenant-genenil  in  1N2.5.  waa  knighttxl  in  ItSSS,
and  iHt-amea  full  gcncnil  in  1K41.

RIHAS,  Andnnt  Frroz  de  (re-baa),  Spanish
missionary,!),  in  Cord«)va,  Spain,  in  1576;  d.  in
Mexico.  26  Man-h.  UJ55.  After  being  ordained
priest,  he  entenxl  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  1602.  and
was  sent  immediately  afterward  to  Mexico,  where
he  became  suc<'essively  rector  of  a  college  and  pro-
vincial of  New  Spain.  He  wasa>ucrt'ssful  ana  la-
borious mis.sionary  among  the  Indians.  He  wrote
"  Vida,  Virtudes  y  Muerte  del  Padre  Juan  de  Ij&-
desma"  (Mexico!  1636).  and  "  Historia  de  los
triunfos  de  nuestra  Santa  Fe  entre  l«»s  li&rbaros  con
las  cost  u  mbres  de  los  Indios  "(Madrid.  1645).  He
left  "  Historia  de  la  Provincia  de  la  Compaftia  de
Jesiis  in  Mexico,"  and  "  Historia  <leSinaloa,"  which
remain  in  manuscript  in  the  Library  <if  Mexico.

RIBAS,  Jos6  F^lix  (re-lws),  Venezuelan  sol-
dier, b.  in  Caracas,  19  Sept.,  1775;  d.  in  Tucupido,
18  Jan.,  1815.  He  married  a  maternal  aunt  of
Simon  Bolivar,  was  one  of  the  most  enthusiastic
originators  of  the  movement  for  independence  in
1810.  and  was  ap|>ointed  a  member  of  the  supreme
junta  of  Caracas.  He  organized  a  battalion,  of
which  he  was  ap[K)inted  colonel,  an<l  tofik  part  in
the  unfortunate  <*amf)aign  against  Monteverde.
After  the  capitulation  of  Miranda,  25  July.  1812,
Ribas  obtained  through  family  influence  a  passi>ort
from  Monteverde,  and  went  to  Cura^oa.  '  Thence
he  accompanied  Bolivar  to  Cartagena  and  in  his
invasion  of  Venezuela,  being  in  command  of  the
division  that  defeated  the  Spaniards  at  Niquitao,
23  June,  1813,  and  at  Horcones  on  22  July,  and
was  promoted  brigadier  on  5  Oct.,  and  chief  of  op-
erations in  the  central  provinces.  When  Boves,  at
the  heatl  of  7,000  men.  attacked  Caracas,  Ribas,
with  only  1,5(X)  men,  intrenche<l  himself  at  Victo-
ria, and,  after  resisting  for  a  whole  day  the  furious
attacks  of  Boves  and  Morales,  totally  routed  them
in  the  evening  of  12  July,  1814.  He  defeated  Ro-
sete  at  Charallave.  20  Feb.,  was  promoted  lieuten-
ant-general on  24  March,  and  t<K>k  part  in  the  vic-
tory of  Carabobo  on  28  May.  After  the  disaster  of
La  Puerta  he  was  sent  to  the  eastern  provinces,  and
when  Bolivar  presented  himself,  after  the  defeat
of  Aragua,  in  Carupano,  Ribas's  troops  de{H)se<l  Bo-
livar and  Marifio,  proclaiming  Riltas  and  Piar  first
and  second  chief.  But  Rilias  was  totally  routed
at  UricA  by  Boves  on  5  Dec.,  and  in  Maturin  by
Morales  on  11  Dec,  and  the  last  jwtriot  army  was
totally  dispersed.  Ribas  was  captured  in  the  farm
of  Tamanaco  while  awaiting  provisions  from  the
neighboring  town  of  Valle  de  Pai^cua.  He  was
shot  in  Tucupido,  and  his  head  was  sent  to  Cara-
cas to  be  exnoseil  in  a  cage.

RIBAl'T,  or  RIBAULT,  Jean  (re-bf.).  French
navigator,  b.  in  Diepfw  in  1520;  d.  in  Florida,  28
Sept..  1565.  He  was  reputed  an  exi>erienced  naval
ofncer  when  he  pro{>osea  to  Admiral  Ga.'snar  de  Co-
lignv,  the  chief  of  the  Protestants  in  France,  to
establish  colonies  in  unexplore<l  countries,  where
they  would  be  at  liberty  to  {>ractise  the  refonned
religion.  The  admiral'  obtained  a  patent  from
Charles  IX.,  and  arme<l  two  ships,  on  which,  besides
550  veteran  soldiers  and  sailors,  many  youn^  no-
blemen embarked  as  volunteers,  and  apptunted
Rilmut  commander.  The  latter saile<l  from  Dieppe,
18  Feb..  15(52.  and.  avoiding  routes  where  he  might
encounter  Spanish  vessels,  as  the  success  of  the  ex-
{KHlition  depended  entirely  on  s«*cn*<'v.  sighted  on
30  April  a  ca|>e  which  he  name<l  Francois.  It
is  now  one  of  the  headlands  of  Matanzas  inlet.
The  following  day  he  discovered  the  mouth  of  a
stream,  which  he  called  Riviere  de  Mai  (now  St


232


RIBAUT


RICE


John's  river),  and  on  its  southern  shore  he  planted
a  cross  bearing  the  escutcheon  of  the  king  of
France,  and  took  formal  possession  of  the  country.
Moving  northward  slowly  for  three  weeks,  they
named  each  stream  after  some  French  river,
till  they  saw,  in  latitude  32°  15',  a  commodious
haven,  which  received  the  name  of  Port  Royal.
On  27  May  they  crossed  the  bar,  passed  Hilton
Head,  and  landed.  Ribaut  built  a  fort  six  miles
from  the  present  site  of  Beaufort,  and,  in  honor  of
the  king,  named  it  Fort  Charles.  He  left  there  one
of  his  trusted  lieutenants,  Charles  d' Albert,  with
twenty-five  men  and  some  supplies,  and  on  11  June
sailed  for  France.  His  vessels  were  scarcely  out  of
sight  when  trouble  arose  in  the  colony ;  Albert  was
murdered,  and  the  survivors,  headed  by  Nicolas  de
la  Barre,  after  difficulties  with  the  Indians,  who
burned  the  fort  and  destroyed  their  provisions,
constructed  a  small  bark  in  which  they  set  sail.
They  were  rescued  near  the  coast  of  Brittany  in
extreme  misery  by  an  English  vessel  and  carried
as  prisoners  to  Londcm.  Ribaut,  who  had  mean-
while arrived  safely  in  Dieppe  on  20  July,  was  un-
able to  forward  re-enforcements  and  supplies  to  his
colony,  owing  to  the  religious  war  that  then  raged
in  France,  in  which  he  was  obliged  to  take  part.
After  the  peace  he  renewed  the  project  of  a
Huguenot  colony  in  P^lorida,  and  at  his  instance
Coligny  sent,  in  April,  1564,  Rene  de  Laudonniere
(q.  V.)  with  five  ships,  who  built  Fort  Caroline  on
St.  John's  river.  Ribaut  followed  on  22  May,  1565,
with  seven  vessels,  carrying  400  soldiers  and  emi-

f  rants  of  both  sexes,  with  supplies  and  provisions,
'hey  arrived  on  29  Aug.  and  found  Laudonniere's
colony  starving  and  on  the  eve  of  dissolution.
Ribaut  immediately  superseded  Laudonniere  in
command,  and,  after  landing  his  troops,  went  to  ex-

Elore  the  country.  On  4  Sept.  the  French  that
ad  been  left  to  guard  the  ships  sighted  a  large
fleet,  and  asked  their  object.  "  I  am  Pedro  Me-
nendez  de  Aviles,"  haughtily  responded  the  com-
mander, "  who  has  come  to  hang  and  behead  all
Protestants  in  these  regions.  If  I  find  any  Catho-
lic he  shall  be  well  treated,  but  every  heretic  shall
die.  The  PVench  fleet,  being  surprised,  cut  its
cables,  and  Menendez  entered  an  inlet,  which  he
named  San  Augustin,  and  here  he  began  to  in-
trench himself.  Ribaut  rallied  all  his  forces  and
resolved  to  attack  the  Spaniards  against  the  ad-
vice of  his  officers,  especially  Laudonniere.  He
embarked  on  10  Sept.,  but  was  scarcely  at  sea  when
a  hurricane  dispersed  his  fleet.  The  Spanish  con-
ceived the  plan  of  attacking  Fort  Caroline  by
land,  and  captured  it  by  surprise.  Three  days  later
Ribaut's  ships  were  wrecked  near  Cape  Canaveral,
and  he  immediately  marched  toward  Fort  Caroline
in  two  divisions.  The  first  one  arrived  near  the
site  of  the  fort  and  surrendered  to  Menendez,  and  its
members  were  put  to  death.  Ribaut's  party  ar-
rived a  few  days  later,  and,  as  Menendez  pledged
his  word  that  they  should  be  spared,  they  agreed  to
surrender  on  23  Sept.,  but  they  were  likewise  mur-
dered, Ribaut  being  killed  by  Menendez's  own  hands,
and  their  bodies  hung  to  the  surrounding  trees
with  the  inscription :  "  Executed,  not  as  French-
men, but  as  Lutherans."  Ribaut's  son,  Jacques,
with  Laudonniere  and  a  few  others,  when  Fort
Caroline  was  taken,  escaped  upon  a  small  brig,  "  La
Perle,"  and  brought  the  news  of  the  disaster  to
France.  Ribaut's  death  was  afterward  avenged  by
Dominique  de  Gourgues  {q.  v.).  The  relation  of
Ribaut's  first  expedition  to  Coligny  is  known  only
in  the  English  translation :  "  The  whole  and  true
Discovery  of  Florida,  written  in  French  by  Cap-
tain Ribault,  the  first  that  whollye  discovered  the


same,  contevning  as  well  the  wonderful  straunge
Natures  and  Maners  of  the  People,  with  the  mar-
veylous  Commodities  and  Trea.sures  of  the  Coun-
try ;  as  also  the  pleasaunt  Portes  and  Havens  and
Wayes  thereunto,  never  found  out  before  the  last
year  1562.  now  newly  set  forth  in  English  the
XXX  of  May  1563  "  (London,  156:3).  This  volume
is  extremely  rare,  and  was  reprinted  by  Richard
Hakluyt  in  his  "'Voyages"  (London,  1582).  Lau-
donniere's  relation  contains  also  an  account  of  Ri-
baut's death,  as  also  the  "  Discours  de  I'histoire  do
la  Floride"  (Dieppe,  1566),  written  by  £tienne
Challeux,  a  carpenter  who  had  accompanied  Ri-
baut, and  who  esca|)ed  in  the  brig  "  La  Perle."

RICAUD,  James  Barroll  (ry-cawdj,  jurist,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  11  Feb.,  1808;  d.  in  Chestertown,
Md.,  26  Jan.,  1866.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's
college,  Baltimore,  Md.,  studied  law,  and  on  ad-
mission to  the  bar  entered  into  practice  at  Ches-
tertown. He  was  a  member  of  the  Maryland  sen-
ate in  1838,  and  of  the  house  of  delegates  in  1843  and
succeeding  sessions,  and  a  presidential  elector  on
the  Harrison  ticket  in  1836,  and  on  the  Clay  ticket
in  1844.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  congress  by
the  American  party  for  two  successive  ternis,  serv-
ing from  3  Dec,  1855,  till  3  March,  1859.  He  sub-
sequently sat  in  the  state  senate,  but  resigned  on
being  appointed  a  judge  of  the  circuit  court  in  1864.

RICAURTE,  Antonio  (re-kah-oor'-tay),  Co-
lombian soldier,  b.  in  Bogota  in  1792 ;  d.  in  San
Mateo,  Venezuela,  25  March,  1814. At  the  first

fatriotic  movement  he  entered  the  ranks  of  the
ndependents.  and  served  as  captain  in  re-en-
forcements that  were  sent  by  the  state  of  Cundi-
namarca  to  Bolivar.  With  the  latter  he  marched
to  Venezuela,  taking  part  in  numerous  battles.
He  formed  part  of  Bolivar's  forces  that  awaited
Boves's  army  at  San  Mateo  between  Victoria  and
the  Lake  of  Valencia,  and  assisted  in  the  defence
of  that  place  from  25  Feb.  to  25  March.  In  the
latter  day  the  patriots  resisted  the  attacks  of
Boves,  when  by  a  furious  charge  they  were  dis-
lodged for  a  moment,  leaving  their  reserve  ammu-
nition in  a  sugar-mill  on  an  eminence  temporarily
unprotected.  Half  of  Boves's  forces  swept  down
on  that  point,  when  Ricaurte,  who  commanded  the
mill  with  a  small  detachment,  dismissed  his  men,
and,  when  the  building  was  surrounded  bv  thou-
sands of  the  enemy,  blew  it  up  and  perished  in  the
explosion.  The  Spaniards  in  their  confusion  were
routed  by  Bolivar.  A  monument  has  been  erected
to  Ricaurte  in  his  native  city  for  his  heroic  deed;

RICE,  Alexander  Hamilton,  governor  of  Mas-
sachusetts, b.  in  Newton  Lower  Falls,  Mass.,  30
Aug.,  1818.  He  received  a  business  training  in
his  father's  paper-mill  at  Newton  and  in  a  mer-
cantile house  in  Boston,  and,  after  his  graduation
at  Union  college  in  1844,  established  himself  in
the  paper  business  at  Boston.  He  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  school  committee,  entered  the  common
council,  was  chosen  president  of  that  body,  and
in  1855  and  1857  was  elected  mayor  of  Boston
on  a  citizens'  ticket.  ^During  his  administration
the  Back  Bay  improvements  were  undertaken,  the
establishment  of  the  Boston  city  hospital  was  au-
thorized, and  on  his  recommendation  the  manage-
ment of  the  public  institutions  was  committed  to
a  board  composed  in  part  of  members  of  the  com-
mon council  and  in  part  chosen  from  the  general
body  of  citizens.  He  served  several  years  as  presi-
dent of  the  Boston  board  of  trade,  and  has  been  an
officer  or  trustee  of  numerous  financial  and  educa-
tional institutions.  He  was  elected  1^  congress  by
the  Repul)lican  party  for  four  successive  terms,
serving  from  5  Dec,  1859,  till  3  March,  1867. He


RICE


RICE


served  on  the  conimitton  on  nnval  HfTnirs.  and,  a»
chairiniin  of  that  (HtMiniittM*  in  the  :{Hth  conjjrt'SK,
introdut'e<l  im{H)rtant  nu'asure-H.  He  was  a  dole-
rate  to  the  Luyalist.s'  cHinvention  at  I'hiladflphia
in  IHtiO.  and  to  the  Uopublionn  national  conven-
tion in  1S(W.  Ho  wjus  governor  of  Mas-snchusetts
in  ISTCi,  1H7T.  and  IHTH.

RICK,  Allen  Thoriidlko,  c<litor.  h.  in  lioston,
Mass.,  18  June,  1853;  d.  in  New  York  city.  10  May,
188U.  At  the  aee  of  nine  years  he  was  tnken
abntad.  In  1867 he  returned  to  the  I'nited  States,
and  remaine<l  here  until  1871,  when  he  went  to
En);land  and  wtis  graduated  at  Uxfonl  in  1H75.
On  his  return  to  the  Unilwl  Stat»»s  he  entennl  as
a  student  at  Columbia  law-si-h(M>l.  In  1H7U  he
bought  the  "North  American  lt«niow,"  of  which
he  was  afterwanl  thewlitor.  He  organized  in  1879
and  subsequently  directetl  what  is  iK>pularly  known
as  the  (.'harnay  ex|>edition,  which  was  despatched
under  the  joint  auspices  of  the  United  States  and
France,  to  investigate  systematically  the  remains
of  ancient  civilization  in  Central  America  and
Mexico.  In  1884  he  iK>uglit  a  controlling  interest
in  "  Le  Matin,"  one  of  the  chief  papers  of  Paris,  in
which  he  continued  a  proprietor,  lie  was  at-tively
interested  in  {Kiliiics,  ana  in  1880  received  a  Ile-
publican  nomination  for  congress,  but  was  defeat-
ed by  the  IocaI  political  leaders.  A  controversy
suct-eedetl.  which  resulted  in  the  expulsion  of  Mr.
Rice's  oiiptments  from  the  Republican  organiza-
tion, Tnis  event  turned  his  attention  to  the  Aus-
tralian system  of  voting,  which  he  was  the  first  to
reconunend  for  adoption  in  the  United  States,  and
mainly  owin^  to  his  advocacy  a  demand  for  luillot-
reform  was  incornorated  in  the  platforms  of  the
Republican  an<l  Lnited  Lalx)r  parties  in  1887.  He
edited  "  Reminiscences  of  Abraham  Lincoln  "  (New
York,  188(5),  and  contributed  to  *'  Ancient  Cities  of
the  New  World"  (1887).

RICE,  Ainericus  VespncI us,  soldier,  b.  in  Per-
n'sville,  Ohit),  18  Nov.,  18;i5.  He  was  gra<lunted  at
Union  college  in  1860,  and  began  the  study  of  law.
On  12  April,  1801,  he  enlisted  in  the  National  army,
soon  afterward  was  appointe<i  a  lieutenant,  and
then  a  captain  in  the  22d  Ohio  volunteers,  and
served  in  West  Virginia.  When  his  term  of  en-
listment expired  in  August,  1801,  he  assisted  in  re-
cruiting the  57th  Ohio  infantry,  retnrne<l  to  the
field  as  captain  of  a  company,  and  became  lieuten-
ant-colonel, and  afterwanl  colonel,  of  the  regiment.
He  fought  in  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman's  cam-
paigns, in  CJen.  William  B.  Hazen's  division,  was
wounde<l  several  times,  and  at  the  battle  of  Kene-
saw  Mountain  lost  a  le^.  The  people  of  his  dis-
trict gave  him  a  majority  of  votes  as  the  Demo-
cratic candidate  for  congress  in  1864,  but  ho  was
defeate<l  by  the  soldiers  vote.  He  was  promoted
briga«lier-general  on  31  May,  1805,  and  mustered
outt)n  15  Jan.,  1800.  In  1808  he  Ijecame  manager
of  a  private  banking  business  in  Ottawa,  Ohio.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Democratic  national  con-
vention at  Baltimore  in  1872,  and  was  elected
in  1874  to  congress,  and  re-elected  in  1876. — His
cousin.  RoHella,  author,  b.  in  Perr)-sville,  Ohio,
11  Aug..  1827.  She  l)egan  writing  for  the  local
papers  at  an  early  age,  published  a  novel  entitled
*'  MaU'l.  or  Heart  Histories  "(Columbus,  1858),  and
has  since  Ihm'U  a  contributor  of  serial  stories  and
humontus  articles  and  of  poems  descriptive  of
nature  to  newsitajiers  and  macrazines.  She  is  also
known  as  a  public  lecturer.  In  1871-'2  she  oon-
tributetl,  utuler  the  pen  -  name  of  "  Pipsissiway
Potts,"  a  serial  entitle<l  "Other  People's  Win-
dows "  to  Timothy  S.  Arthur's  "  Home  Magazine."
It  attracted  attention,  and  was  followed  by  otheis


with  the  same  signatur(>,  "My  Oirls  and  I"  and
other  tales  signed  "Chatty  Br«K)k»,"  and  still  other
serials  publishe<l  under  her  own  name,  including
"  Fiftv  V»'ars  Ago,  or  the  Cabins  of  the  West."

RI('E,  Bonjaniin  Franklin,  si-nator.  b.  in  Fast
Otto.  CatUiniugus  co..  N.  Y.,  20  May,  1828.  After
obtaining  his  tHlucation  in  an  academy,  he  taught
for  s«'vend  winters,  stu<lied  law.  and  was  admitte<l
to  the  bar  at  Irvine.  Ky.  He  was  a  pn-sidential
elector  in  1856.  and  was  ek-cteil  to  the  Kentucky
legislature  in  1805.  Mr.  Rice  removjHl  to  Minne-
sota in  1860,  enlisteil  in  the  National  anny  in  1861,
was  appointed  a  captain  in  the  '3d  Minnesf>ta  in-
fantry, and  s<»rved  in  that  grade  till  1864,  when  he
resigned  and  establishe<l  himstdf  in  the  practit*  of
law  at  Little  Rock,  Ark.  He  was  the  organizer  of
the  Republican  ]»arty  in  Arkansas  in  1867,  was
chairman  of  its  central  cfunmittee,  managed  the
electoral  canvass  during  the  predominance  of  his
partv,  and  was  electe<l  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving
from  3  June,  1868,  till  3  March,  1873.

RICE,  Daniel,  showman,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1822.  His  name  was  originally  Mcljaren,  but
he  changed  it  to  Rice  after  removing  to  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  and  becoming  an  acrobat.  He  after-
ward travelletl  as  a  circus-clown  through  the  west
and  southwest,  and  acquired  such  |X)pularity  that
he  was  enabled  to  exhibit  his  own  circus,  which
his  rivals  derisively  calletl  the  "one-horse  show"
because  the  chief  attraction,  liesides  his  jests,  was
a  trained  Arabian  stallion.  He  s<K)n  gathered  a
large  company,  and  enhanced  the  rej)Utation  of
his  "great  and  only  show"  by  munificent  gifts
for  charitable  purposes  and  public  monuments.
During  the  civil  war  he  promoted  recruiting  bv
delivering  patriotic  s|)eecnes  in  connection  with
his  comic  performances.  He  met  with  financial
disaster,  and  performed  under  the  management  of
others  until  intemf»erate  habits  interfered  with  his
engagements.  Having  reforme<l,  he  occasionally
lectured  in  advocacy  of  teini)erance.  He  resided  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  subsequently  in  Texas,  where
he  l)ecame  a  large  land-owner.

RICE.  Davla.  clergyman,  b.  in  Hanover  county,
Va.,  20  I)ec.,  17133;  d.  in  Green  county,  Ky.,  18
June,  1810. He  was  graduated  at Princeton in

1701,  studied  theology,  was  licensed  to  preach  in

1702,  and  was  instalunl  as  pastor  of  the  Presbyte-
rian church  at  Hanover.  Va.,  in  December.  1703.
At  the  end  of  five  years  he  resigned  on  account  of
dissensions  among  the  church-memljers,  and  three
years  later  he  tot)k  charge  of  three  congregations
in  the  new  settlements  of  Bedford  county,  Va,,
where  he  labored  with  success  during  the  period  of
the  Revolution.  When  Kentucky  was  oj)ened  to
settlement  he  visited  that  country  in  Octolx>r,  1783,
removed  thither  with  his  /amily.  and  in  1784  or-
ganize<i  in  Mercer  county  the  first  religious  con-
gregation in  Kentucky,  and  opened  in  his  house
the  earliest  school.  He  was  the  organizer  and  the
chairman  of  a  conference  that  was  neld  in  1785  for
the  purpose  of  instituting  a  n'gulur  organization
of  the  rresbvterian  church  in  the  new  territory,
and  the  principal  founder  of  Transylvania  academv,
which  developled  into  Transylvania  university.  lie
was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed  a
state  constitution  in  1792.  In  1798  he  reniove<l  to
Green  county.  His  wife.  Mar>-.  was  a  daughter  of
Rev.  Samuel"  Blair.  He  publ'ishetl  an  "  F^ssay  on
liaptism  "  (lialtimore.  1789) :  a  "  I>ecture  on  Divine
I)ecree8"  (1791);  "Slaverv  Inc»>nsistent  with  Jus-
tice and  Policy"  (1792);  "An  Kpistle  to  the  Citi-
zens of  Kentuckv  Professing  Christianity,  those
that  Are  or  Have  Been  Denominated  Presbvterians **
(1805);  and  "A  Second  Kpistle  to the  l*resbyte-


234


RICE


RICE


piiz^


rians  of  Kentucky,"  warning  them  against  the
errors  of  the  day  (1808);  also  "A  Kentucky  Pro-
test against  Slavery  "  (New  York.  1812). — david's
grandson,  John  Holt,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Lon-
don, Va..  28  Nov..  1777;  d.  in  Hampden  Sidney,
Prince  Edward  co.,  Va.,  3  Sept.,  1831.  He  was
educated  at  Liberty  Hall  academy,  near  Lexing-
ton, began  the  study  of  medicine  in  1799,  afterward
studied  theology,  wa-s
a  tutor  in  Hampden
Sidney  col  leg?  in  1801,
was  licensed  to  preach
on  12  Sept.,  1803,  and
on  29  Sept.,  1804,  was
installed  as  pastor  of
a  Presbyterian  church
at  Cjub  Creek,  Char-
lotte CO.,  Va.  On  17
Oct.,  1812,  he  was  in-
stalled as  pastor  of  the
first  separate  Presby-
terian church  in  Rich-
mond, the  Presbyte-
rians having  previous-
ly worshipped  in  a
buildingwitnthe  Epis-
copalians. In  July,
1815,  he  began  the
publication  of  the
"Christian  Monitor,"  a  religious  periodical,  which
he  conducted  for  several  years.  From  1818  till
1829  he  edited  a  similar  publication  called  the
"  Virginia  Evangelical  and  Literary  Magazine."  He
was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly  at  Phila-
delphia in  1819.  He  was  called  to  the  presidency
of  Princeton  in  1822,  and  a  few  weeks  later  to  the
professorship  of  theology  in  the  Union  theological
seminary  at  Hampden  Sidney  college,  which  latter
post  he  accepted.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Princeton  in  1819.  Dr.  Rice  was  known  as  a
powerful  and  fervent  preacher,  not  alone  in  Vir-
ginia, but  in  the  northern  states,  which  he  often
visited,  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  an  en-
dowment for  his  seminary.  Besides  review  articles,
controversial  pamphlets,  memoirs  of  friends,  and
numerous  sermons,  his  only  published  work  was  a
small  volume  entitled  "  Historical  and  Philosophi-
cal Considerations  on  Religion  "  (1832),  consisting
of  letters  addressed  to  James  Madison,  originally
published  anonymously  in  1830  in  the  "Southern
Religious  Telegraph,"  in  which  he  endeavored  to
show  that  the  propagation  of  the  Christian  religion
ought  to  be  fostered  by  statesmen  in  the  interest  of
national  prosperity.  See  his  "  Memoir  "  by  William
Maxwell  (Philadelphia,  1835).— John  Holt's  brother,
Benjamin  Holt,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  London,
Va.,  29  Nov.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Hampden  Sidney  colle|;e,
24  Feb.,  1856,  was  educated  under  his  brother's  m-
struction,  taught  at  New  Berne  and  Raleigh,  N.  C,
was  licensed  to  preach  while  at  Raleigh,  28  Sept.,
1810,  and  was  sent  as  a  missionary  to  the  seaboard
counties  of  North  Carolina.  He  removed  to  Peters-
burg, Va.,  in  1812,  and  organized  a  church  in  that
place,  of  which  he  was  installed  pastor  in  1814,
and  with  which  he  remained  for  the  following
seventeen  years.  He  was  moderator  of  the  Pres-
byterian general  assembly  in  1829,  and  in  1832
received  from  Princeton  the  degree  of  D.  D.  He
was  pastor  of  the  church  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  from
15  Aug.,  1833.  till  26  April,  1847,  and  thence-
forth of  the  Hampden  Sidney  college  church  till
his  death.  His  wife  was  a  sister  of  Rev.  Dr.  Archi-
bald Alexander.  See  "  Discourse  on  the  Death  of
Dr.  Benjamin  H.  Rice,"  by  the  Rev.  William  E.
Scbenck  (Philadelphia,  1856).


RICE,  Edwin  Wllbnr,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kings-
borough,  N.  Y.,  24  July,  18Jil.  lie  was  gra4luated
at  Union  college  in  1854,  studied  law  for  one  year,
and  then  theology  in  Union  theological  seminary.
New  York  city,  taught  in  1857-'8,  and  became  a
missionary  of  the  American  Sunday-school  union
in  1859,  receiving  ordination  as  a  Congregational
minister  in  1860.  In  1864  he  was  maxle  superin-
tendent of  the  society's  missions  at  Milwaukee,
Wis.,  and  in  1871  he  biecame  assistant  secretary  of
missions  and  assistant  editor  of  the  periodicals  of
the  union  in  Philadelphia.  Since  1879  he  has  been
editor  of  its  periodicals  and  publications.  The
degree  of  I).  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Union
college  in  1884.  Dr.  Rice  conceived  the  idea  of  the
series  of  lesson-papers  that  have  been  issued  regu-
larly since  1872,  and  edited  all  of  these  papers.
He  has  also  prepared  since  1874  the  "Scnolar's
Handbooks  on  the  International  Lessons,"  of
which  twenty-seven  volumes  have  appeared  down
to  1888,  and  several  have  been  ^translated  into
Dutch,  Italian,  Greek,  and  other  languages.  He
has  since  1871  edited  the  "Sunday-School  World"
and  the  "  Youth's  World,"  and  since  1875  the
"  Union  Companion  "  and  "  Quarterly."  He  con-
tributed the  geographical  and  topographical  ar-
ticles to  Philip  Schaff's  "  Bible  Dictionary  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1880),  and  edited  Kennedy's  "  f'our  Gos-
pels" (1881)  and  Paxton  Hood's  "Great  Revival
of  the  Eighteenth  Century  "  (1882).  His  independ-
ent publications  are  "  Pictorial  Commentary  on
Mark"  (1881);  "Historical  Sketch  of  Sunday-
Schools"  (1886);  "People's  Commentary  on  Mat-
thew" (1887);  "People's  Lesson- Book  on  Mat-
thew " ;  and  "  Stories  of  Great  Painters  "  (1888).

RICE,  George  Edward,  poet,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  10  Julv,  1822;  d.  in  Roxbury.  Mass.,  10
Aug.,  1861.  lie  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1842,  studied  in  the  Harvard  law-school,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  practised  his  profession  in
Boston  until,  near  the  close  of  his  life,  he  became
insane.  He  contributed  to  the  "North  American
Review  "  and  other  periodicals.  Some  of  his  poems,
with  others  by  John  Howard  Wainwright,  were  pub-
lished anonymously  in  a  volume  called  "  Ephem-
era" (Boston,  1852).  A  fanciful  adaptation  of
"  Hamlet,"  under  the  title  of  "  A  New  Play  in  an
Old  Garb,"  was  published  with  illustrations  (1852),
and  was  acted  with  applause,  as  were  two  other
plays  that  were  published  subsequently,  entitled
"Myrtilla,"  a  fairy  piece  (1853),  and  "Blondel,  a
Historic  Fancy  "  (1854).  He  was  also  the  authpr
of  "  Nugamenta,"  a  book  of  poems  (1859).

RICb,  Harvey,  poet,  b.  in  Conway,  Mass.,  11
June,  1800.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in
1824,  and  removed  to  Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  he
opened  a  classical  school,  at  the  same  time  studying
law.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  began  prac-
tice in  1826.  In  1828  he  purchased  a  Democratic
newspaper,  which  has  called  the  "  Independent
News-Letter,"  and  which  |ias  since  been  known  as
the  Cleveland  "  Plaindealer."  He  was  its  editor  in
1829,  and  in  1830  was  the  first  Democrat  that  was
elected  to  the  legislature  from  Cleveland.  In  the
same  year  he  was  appointed  agent  at  Millersburg
for  the  sale  of  school  lands  in  the  Western  Reserve.
He  was  appointed  clerk  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  at  Cleveland  in  1833,  and  in  1834  and  1836
was  the  unsuccessful  Democratic  candidate  for
congress.  In  1851  he  was  elected  to  the  state  sen-
ate, and  was  the  author  of  the  bill  for  the  reorgani-
zation of  the  common-school  system  of  Ohio,  plac-
ing the  schools  under  a  state  commissioner,  and
recognizing  the  expediency  of  school  ♦ibraries.  He
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Williams  in


RICK


RICK


886


1871.  Ho  bus  Ihh'U  a  fn-fiucnt  contributor  to
magaziiu's.  aiuI  in  IXiH  publisbtHl  "  Mount  Vvrnon,
amrotber  l'o««nja"  (4th  cU..  Now  York,  1864).  lie
ha»  also  publiMbod  "  Nature  and  Culture  "  (lioston,
1875) ;  "  rioiuH'rs  of  tb«  \Vesl«'rn  lU'JHTve  "  (1882):
"St'Iwt  IWins"  (188.J):  nn<l  " Skfttlu's  of  West-
.-rn  Lifo"(lW8).

RICE,  Henry  Mower,  senator,  b.  in  Waits-
fifhl.  Vt.,  2U  Nov..  1810.  He  emiKniteil  U*  the
territory  of  Miehijjun  in  18:^").  and  wius  em|>lf>y«l
in  making;  surveyr*  of  KalamaZ(K)  and  (irai|d  riv-
ers, and  on  the  survey  of  the  Sauit  Sainto  Marie
canal  in  1837.  He  removed  to  Fort  Snellin>r,  Iowa
territorj'.  in  1831),  and  was  post-sutler  at  Fort  At-
kinson in  1840-'2,  and  8ubse<juently  an  a^ent  of
a  fur-tradinjf  company.  an<l  established  trading-
posJji  frjm  Lake  Su|)erior  to  the  Red  river  of  the
North.  Un  2  Auij.,  1847.  he  serve<l  a-s  U.  .S.  com-
missioner at  Fond  du  I^c  in  making  a  tn>aty
with  the  Ojibwav  Indians  for  the  cession  of  the
country  south  or  Crow  Wing  and  Lonp  Prairie
rivers.  On  21  Aug.  he  obtained  from  the  l^illaeer
band  of  Ojibways  the  cession  of  a  large  tract  be-
tween th«)se  rivers,  known  as  the  I^eaf  Kiver  coun-
try. He  assistetl  in  making  many  other  treaties.
He  settleil  in  St.  Paul  in  1849,  was  elected  a  dele-
gate from  Minnesota  territ<jrv  to  congress  in  185.3,
was  re-elected  in  1855,  was  the  author  of  the  law
extending  the  right  of  pre-emption  over  unsur-
veyed  lands  in  the  territory,  and  procured  the  pas-
sage of  an  act  authorizing  the  framing  of  a  state
constitution  preparatory  to  the  admission  of  Min-
nesota into  the  I  nion.  He  was  then  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  serving  from  11  May,  1858,  till  3
March,  18<K}.  Mr.  Rice  was  a  meml>er  of  the  com-
mittees on  finance  and  military  aflFairs.  and  the  spe-
cial committee  on  the  condition  of  the  country  in
1860-'l.  and  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  nation-
al union  convention  in  1866.  He  was  the  founder
of  Hayfleld.  Wis.,  and  Munising,  Mich.,  and  has
given  Rice  park  to  the  city  of  St.  Paul.

RICK,  Isaac  I^eopold'.  author,  b.  in  Wachen-
heim.  Havariu,  22  Feb.,  18.'50,  He  was  brought  to
the  United  States  in  1856,  educated  at  Philadel-
phia high-school,  and  studied  music  in  that  city
and  in  1866-'8  at  the  Paris  conservatoire,  acting
while  there  as  correspondent  of  the  Philadelphia
"  Evening  Hulletin."  He  taught  music  and  lan-
guages for  some  time  in  Kngland,  and  in  the  au-
tumn of  18(59  established  himself  as  a  music-teacher
in  New  York  city.  He  wa.s  graduated  at  Columbia
law-school  in  1880,  founded  the  academy  of  jmliti-
cal  science,  and  was  lecturer  and  librarian  of  the
political  science  library  of  Columbia  in  1882-'3.
and  then  entered  on  the  practice  of  the  special
branch  of  railroad  law,  acting  also  as  instructor  in
Columbia  college  law-school  till  1886.  He  was  one
of  the  founders  of  the  "  Forum  "  in  New  York  city
in  188.5.  and.  I>esidcs  articles  on  political  science,
has  publishrtl  '•  What  is  Music  f"  (New  York,  1875)
and  '•  How  Geometrical  Lines  have  their  Counter-
parts in  Music"  (1880).

RICK,  James  Clay,  soldier,  b.  in  Worthington,
Mass..  27  Dec.,  1829;  d.  near  S{»ottsvlvania  Court-
HoUM',  Va.,  11  May,  1864.  He  obtained  an  eiluca-
tion  by  his  own  effort!*,  and,  after  graduation  at
Yale  in  18.')4.  engaged  in  teaching  at  Natchez.
Miss.,  and  conducte<l  the  literary  de|)artment  of  a
news(>aper.  He  also  began  the  study  of  law.  and
continued  it  in  New  York  city,  where  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  liar  in  18.56  and  entered  into  practice.
When  the  civil  war  began  he  enlisted  as  a  private,
became  adjutant  and  captain,  and,  on  the  organi-
zation of  the  44lh  New  York  n-giment,  was  ap-
pointed it«  lieuterant-colonel. He became  colo-


nel of  the  regiment  soon  afterward,  and  Iwl  it  in
the  Imttles  of  Yorktown.  Hanover  Court-IIouse,
Gaines's  Mills.  Malvern  Hill,  Mansmas,  Fn<derick»-
burg,  and  Chancellorsville,  and  at  Gettysburg
commanih'il  a  brigiule.  an<l  during  the  leooncl  days
fight  performiMl  an  im{M>rtant  service  by  holding
the  extreme  left  of  the  line  against  re|)cat«l  at-
tacks and  s(>curing  Round  Top  mountain  against
a  flank  movement.  For  this  he  was  commissioned
as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  17  Aug.,  1863.
He  {iartici{tateil  in  the  advance  on  Mine  Run  and
in  the  o|>eration8  in  the  Wilderness,  and  was  killed
in  the  liattle  near  .Spottsylvania.

RICK,  Lntlier,  i)hil'anthropi.st,  b.  in  North-
lK)rough,  Mass.,  25  Jlarch,  17831;  d.  in  F^lgefield
district,  S.  C.,  25  Sept.,  18:i«.  He  spent  three
vears  at  I.ieicester  acailemy.  paying  his  expenses
by  his  own  exertions.  While  he  was  at  Wniiams
college,  which  he  enteri'd  in  1807,  he  Ix^came  deep-
Iv  interested  in  the  subject  of  foreign  missions.
I'hrouph  his  instrumentality  a  soc-iety  of  inquirv
on  this  subject  was  formed,  a  branch  of  whicn
was  organize<l  alx^ut  the  same  time  at  Andover
seminary.  At  this  st-minan*,  where  he  became  a
student,  he  engaged  with  Judson,  Mills.  Newell,
and  others  in  prejiaring  a  memorial  to  the  General
a.s.sociation  of  evangelical  ministers  in  Massachu-
setts, urging  the  claims  of  the  heathen  upon  their
attention.  The  result  of  their  efforts  was  the  for-
mation of  the  American  board  of  commissioners
for  foreign  missions.  Rice  was  not  anjiointed  with
the  first  com|)any  of  missionaries  by  the  board,
but,  being  intent  uiion  going,  wa.s  allowed  to  do  so
on  condition  that  ne  should  raise  the  money  for
his  outfit  and  passage.  This  he  did  in  a  few  days.
He  was  ordained  as  a  Congregational  minister  in
Salem,  Mass.,  6  Feb.,  1812,  and  sailed  for  India  on
the  18th  in  the  packet  "  Harmony."  Shortly  after
his  arrival  in  India  he  united  with  the  Baptists.
His  associates,  Adoniram  Judson  and  his  wife,  had
done  the  same  thing  a  few  weeks  earlier.  On
account  of  opjKJsition  on  the  part  of  the  English
authorities,  Mr.  Rice  sailed  for  the  Isle  of  France,
and  thence  for  the  United  States,  to  adjust  his  re-
lations with  the  American  boanl.  Reaching  New
York,  7Sept.,  1813,  he  went  at  once  to  Boston.  His
relations  with  the  board  were  quickly  dissolved,
and  he  turned  to  the  Baptist  denomination,  with
which  he  now  identified  himself.  Being  commis-
sioned as  an  agent  by  a  company  of  Baptists  in
Boston,  he  traversed  the  country,  stirring  the  Bap-
tist churches  to  take  up  the  cause  of  foreign  mis-
sions. Partly  as  a  result  of  his  efforts,  delegates
met  in  Philadelphia  in  May,  1814,  and  organized
the  general  convention  of  (he  Baptist  denomina-
tion in  the  United  States  for  foreijjn  missions.
With  his  missionar)'  zeal  Mr.  Rice  united  an  eager
interest  in  the  cause  of  ministerial  education.
Mainly  through  his  influence  and  efforts  an  insti-
tution of  learning  was  establishetl  in  Washington,
I).  C,  which  is  now  known  as  Columbian  university.
He  was  for  several  years  its  agent  and  treasurer,
while  serving  at  the  same  time  as  missionary  agent.
He  sacrificed  his  life  in  seeking  to  promote  the
welfare  of  the  ctillege  that  he  had  foiindwL  In
1815  he  was  elei-ted  to  the  presidency  of  Transyl-
vania universitv.  Ijexington.  Ky..  but  he  declined
this  call,  as  weil  as  a  similar  one  to  (ieorgetown
college.  Ky.  Mr.  Rice  was  a  pri'acher  of  great
tH)wer.  He  left  no  published  works,  but  few  men
nave  exert e<l  uiN)n  the  Baptist  denomination  a
wider  and  more  lasting  influence.

RICK,  Nathan  Lewlx,  clergyman,  b.  in  Garrard
county,  Ky.,  29  Dec.,  1807;  d.  in  Chatham,  Kv.,  11
June,  187*'. He  was  educated  at  Centre  college.


RICE


RICE/


^oT^.


cjO


teaching  Ijatin  in  the  preparatory  department,
entered  Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1889,
and  was  installed  as  nastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  at  Bardstown,  Ky.,  on  8  June,  1833.  There
he  established  and  conducted  a  seminary  for  girls,
and  edited  a  paper  called  the  •'  Western  Protest-
ant." After  resigning
his  pastorate  in  1841
he  preached  in  Paris,
Ky.,  where  he  held  a
public  discussion  on
the  subject  of  bap-
tism. The  Baptists
arranged  for  another
debate,choo8ing  Alex-
ander Campbell  as
their  champion.  It
took  place  in  Lexing-
ton, Ky.,  and  excited
widespread  interest
throughout  the  west.
On  12  Jan..  1845,  he
assumed  charge  of  a
church  in  Cincinnati,
where  he  held  public
debates,  taught  candi-
dates for  the  ministry,
and  wrote  several  volumes.  In  1850  he  held  a
memorable  public  discussion  with  Archbishop
John  B.  Purcell  on  the  doctrines  of  the  Roman
Catholic  church.  Ilis  activity  was  as  great  while
filling  a  pastorate  in  St.  Louis  in  1853-'7,  where
he  edited  the  "  St.  Louis  Presbyterian."  He  was
moderator  of  the  general  assembly  at  Nashville
in  1855.  On  20  Oct.,  1857,  he  was  installed  as
pastor  of  a  church  in  Chicago,  where  he  conduct-
ed the  '•  Presbyterian  PiXpositor."  and  in  1859-'C1
filled  the  chair  of  didactic  theology  in  the  Theo-
logical seminary  of  the  northwest.  He  entered
on  the  pastorate  of  the  Fifth  avenue  church  in
New  York  city  on  28  April,  1861.  His  health  soon
began  to  decline,  and  on  16  April,  1867,  he  re-
signed his  charge  and  retired  to  a  farm  near  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.  After  resting  from  intellect-
ual work  for  more  than  a  year,  he  assumed  the
presidency  of  Westminster  college,  Fulton.  Mo.,
and  in  October.  1874.  exchanged  this  post  for  the
professorship  of  didactic  and  polemic  theology  in
the  theological  seminary  at  Danville,  Ky.,  which
he  held  till  his  death.  His  debate  with  Camptell
on  "  Baptism  "  was  published,  as  were  also  debates
with  E.  M.  Pingree  on  "  Universal  Salvation"  (Cin-
cinnati, 1845)  and  with  Jonathan  Blanchard  on
"  Slavery  "  (1845).  He  was  the  author  of  other
works,  mostly  on  polemical  subjects,  including
"  Romanism  the  Enemy  of  Free  Institutions  and
of  Christianity  "  (1851) ;  "  The  Signs  of  the  Times"
(St.  Louis,  1855) ;  "  Baptism  :  the  Design,  Mode,  and
Subjects  "  (1855) ;  "  Our  Country  and  the  Church  "
(1861) ;  "  Preach  the  Word,  a  Discourse  "  (New  York,
1862):  "The  Pulpit:  its  Relations  to  Our  National
Crisis"  (1862):  and  "Discourses"  (1862).

RICE,  Samuel  Allen,  soldier,  b.  in  Penn  Yan,
N  Y.,  27  Jan.,  1828:  d.  in  Oskaloosa,  Iowa,  6  July.
1864.  He  was  educated  at  Ohio  university  and  at
Union  college,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1849.
He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1852,
and  began  ))ractice  at  Oskaloosa.  Iowa,  where  he
was  elected  county  attorney  in  1853.  In  1856  he
was  chosen  attorney-general  of  Iowa,  and  in  1858
he  was  continued  in  that  office  for  a  second  term.
He  entered  the  National  army  as  colonel  of  the  33d
Iowa  volunteers,  his  commission  dating  from  10
Aug.,  1862.  For  bravery  at  Helena,  Ark.,  he  was
promoted  brigadier  -  general  of  volunteers  on  4


Aug.,  1868,  and  served  with  credit  through  the
campaigns  of  1863-'4  in  Arkansas  until  he  was
mortally  wounded  at  Jenkin's  Ferry,  30  April,
1864.— !lis  brother,  Elliott  Warren,  soldier,  b.
in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  16  Nov.,  1835 :  d.  in  Sioux  City,
Iowa,  22  June,  1887.  was  educated  at  Ohio  uni-
versity and  Union  law-scho(jl,  admitte<l  to  the  bar,
and  practised  in  Oskaloosa,  Iowa.  At  the  Ijegin-
ning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  National  array
as  a  private,  and  first  met  the  enemy  at  Belmont,
Mo.,  7  Nov.,  1861.  He  rose  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general,  his  commis.sion  dating  from  20  June,  1864,
fought  with  distinction  in  the  imriortant  battles
of  the  southwest,  and  in  Gen.  William  T.  Sher-
man's campaign  in  Georgia  and  the  Carolinas
commandetl  a  brigade  in  Gen.  John  M.  Corse's  di-
vision. He  was  brevetted  major-general  on  13
March,  1865,  and  mustered  out  on  24  Aug.

RICE,  Thomas  D.,  actor,  b.  in  New  York  city,
20  May,  1808:  d.  there,  19  Sept.,  1860.  He  was
first  apprenticed  to  a  wood-carver  in  his  native
place,  and  received  his  early  theatrical  training  as
a  supernumerary.  Later  he  became  a  stock-actor
at  several  western  play-houses.  Alx)ut  1832  he  be-
gan his  career  in  negro  minstrelsy  at  the  Pittsburg
and  Louisville  theatres  with  success,  repeating  his
performances  in  the  eastern  cities  for  several  years
to  crowded  houses.  In  1836  Rice  went  to  Eng-
land, where  he  made  his  debut  at  the  Surrey  thea-
tre in  London.  This  was  followed  by  prolonged
engagements  in  the  British  capital  an^  other  large
cities  of  the  United  Kingdom.  On  18  June,  1837,
he  married,  in  London,  Miss  Gladstone,  and  soon
afterward  returned  to  his  native  land.  He  was
for  a  long  time  the  recipient  of  a  large  income,
which  was  squandered  in  eccentric  extravagance.  In
the  days  of  his  prosperity  he  wore  a  dress-coat  with
guineas  for  buttons,  and  his  vest-buttons  were  stud-
ded with  diamonds.  Rice's  extraordinary  career
was  suddenly  brought  to  its  close  by  paralysis,  which
destroyed  the  humor  of  his  performances.  For  a
short  time  in  1858  he  was  with  Wood's  minstrels,
where  his  name  stood  for  the  shadow  of  an  attrac-
tion. His  life  ended  in  poverty  and  suffering,  and
he  was  buried  by  subscription.  Among  his  favor-
ite entertainments  were  "  Bone  Squash  Diavolo,"  a
burlesque  on  "  Fra  Diavolo  "  ;  "  Othello,"  a  bur-
lesque tragedy:  and  the  farces  of  "Jumbo  Jum"
anci  the  "Virginia  Mummy."  His  songs  "Jim
Crow,"  "  Lucy  Long,"  "  Sich  a  gittin  up  Stairs,"
and  "  Clare  de  Kitchen,"  all  set  off  by  grotesque
dancing,  were  hummed  and  whistled  throughout
the  land,  and  liecame  equally  popular  beyond  Che
ocean.  Rice  was,  in  reality,  an  accomplished  gen-
teel comedian,  who  elevated  negro-minstrelsy  to
respectability.  He  was  without  forerunner  or  suc-
cessor. Ethiopian  comedy  died  with  him.

RICE,  Victor  Moreau,  educator,  b.  in  Mayville.
Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  April,  1818 :  d.  in  Oneida,
Matlison  co.,  N.  Y.,  17  Oct.,  1869.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Allegheny  college  in  1841,  studied  law.  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  though  he  did  not  follow
the  profession.  In  184^3  he  l)ecame  a  teacher  of  pen-
manship and  of  Latin  in  the  schools  of  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  and  for  some  time  was  the  editor  of  a  jour-
nal named  the  "Cataract,"  which  was  afterward
called  the  "  Western  Temperance  Standard."  He
again  became  connected  with  the  schools  of  Buf-
falo in  1846,  and  was  elected  superintendent  of
the  city  schools  in  1852,  and  president  of  the  State
teachers'  association  in  1853.  The  legislature  hav-
ing created  a  department  of  public  instruction  in
1854,  Mr.  Rice  was  elected  the  first  state  superin-
tendent for  three  years.  He  was  thaice  re-elected,
filling  the  office  till  1866. In  1861  he  was  a  mem-


RICE


RICHARD


237


ber  of  the  lef^Iatiir«,  and  mrred  M  chairman  of
the  c«iniinitt«*4>  on  M-hooln.  In  1H07  ho  imlucMl  the
Ir^iiilatiiri'  to  iitM>li!(li  rat«t«.  making;  all  the  M-hooln
fr»H».  During  his*  first  tonn  a.**  siijifrintotuiont  hi*
eolUH'totI  HHii  rollalfd  the  !<tatiitf.H  n-latinK  to  piil>-
lif  intitrui-tion,  and  publishfd  tlicin  by  k>);i.Hhitiv«>
authority  under  the  title  of  "(VmIo  o^  I*ui)lic  In-
struction "(All»any.  IMti).  lie  pultiislied  a  "S|ie-
fial  K«'|»ort  on  the  l*n>!<»'nt  State  of  hklucalion  in  the
rnit««<l  States  and  (Mlier  Countries  "(Ail»an v.  1H<57).

RICK.  >ViIIUiii  North,  iHlueator.  Ii.  in  MarhU-
head.  Mavs..  'i\  Nov.,  1M4.'>.  IU>  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  in  lHtl.'».  and  then,  devotin>f  himself  to
the  j)ursuit  of  natural  history.  studie<l  at  the  Shef-
field scien  I  iflc  s<h«M)l  of  Yale,  and  in  two  years  re-
ceived the  dejjree  of  Ph.  I).  In  1H<17  he  was  a[>-
pointed  professor  of  natural  history  and  pndojfy
in  Wesleyan.  an<l  after  s|>endini;  the  first  year  on
leave  of  abs«>nee.  studying  at  the  University  of  B<?r-
lin,  he  c'oiitinue<l  in  the  possession  of  that  chair
until  18K4,  when  he  became  professor  of  jjeology  in
the  same  institution.  lie  is  a  regularly  ordained
minister  of  the  Methodist  Kpisco|Hil  cfiurch,  and
a  meinlx«r  of  the  Ka.«t  Xew  Vork  conference,  al
though  he  has  never  filled  a  [Mistorate.  Prof.  Rice
has  spent  two  of  his  summers  in  zor>logical  work
with  the  U.  S.  fish  commission  at  Portland,  Me.,
and  at  Noank.  Conn.,  and  was  engaged  in  eco-
logical and  z<K)lopical  investigations  in  the  lier-
muda  islands  during  the  winter  of  1870-*7.  He  is
a  fellow  of  the  American  ji.ssooiation  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science,  and  a  member  of  other  sci-
entific societies,  and  in  1880  receivetl  the  degree  of
LL.  I),  from  Syracuse  university.  Prof.  Rice  has
published  articles  in  scientific,  ndigious,  and  other
periodicals,  chiefly  on  points  in  geology  and  its
cHignate  sciences,  and  on  the  relations  of  science
and  n-ligion.  At  present  (1888)  he  is  preparing  a
work  «»n  ziKtlogical  classification  and  one  on  the
relati(»ns  of  science  and  religion.

RICH,  Charles  Alonzo,  architect,  b.  in  Bever-
ly. Mass.,  22  Oct.,  18.'>o.  He  was  gnuluated  at  the
Chandler  wientific  dejMirtment  of  Dartmouth  in
1875,  and  subseijuently  devotetl  his  attention  to  the
study  of  artrhitecture.  spemling  1879-'80  in  Euro|)e
for  that  purjx)se.  On  his  n-turn  he  settle*!  in  New
York,  and  lK*came  professionally  associated  with
Hugh  Ijamb.  The  firm  has  trained  a  good  reputa-
tion amimg  those  who  stand  nigh  in  the  recent  de-
velopment of  American  architecture,  Amonp  the
great  numl>er  of  buihlings  that  they  have  designed
are  the  Mount  Morris  bank  in  Harlem,  the  up[>er

Sart  of  which  is  use«l  for  apartments,  the  Astral
ats  in  OreciiDoint,  the  Pratt  industrial  institute,
Br«R)klyn,  ana  the  P^st  Orange  onera-housi',  as
well  as  iiiany  private  residences  in  New  York  city.
RICH,  Inauc,  merchant,  b.  in  Wellfiwt.  Barn-
stable CO.,  Mass.,  in  1801  ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  13
Jan.,  1872.  He  was  of  humble  parentage,  at  the
age  of  fourteen  assisted  his  father  in  the  care  of  a
flsh-stall  in  Boston,  and  afterward  had  an  oyster-
stall  in  Kaneuil  hall.  In  the  course  of  years  he  be-
came a  successful  fish-merchant,  and  subseouentlv
a  millionaire,  gave  largely  to  educational  ancl  chari-
table institutions,  and,  in  addition  to  numerous  be-
quests, left  the  greater  part  of  his  estate,  a[)praised
at  )|!1.7(X).(HX).  to  the  trustees  of  the  Boston  Wes-
levaii  university.

RICH,  Obadlah,  biblionhile,  b.  in  Truro.  Mass.,
25  Nov..  1777;  »1.  in  Ijomlon,  England,  20  Jan.,
1850.  He  went  to  Spain  in  early  years,  servttl  as
U.  S.  consul  in  Valencia  from  1816  till  1820.  re-
siding at  Madrid,  and  as  c<msul  in  Port  Malion
from  18;J4  till  185i*>.  He  gathered  a  large  wllet^'-
tion  of  raru  books  and  manuscripts  relating  to  the


eartjr  settlement  and  history  of  America,  which  he
took  to  Ijondon.  and  c«>nstantly  gave  the  benefit  of
his  time  and  M-holarship  to  authom  and  collectors.
Hecoinpileil  many  valuable  catalogues,  which  com-
mand hich  iiriccs,  and  are  of  MTvic^*  to  the  his-
torian and  Itioliophile.  .Among  these  are  "  A  Cata-
logue of  Books  relating  principally  to  America,
arrang«><l  under  the  Years  in  whii'li  they  were  Print-
e«l,  l.'iOO-17(X)"(Ix)ndon,  1H32);  "Catalogue of  Mis-
cellaneous Books  in  all  languages"  (I(S4):  "  Bib-
liotliK'a  Americana;  or,  a  Catalogue  of  Books  in
Various  languages,  relating  to  America,  printed
since  the  Year  17(X)"(2  vols..  I^mdon  and  New
Vork,  1885);  "Bibliotheca  Americana  Nova "  (2
vols,,  Ix>ndon,  1846) ;  and  part  of  the  "  Biblio-
theca Americana  Vetus,"  the  manuscript  of  which
was  accidentally  left  in  a  hackney-coach  and  lost.
George  Ticknor,  William  H.  Pn*sc-ott.  and  (te<^>rge
Bancroft  testify  to  Mr.  Kich's  knowle*lgeand  valu-
able service,  and  Washington  Irving,  in  a  letter
under  date  of  17  Sept.,  1857,  says  :  "  lie  was  one  of
the  most  indefatigtible,  intelligent,  and  successful
bibliographers  in  Kuro{)e.  His  house  at  Madrid
wa.s  a  literary  wilderness,  alwunding  with  curious
works  and  rare  editions,  in  the  midst  of  which  he
lived  and  movinl  and  had  his  Iteing.  and  in  the
midst  of  which  I  passed  many  months  while  era-
ployed  on  my  work.  ...  He  was  withal  a  man  of
great  truthfulness  and  simplicity  of  character,  of
an  amiable  and  obliging  disitositi'on.  and  strict  in-
tegrity." After  his  death  nis  sons  continued  the
business.  Their  stock  of  b(x>ks  finally  passe<l  into
the  possession  of  Edwanl  O.  Allen,  of  l^ondon,  who
issuetl  a  series  of  catalogues.  There  have  been
several  auction  sales  of  b(M)ks  in  l^Jtidon  purport-
ing to  be  selections  from  the  stock  of  Olmdiah
Rich,  and  it  is  believed  that  his  collection  has  been
disiHTM'*!  in  Ix)ndon.

RICHARD,  (tabriol,  clergyman,  b.  in  Saintes,
France.  15  Oct.,  1707;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  13
Sept.,  1832.  He  was  relateil,  on  his  mother's  side,
to  Bo.«suet,  bishop  of  Meaux.  After  receiving  his
preliminary  e<lucation  in  the  college  of  his  native
town,  he  entered  the  seminary  of  Angers  in  1784,
receive*!  minor  orders  in  1785.  and.  to  qualify  him-
self to  become  a  nieml)er  of  the  Sul})itian  society,
he  rejiaireil  to  their  houst»  at  Issy.  near  Paris,  where
he  was  ordaineil  j»riest  in  1791.  He  taught  mathe-
matics in  the  college  at  Issy  till  April.  175>2,  when
he  embarked  for  the  Unite<!  States  in  comi»an^
with  Dr.  Mankihal,  afterward  archbishop)  of  Balti-
more. He  engaged  in  missionary  work  in  Illinois,
and  in  1798  was  transferred  to  Detroit.  His  juris-
diction extende<l  over  the  region  that  is  now  era-
bracked  in  the  states  of  Michij^an  and  Wisc-onsin.
He  o{»ened  a  school  in  Detroit  in  1804.  but  the  fire
of  the  following  year  swept  away  this  and  other
buildings  that  he  hml  erected.  In  1807  he  was  in-
vited by  the  governor  of  the  territory  and  other
Protestant  gentlemen  to  preach  tt)  thera  in  the
English  language,  as  there  was  at  the  time  no
Protestant  clergyman  in  Detroit.  He  accordingly
held  meetings  ever}'  Sunday  at  noon  in  the  c-ouncil
house,  where  he  delivenil  instructions  on  the  gen-
eral principles  on  which  all  Christians  are  agreed.
He  established  a  printing-i)ress  in  Detroit — the  first
in  the  territory — and  U'gan  the  publication  of  a
journal  in  French.  entitle<!  the"  Kssais  du  Michi-
gan," in  1809.  The  irregularity  of  the  mails  led  to
Its  discontinuance  after  some  time,  but  he  issued
works  of  piety,  ctmtroversy,  and  jiatriotism  from
his  press,  which  was  for  several  years  the  only  one
in  Michigan. His  advwacy  of  .American  princi-

tles  and  his  denunciation  of  the  British  at  the
eginning  of  the  war  of  1812  excited  great  indig-


238


RICHARD


RICHARDS


nation  in  Canada,  and  he  was  soon  afterward
seized  and  imprisoned  at  Sandwich  until  the  close
of  the  war,  but  was  allowed  to  labor  among  the  In-
dian allies  of  the  English,  and  he  saved  several
American  prisoners  from  torture  and  death.  On
his  return  to  Michigan  he  found  the  [>eople  in  des-
titution, and  collected  money  with  whicli  he  pur-
chased provisions  for  all  that  were  in  need.  In
1817  he  began  the  erection  of  a  church  in  Detroit,
which  was  consecrated  in  1819.  In  1823  he  was
elected  delegate  to  congress  from  the  territory  of
Michigan,  being  the  first  Roman  Catholic  priest  to
receive  this  honor.  He  soon  won  the  esteem  of
the  members,  especially  of  Henry  Clay,  who,  when
the  abbe  did  not  make  his  meaning  clear,  owing
to  his  defective  knowledge  of  English,  frequently
repeated  his  arguments  to  the  house.  He  obtained
aid  from  the  Federal  government  in  opening  routes,
building  bridges  and  quays,  and  for  other  works  of

Eublic  utility.  He  was  again  a  candidate  in  1826,
ut  failed  of  re-election,  and  then  engaged  in  a
great  many  plans,  most  of  which  he  was  not  able
to  realize  for  want  of  resources.  He  built  several
churches,  and  established  Indian  schools  at  Green
Bay,  Arbre  Croche,  and  St.  Joseph's.  He  studied
Sicard's  method  of  teaching  the  deaf  and  dumb,
and  delivered  lectures  in  the  normal  school  of
Detroit,  but  he  was  never  able  to  open  the  asylum
that  he  projected.  He  was  about  to  lay  the  founda-
tion of  a  college  at  the  beginning  of  the  epidemic
of  Asiatic  cholera  in  1832.  During  its  prevalence
for  three  months  he  was  almost  constantly  on  his
feet  night  and  day,  until  he  was  prostrated  by  the
disease  on  9  Sept.  See  a  life  of  him  by  Louis  Guerin,
entitled  "  Le  martyr  de  la  charite  "  (Paris,  1850).

RICHARD,  Louis  Framjols  (re-shar).  West
Indian  physician,  b.  in  the  island  of  St.  Martin  in
1757;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  1806.  He  studied
in  New  Orleans,  and  was  for  many  years  a  marine
surgeon.  In  1799  he  became  president  of  the
board  of  health  of  French  Guiana,  and  performed
remarkable  experiments  on  yellow  fever,  even
sleeping  in  beds  of  persons  that  were  affected  with
the  disease,  and  inoculating  himself  with  their
virus.  In  1803  he  was  sent  to  Louisiana  to  study
the  effects  of  yellow  fever;  but  he  was  attacked  by
the  disease  and  died  in  New  Orleans.  His  works,
which  were  published  by  the  Paris  academy  of
medicine,  include  "  Recherches  generales  sur  les
blessures  causees  par  les  fleches  empoisonnees  usees
par  les  Indiens  "  (Paris,  1803) ;  "  Traite  des  simples
et  des  poisons  des  Indiens"  (1805) ;  "  Monographic
de  la  fievre  jaune  "  (1806) ;  and  "  De  la  contagion  de
la  fievre  jaune  "  (1807),  in  which  the  author  defends
the  theory  that  yellow  fever  is  not  contagious.

RICHARDS,  Benjamin  Wood,  mayor  of  Phila-
delphia, b.  in  Burlington  county,  N.  J.,  in  Novem-
ber, 1797 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13  July,  1851.
After  graduation  at  Princeton  in  1815  he  settled  in
Philadelphia,  which  he  represented  in  the  legisla-
ture. In  that  body  he  offered  the  first  resolutions
to  make  appropriations  for  the  organization  and
support  of  public  schools,  and  was  one  of  the  first
members  of  the  board  of  control.  He  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Jackson  a  director  of  the  U.  S.
bank,  which  office  he  resigned  to  become  mayor  of
Philadelphia  in  1830-'l.  Subsequently  he  visited
Europe,  and  on  his  return  formed  an  association
with  Nathan  Dunn,  John  Jay  Smith,  Frederick
Brown,  and  Isaac  Collins,  to  purchase  and  lay  out
the  cemetery  that  is  now  known  as  Laurel  Hill.
He  was  one  of  the  earliest  directors  of  Girard  col-
lege, the  originator,  founder,  and  president  until
his  death  of  the  Girard  life  and  trust  company,  and
a  founder  with  John  Vaughan  of  the  Blind  asylum.


RICHARDS,  Cyrns  Smith,  educator,  b.  in
Hartford,  Vt.,  11  March,  1808;  d.  in  Madison,
Wis.,  19  July,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1835,  from  that  year  till  1871  was  princi-
pal of  Kimball  union  academy,  Meriden,  N.  H.,
and  from  1871  until  his  death  had  charge  of  the
preparatory  department  of  Howard  university,
Washington,  D.  C.  Dartmouth  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  in  1865.  He  was  the  author  of
"  Latin  Lessons  and  Tables  "  (Boston,  1859) ;  "  Out-
lines of  Latin  Grammar  "  (Washington,  1882);  and
an  "Introduction  to  Ciesar :  First  Latin  Lessons"
(1883).— His  first  wife,  Helen  Dorotliy  Wliiton,
was  the  author  of  several  juvenile  books,  including
"  Robert  Walbar,"  "  Hemlock  Ridge,"  and  "  The
Conquered  Heart." — Their  son,  Cliarles  Herbert,
clergyman,  b.  in  Meriden,  N.  H.,  18  March,  1839,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1860,  and  studied  at
Union  theological  seminary,  and  at  Andover,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1865.  He  was  pastor  of  a
Congregational  church  in  Kokomo,  Ind.,  in  1866-7,
and  since  that  time  has  had  charge  of  the  1st  Con-
gregational church  in  Madison,  Wis.  Beloit  col-
lege gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1882.  He  is
the  author  of  "Will  Phillips"  (Boston,  1873);
"Songs  of  Christian  Praise"  and  "Scripture  Se-
lections for  Public  Worship  "  (New  York,  1880) ;
and  "Songs  of  Praise  and  Prayer"  (1883).

RICHARDS,  (ieorge,  author,  b.  probably  in
Rhode  Island ;  d.  in  Philadelphia  about  1  March,
1814  After  the  Revolution  he  was  a  school-master
in  Boston,  and  occasionally  preached.  He  was  pas-
tor of  a  Universalist  church  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
from  1793  till  1809,  and  subsenuentlv  in  Phila-
delphia, where  he  established  the  "  f'reemason's
Magazine  and  General  Miscellany,"  and  edited  it
for  two  years.  He  was  the  author  of  odes,  ma-
sonic orations,  "An  Historical  Discourse  on  the
Death  of  Gen.  Washington"  (Portsmouth,  1800),
and  many  patriotic  poems  descriptive  of  the  Revo-
lution, extracts  from  which  are  contained  in  the
"  Massachusetts  Magazine"  (1789-92).

RICHARDS,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Ca-
naan, Conn.,  29  Oct.,  1767 ;  d.  in  Auburn.  N.  Y.,
2  Aug.,  1843.  He  was  descended  from  Samuel
Richards,  a  Welshman,  who  settled  near  Stamford,
Conn.  After  studying  at  Yale  in  1789,  he  taught
in  Farmington,  completed  his  academical  and  theo-
logical course  under  Dr.  Timothy  Dwight  in  Green-
field, Conn.,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1793.
He  served  in  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  of  Morris-
town,  N.  J.,  from  1794  till  1797,  when  he  became
its  pastor,  and  in  1809  was  charged  with  the  Presby-
terian church  of  Newark,  N,  J.  In  1823  he  be-
came professor  of  theology  in  Auburn  theological
seminary,  which  chair  he  held  until  his  death.  He
was  a  trustee  of  Princeton  college  and  seminary,
and  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Yale  in  1794,
and  that  of  D.  D.  in  1815.  A  selection  of  his
"  Lectures"  was  published,  with  a  memoir,  by  the
Rev.  Samuel  H.  Gridley  (New  York,  1846),  and  a
volume  of  his  sermons,  with  an  essay  on  his  charac-
ter, by  the  Rev.  William  B.  Sprague  (Albany,  1849).

RICHARDS,  Jolin  William,  clergyman,  b.
at  Reading.  Pa.,  18  April,  1803  ;  d.  there,  27  Jan.,
1854.  His  father,  Matthias  Richards,  was  for  many
years  an  associate  judge  of  the  courts  in  Berks
county,  and  his  mother  was  a  daughter  of  Henry
Melchior  Muhlenberg.  He  received  his  classical
training  in  the  academy  in  his  native  place,  began
his  theological  course  under  his  pastor.  Dr.  Henry
A.  Muhlenberg,  in  1821,  and  in  1824  was  licensed
by  the  ministerlum  of  Pennsylvania  with  which
body  he  was  connected  until  his  death,  and  in  which
he  held  many posts  of honor  and  trust. He


RICUARDS


RICHARDS


239


waa  pastor  sucoeasively  of  chun-hos  in  Now  IIoN
land,  Trappo,  (Jcmiantown.  ttn<l  Ki-adinf;.  I'a.  Dur-
iug  his  pu>torHto  at  h^ntoii  hv  wa?*  prnfoswor  of
Uu'  Ciiriuan  lanKUB^i'  hikI  litfratun'  in  I><ifayette.
Ho  rtH-oivcii  the  degree  of  I).  I),  fmra  Jfffi>r»€»n
collfp',  I'a.,  in  1852.  Dr.  Richanls  wa.s  a  brilliant
pn^rhcr  and  a  forcibK*  writer.  His  publications
include  "Tho  Fniitful  KftrosiHH-t."  a  wrmon
proa<'h«><l  at  TrupiK*  at  tho  ftMitonary  n-lfbration
of  the  lavinir  of  the  eonier-stone  of  the  churc-h
(Pottstowli.  1*11,.  IH43),  and  "  Tho  Walk  aljoiit  Zion,"
a  sennon  deliven-d  at  the  cUmw  of  his  pastorate
(F^ton.  18.')!).  Anionf;  his  unpublished  manu-
scripts is  the  translation  of  a  larije  part  of  "  Hal-
le'sche  Nachrichten,"  a  work  publishiMl  in  two  vol-
umes (Halle,  1H87),  which  is  the  primary  source  of
American  Lutheran  history.— His  son.  MatthiaH
Henry,  derjjyman.  b.  in  Philadelnhia,  Pa,,  17
June.  1H41,  was  graduated  at  Pennsylvania  coUejje.
Gettysljurjf,  in  18(50,  and  at  the  theolofjical  .semi-
nary'there  in  1H«14,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  or-
dainfHl  to  the  ministry.  He  has  l)een  successively
tutor  at  Pennsylvania  collefje  in  18(Jl-'3,  jmstor  at
South  Flaston,  Pa.,  in  186+-'5,  and  at  (.ireenwich,
N,  J.,  in  18(i5-*8,  professor  of  the  Kn^ILsh  lanjfuafjf
and  literature  in  Muhlonl)er^  collece  in  1808-'73,
{lastor  at  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  in  1873-'0,  and  again
pn)fcssor  in  Muhlenl)erg  college  since  1876,  and
secretary  of  the  faculty.  He  has  delivered  a  large
nurabcr'of  kictures.  and  is  a  frequent  contributor
to  periodicals.  Since  1880  he  has  been  i^litor  of
'•church  Lesson-Leaves"  and  "Helper" (Philadel-
phia), and  since  1886  the  managing  editor  of  the
'•  Church  Messenger  "  at  Allentown.  Of  his  numer-
ous sermons,  addresses,  and  other  literary  produc-
tions that  have  appeared  in  the  various  peruxlicals
of  the  church,  only  three  i)oems  have  oeen  pub-
lished sejMiratelv  in  namphlet-forra,  and  "Church
Lesson  LeaHet  "' (Philmlelphia,  1887-8).

RICHARDS,  Maria  Tolman,  author,  b.  in
Dorchester,  Mass.,  8  Oct.,  1821.  Her  maiden  name
was  Tolman.  After  graduation  at  the  Female
seminary  in  Townsend,  Mass.,  she  married,  in  1842,
the  Kev!  Samuel  Richards,  who  held  pastorates  in
Edgartown,  Ma.s.s.,and  Providence.  K.  I.  For  seven
years  they  conducteti  in  the  latter  city  a  sch(x»l
for  girls,  which  was  closetl,  owing  to  the  impaire<l
health  of  Mr.  Richards.  His  death  occurred  in
1883.  Mrs.  Richards  has  been  identified  with  vari-
ous departments  of  philanthropic  and  missionary
work,  having  served  as  president  of  the  Rhcnle  Isl-
and branch  of  the  Woman's  I^ptist  home  mission
society  an«l  of  the  Rhode  Island  branch  of  the
Woman's  national  Indian  aid  association,  and  as  a
trustee  of  Hartshorn's  memorial  college,  Richmond,
Va.  She  has  given  courses  of  lectures  on  Knglish
and  biblical  literature  in  several  cities,  and  is  the
author  of  "  Life  in  Judea,  or  Glimpses  of  the  First
Christian  Age  "  (Philiulelphia,  1854),  and  "  Life  in
Isra.'l  "  (New  York,  1857).

RICHARDS,  Robert  Hallowell, metallurgist,
b.  in  Gardiner,  .Mc,  20  Aug.,  1844.  He  wasgradu-
ated  at  .Massachusetts  institute  of  technology  in
1868,  was  an  a.ssistant  there  until  1871,  when  he
was  chosen  to  the  chair  of  mineralogy,  and  now
holds  the  nrofes.sorshin  of  mining  and  metallurgy.
His  intrtMiuction  of  laboratory  methods  into  the
teaching  of  mining  and  metallurgy  has  Ijeen  the
great  work  of  his  life.  Prof.  Richards  has  in-
vented a  jet  aspirator  for  chemical  and  phys-
ical lalK)ratorics  (1874);  and  an  ore-separator  foi
the  I^ke  S«|>orior  copper-mills  (188;i).  During
1886  he  was  president  of  the  American  institute
of  mining  engineers,  and  he  is  a  member  of  va-
rious other  scientiflc  societies. He  has  devoted


his  attention  largely  to  improved  metallurgical
processes,  especially  in  copjier,  on  which  he  is  an
accepted  authority.  His  |>a|K>rs  on  that  subject
have  l)een  contributed  to  the  "Transactions  of  the
American  In.stituti*  of  Mining  Engineers,"  but  his
earlier  publications  tendtnl  more  to  chemistry  and
mineralogy  and  ap|K>ared  in  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  Scienw."— His  wife,  Ellen  Henrietta,
chemist,  b.  in  Dunstable,  Mass.,  H  Dec-.,  1842,  was
graduated  at  Vassar  in  1870,  and  at  M<issachu.sett«
institute  of  technology  in  1878.  .She  continued  at
tho  institute  as  resident  grailuate,  and  married
Prof.  Richards  in  1875.  In  1878  hhe  was  maile  in-
structor in  chemi.stry  and  mineralogy  in  the  Wom-
an's laborator)'  of  the  institute,  and  in  1885  she
became  instructor  in  sanitary  chemistry.  Mrs,
Richards  has  obtained  deserved  recognition  as  a
chemist  by  her  original  investigations  in  that
science.  Her  sfKH-'ial  work  has)M>en  that  of  educa-
tion, and  her  influence  in  developing  scientific  stud-
ies among  women  has  been  large.  The  applica-
tion of  cberaic^il  principles  and  knowledge  to  the
better  conduction  of  the  home  is  one  of  her  chosen
fields,  and  in  teaching  this  subjc-cl  to  wonien  she  is
prol>ably  the  pioneer  in  this  country.  Mrs.  Rich-
ards was  the  first  of  her  sex  to  Iw  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  institute  of  mining  enginwrs,
and  she  is  a  member  of  several  c)ther  sc-ientific
bcxlies.  In  addition  to  various  chemical  papers,  she
has  published  "  Chemistry  of  Cooking  anci  Clean-
ing (Bostcm,  1882);  "  F(KxI  Materials  and  their
Adulterations"  (1885);  "First  I.ies.sons  in  Miner-
als "  (1885) ;  and  with  Marion  Talbot  edited  "  Home
Sanitation  "(1887).

RICHARDS,  William,  mi.ssionar>-.  b.in  Plain-
field,  Ma.ss.,  22  Aug.,  175)2  ;  d.  in  Honolulu.  7  Dec.,

1847.  After  graduation  at  Williams  in  181U.  and
at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1822.  he  wa-s  or-
dained, and  on  19  N'ov..  1822.  embarked  as  a  mis-
sionary to  the  Sandwich  Islands.  In  18:W  he  be-
came councillor,  chaplain,  and  interpreter  to  the
king,  and  after  the  recognition  of  the  independence
of  the  islands  by  foreign  powers  was  sent  as  am-
bassador to  England,  and  to  other  courts.  On  his
return  to  Honolulu  in  1845  he  wa-s  appointed  minis-
ter of  public  instruction.

RICllARDS,  Sir William Baell,  Canadian
jurist, b. in Brockville,  Ont.,  2 May, 1815; d.
in  Ottawa,  Ont.,  26
Jan..  188!). He  en-
tered {iarliainent  in

1848,  and  became
a  member  of  the
executive  council
in  1851.  He  was
appointed  queen's
counsel  in  1850,
puisne  judge  of  the
court  of  common
pleas  of  Ontario  in
18551.  and  chief  jus-
tice of  that  court  in
1863.  Judge  Rich-
ards ))ecame  chief
justice  of  Ontario
in  1868,  arbitrator
for  that  province
in  thematter  of  the
north  western  l)oun-

dary  in  1H74.  and  chief  justice  of  the  sui>reme  court
of  Canada  in  1875.  He  was  deputy  to  the  govemor-
L'eneral  of  Canada  in  1870  and  in  187H.  was  kniirhted
m  1877,  and  received  the  confederation  medal  in
1885.— His  brother,  Albert  Norton,  Canadian  law-
yer, b.  in  BrockvUle,  Ont.  8  Dec,  1822,  after  re-


Jrv^/^^L^


240


RICHARDS


RICHARDSON


ceiving  his  education  at  the  district-school  of  Johns-
town, studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  tiie  bar  of
Upper  Canada  in  1848.  He  was  created  queen's
counsel  in  1803,  entered  parliament,  and  was  a
member  of  the  executive  council  of  Canada,  and
solicitor-general  for  Upper  Canada.  In  1803-'4  he
sat  in  the  Canada  assembly  as  a  representative  from
South  Leeds.  He  accompanied  William  McDougall
to  the  northwest  as  attorney-general  in  the  provis-
ional government  in  1809,  and  for  several  years
was  land  agent  of  the  Dominion  government  in
British  Columbia.  He  was  lieutenant-governor  of
that  province  from  1875  till  1881.

RICHARDS.  William  Carey,  author,  b.  in
London,  England,  24  Nov.,  1818.  His  father  re-
moved to  this  country  in  1831.  and  the  sou  was
graduated  at  Madison  university  in  1840.  He
then  went  to  the  south,  and  for  ten  years  was  en-

faged  in  educational  and  literary  work  in  Georgia,
n  1849  he  removed  to  Charleston,  S.  ('.,  where  he
resided  for  two  years.  During  his  life  in  the  south
he  edited  the  "  Orion  "  magazine  and  "  The  School-
fe'low."  In  1852  he  returned  to  the  north,  and  soon
afterward  entered  the  ministry.  In  1855  he  be-
came associate  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in
Providence,  R.  I.  From  1855  till  18C2  he  was
pastor  of  the  Brown  street  Baptist  church  in  the
same  city,  and  he  subsequently  ministered  to
churches  in  Pittsfleld,  Mass.,  in  1865-'9.  and  Chi-
cago, 111.,  1876-'7.  For  twentv-five  years  he  has
given  public  lectures  in  the  tJnited  States  and
Canada  on  the  popular  aspects  of  physical  science,
illustrated  by  an  extensive  apparatus.  He  has  re-
ceived the  honorary  degree  of  Ph.  D.  Prof.  Rich-
ards has  contributed  frequently  to  magazines,  and
is  the  author  of  several  college  and  anniversary
poems.  His  principal  works  are  "  Shakespeare  Cal-
endar "  (New  York,  1850) ;  "  Harrv's  Vacation,  or
Philosophy  at  Home  "  (1854) ;  "  Electron  "  (1858) ;
"Science  in  Song"  (1865);  "Great  in  Goodness,  a
Memoir  of  George  N.  Briggs,  Governor  of  Massa-
chusetts "  (Boston,  1866) ;  "  Baptist  Banquets  "
(Chicago,  1881);  "The  Lord  is  My  Shepherd"
(1884);  "The  Mountain  Anthem  "  (1885);  and  "Our
Father  in  Heaven  "  (Boston,  1886). — His  wife.  Cor-
nelia Holroyd  (Bradley),  author,  b.  in  Hudson,
N.  Y.,  1  Nov.,  1822,  after  graduation  at  New  Hamp-
ton literary  and  theological  institute,  married  Dr.
Richards  on  21  Sept.,  1841.  She  has  written  un-
der the  pen-name  of  "  Mrs.  Manners,"  and  is  the
author  oi  "  At  Home  and  Abroad,  or  How  to  Be-
have "  (New  York,  1853) ;  "  Pleasure  and  Profit,  or
Lessons  on  the  Lord's  Prayer  "  (1853) ;  "  Aspiration,
an  Autobiography  "  (1856) ;  "  Sedgemoor,  or  Home
Lessons "  (1857) ;  "  Hester  and  I,  or  Beware  of
Worldliness"(1860);  "Springs  of  Adion"  (1863);
and  "  Cousin  Alice,"  a  memoir  of  her  sister,  Alice
B.  Haven  (1871). — His  brother,  Thomas  Addison,
artist,  b.  in  London,  England,  3  Dec,  1820,  came
to  the  United  States  at  the  age  of  eleven,  and  from
1835  till  1845  resided  in  Georgia.  Thence  he  went
to  New  York,  where  for  the  next  two  years  he  was
a  pupil  at  the  National  academy.  He  was  elected
an  associate  of  the  academy  in  1848,  and  an  academi-
cian in  1851.  In  1852  he  became  its  correspond-
ing secretary,  which  post  he  still  (1888)  holds.  In
1858-'60  he  was  director  of  the  Cooper  union  school
of  design  for  women,  being  the  first  to  fill  the  office.
Since  1867  he  has  been  professor  of  art  in  the  Uni-
versity of  the  city  of  New  York,  which  gave  him
the  honorary  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1878.  He  has  re-
sided in  New  York  since  1845,  but  has  travelled
much,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  His  numerous
paintings  include  "Alastor,  or  the  Spirit  of  Sol-
itude," and  "  The  Indian's  Paradise — a  bream  of  the


Happy  Hunting  Ground  "  (1854) ;  "  Live  Oaks  of  the
South "  (1858) ;  "The  French  Broad  River,  N.  C."
(1859);  "Sunnyside"(1862);  "The  River  Rhine"
and  "Warwick  Castle  "(1869);  "Chatsworth,  Eng-
land" (1870);  "Lake  Thun,  Switzerland"  (1871);
"  Italian  Lake  Scene  "  (1873) ;  "  Lake  in  the  Adi-
rondacks"  (1875);  "  Lake  Winnipiseogee  "  (1876);
"Lake  Brienz,  Switzerland"  (1879);  and  "The
PMisto  River,  S.  C."  (1886).  He  is  also  well  known
as  an  author  and  illustrator  of  books,  and  has  pub-
lished "  The  American  Artist "  (Baltimore,  1838);
"Georgia  Illustrated"  (Augusta,  1842);  "The
Romance  of  American  Landscape"  (1854);  "Sum-
mer Stories  of  the  South  "  (Charleston,  S.  C,  1852) ;
and  "  Pictures  and  Painters"  (London,  1870).  For
most  of  these  he  furnished  both  text  and  illustra-
tions. He  was  also  engaged  on  Appletons'  "  Hand-
books of  Travel."

RICHARDS,  William  Trost,  artist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  14  Nov.,  1833.  He  had  some  in-
struction from  Paul  Weber,  and  in  1855  went
abroad,  remaining  about  a  year.  In  1867  he  visited
Paris,  and  in  1878  he  went  again  to  Europe.  Dur-
ing 1878-'80  he  had  a  studio  in  London,  and  ex-
hibited at  the  Royal  academy  and  the  Grosvenor
gallerv.  Mr.  Richards  has  had  his  studio  in  Phila-
delphia for  many  years,  and  is  an  associate  of  the
Pennsylvania  academy,  and  an  honorary  member
of  the  National  academy  and  the  American  water-
color  societv.  He  gained  a  medal  at  Philadelphia
in  1876,  and  the  Temple  silver  medal  in  1885.  In
his  earlier  years  he  was  a  pronounced  pre-Raphaelite,
and  all  of  his  paintings  show  a  masterly  treatment
of  detail.  Of  late  years  his  attention  has  been  es-
pecially directed  to  marine  painting.  Among  his
works  in  oil  are  "Tulip-Trees"  (1859);  "  Midsum-
mer" (1862);  "Woods  in  June"  (1864);  "Mid-
Ocean"  (1869);  "On  the  Wissahickon"  (1872);
"Sea  and  Sky"  (1875);  "Land's  End"  (1880);
"  Old  Ocean's  Gray  and  Melancholy  Waste  "  (1885) ;
and  "  February  "  and  "  A  Summer  Sea  "  (1887).  His
work  in  water-colors  has  become  widely  known,
and  includes  "Cedars  on  the  Sea-Shore "  (1873) ;
"Paradise,  Newport"  (1875);  "Sand- Hills,  Coast,
N.  J."  (1876);  "King  Arthur's  Castle,  Tintagel,
Cornwall"  (1879);  "Mullion  Gull  Rock,  Tintagel,
Cornwall"  (1882);  "The  Unresting  Sea"  (1884);
"Clififs  of  Moruch.  Land's  End"  (1885);  "A  Sum-
mer Afternoon  "  (1886) ;  and  "  Cliffs  of  St.  Colomb  "
and  "  A  Break  in  the  Storm  "  (1887).  In  the  Met-
ropolitan museum.  New  York,  there  are  forty-seven
of  his  landscape  and  marine  views  in  water-colors.
His  "  On  the  Coast  of  New  Jersey  "  is  in  the  Cor-
coran gallerv,  Washington.

RICHARDSON,  Albert  Deane,  journalist,  b.
in  Franklin,  Mass.,  6  Oct.,  1833;  d.  m  New  York
city,  2  Dec,  1869.  He  was  educated  at  the  district
school  of  his  native  village  and  at  Holliston  acad-
emy. At  eighteen  years  of  age  he  went  to  Pitts-
burg. Pa.,  where  he  formed  a  newspaper  connection,
wrote  a  farce  for  Barney  Williams,  and  appeared  a
few  times  on  the  stage.  In  1857  he  went  to  Kan-
sas, taking  an  active  part  in  the  political  stniggle
of  the  territory,  attending  anti-slavery  meeting,
making  speeches,  and  corresponding  about  the  is-
sues of  the  hour  with  the  Boston  "Journal."  He
was  also  secretary  of  the  territorial  legislature.
Two  years  later  he  went  to  Pike's  peak,  the  gold
fever  being  then  at  its  height,  in  company  with
Horace  Greeley,  between  whom  and  Richardson  a
lasting  friendship  was  formed.  In  the  autumn  of
1859  he  made  a  journey  through  the  southwestern
territories,  and  sent  accounts  of  his  wanderings  to
eastern  journals.  During  the  winteY  that  preceded
the  civil  war  he  volunteered  to  go  through  the  south


RICHARDSON


RICHARDSON


341


«s  secret  correspondent  of  the  "  Tribune,"  ami  re-
tume<l,  after  many  narrow  pwap<>«,  just  before  the
flrin>;  on  Sumter.  lie  next  entered  the  field  as  war
(•<irrr>|K>ndcnt,  and  for  two  yearn alt<'rnate«l  lietween
V'irfriitiu  and  the  southwetit,  being  pre.st»nt  at  many
battles.  On  the  nijjht  of  M  May.  18<W.  he  under-
took, in  company  with  Junius  Henri  Hrowne,  a
fellow-<.*orn'S|H)ndent  of  the  "  Tribune,"  and  Rich-
ard T.  Colburn,  of  the  New  York  "  World."  to  run
the  liatteries  of  Vicksburj;  on  two  barjjes,  which
wore  lashe<l  to  n  steam-tuf;.  After  they  had  'Mfn
under  flro  for  more  than  half  an  hour,  a  large  shell
struck  the  tug,  and,  bursting  in  the  furnace,  threw
the  coals  on  the  liarges  and  set  them  on  Are,  Out
of  :M  men,  18  were  killwl  or  wouiuletl  and  10  were
capturwl,  the  corresjwndents  among  them.  The
Confederate  government  would  neither  release  nor
exchange  the  "  Tribune  "  men,  who,  after  spending
€ighte«Mi  months  in  seven  southern  prisons,  escaped
from  Salisbury,  N.  C,  in  the  dead  of  winter,  and,
walking  400  miles,  arrived  within  the  National
lines  at  Strawberry  Plains,  Tenn.,  several  months
before  the  close  of  the  war.  They  hatl  hml  charge
of  the  hospitals  at  Salisbury,  when^  a  dremlful  mor-
tality prevailed,  and  brought  with  them  a  complete
list,  so  far  as  pn>curablc,  of  the  deaths  there,  which
they  printed  in  the  "  Tribune."  furnishing  the  only
information  that  kindred  and  friends  in  the  north
hatl  of  their  fate.  Richardson's  death  was  the  result
of  a  pistol-shot  flnnl  bv  Daniel  McF'arland  in  the
"  Tributie  "  office  on  20 "Nov.,  1809.  McP'ariand  ha<l
livcil  unhappily  with  his  wife,  who  hatl  obtainetl
a  tlivorce  and  was  engaged  to  marry  Mr.  Richard-
son. A  few  days  before  his  death  they  were  marrietl,
the  ceremony  being  performed  by  the  liev.  Henry
Ward  Beecher.  Richardson's  first  wife  had  died
while  he  was  in  prison.  The  last  four  years  of  his
life  were  passetl  in  lecturing,  travel. and  writing.  He
publisheti  "  The  Field,  the  Dungeon,  and  the  Es-
cape "  (Hartford,  1805);  "  Beyond  the  Mississippi "
(1800);  and  "A  Personal  ftistory  of  Ulysses  S.
Grant"  (1808),  all  of  which  sold  largely.  A  collection
of  his  mist^llaneous  writings,  with  a  memoir  by  his
widow.  Abby  Sage  Richardson,  was  printed  under
the  title  " Garnered  Sheaves"  (1871).— Mrs.  Rich-
ardson has  published  "  F'amiliar  Talks  on  English
Literature"  (Chicago,  1881),  and  several  compila-
tions, and  she  has  appeared  frequently  as  a  lecturer.

RICHARDSON,  Charles  Francis,  author,  b.
in  Ilallowell,  Mo.,  2\)  May,  1851.  He  was  gratluated
at  Dartmouth  in  1871,  and  was  editorially  con-
nected with  the  "  Imlependent "  in  New  York  city
in  1873-'8,  with  the  " Sunday-Sch(X)l  Times"  in
Philadelphia  in  1878-'80,  and  with  "Gotxl  Litera-
ture," New  York  city,  in  1880-'2.  Since  1882  he
has  been  professor  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  antl  English
language  and  literature  at  Dartmouth.  His  publi-
cations include  "  A  Primer  of  American  Litera-
ture "  (B«w«ton,  1870) ;  "  The  Cross."  a  volume  of
TOems  (Philatlelnhia,  1879);  "The  Choice  of
Books"  (New  YorK,  1881);  anil  "American  Litera-
ture "  (2  vols..  1887-'8).

RICHARDSON.  Edmund,  merchant,  b.  in
Caswell  county.  N.  C,  28  June,  1818;  d.  in  Jack-
son, Miss..  11  .hinc,  1880.  He  attendi><l  a  common
school  for  several  terms,  became  a  clerk  in  a  store
in  Danville,  Va.,  and  at  sixteen  years  of  age  settled
in  Jackson,  Miss.,  where  he  gradually  engaged  in
<'utloii-|iI(inting,  shipping,  and  manufacturing  to  a
largf  extent.  At  the  close  of  the  civil  war  he  was
bankrupt,  but  he  successfully  engagetl  in  business
again,  antl  became  the  largest  cotton-j)lanter  in  the
world.  His  fortime  wtus  estimatetl  at  from  $10,000.-
000  to  |12.<KKMMK).  and  he  was  the  owner  .if  forty
£otton-plant4itions  in  Louisiana.  He  was  chairman
VOL.  »■ — 16


of  the  board  of  management  of  the  New  Orleans
centennial  ex|N»sition  in  1884-'5,  and  gave  $25,000
toward  paving  its  oxixnises.

RICH.VKDSON,  Kdward,  mariner,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, .Mjiss.,  in  17MU;  d.  in  BrtKiklyn,  N.  Y.,  0  April,
1M70.  He  was  bretl  a  sailor,  and  for  manv  years
was  captain  of  a  line  of  |»acket  ships  that  pficd  be-
i  tween  New  York  and  Liverpool,  lie  organizetl  the
]  Marine  tem|)eranco  society  in  ISIJS,  and  livtnl  to
see  52.000  names  signtnl  to  its  pletlge.  He  retired
from  sea  servit-e  alniut  1837,  for  several  years  was
su|H'rintendent  of  the  New  York  city  seaman's
home,  and  was  a  vice-president  of  the  New  York
port  society.  At  the  age  of  seventy-three  he  organ-
ized the  Water  street  and  Dover  street  missions  for
sailors,  establishetl  tlav-  arul  Sunday-sch(K>ls  in  that
I  vicinity,  and  was  active  in  religious  meetings  for
j  seamen  and  the  residents  of  tht>se  strttets.  Much
of  his  latter  life  was  devotetl  to  the  welfare  of  the
I  pfK)r  of  New  York  and  Brtwiklvn.
I  RICHARDSON,  Henry  Hobson,  architect,  b.
in  Priestley's  I'oint,  St.  James  parish.  La.,  29
Sept..  18:J8";  .1.  in  Brookline,  Mass.,  28  April,  1880.
His  father,  Henry  D.  Richardst)n,  was  a  planter  of
American  birth,
but  his  earlier
ancestors  were
Scotchmen,  who
had  movetl  to
England  Ix^fore
I  the  family  came
to  this  country.
His  mother  was
Catherine  Caro-
line Priestley,  a
frantltlaughter  of
)r.  Joseph  Priest-
ley. He  was  at
first  intended  for
West  Point  and
the  army,  but  the  ^^

fleathof"hisfather  /d  tf^  10  '  P  ^,
changed  his  plans,  /\l.Ai  ■  J  UjCyfUl/^^Cd 671
and  he  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvartl  in  1869.  His  college  career  was
not  remarkable  for  proficiencyor  promise,  but  after
his  gratluation  he  went  to  Paris,  where  he  liegan
the  study  of  architecture,  and  at  once  develoi)ed
remarkable  jwwers  and  capacit  v  for  work.  The  lt)ss
of  his  pmperty  during  the  civil  war  t)bliged  him  to
serve  in  an  architect's  office  for  his  support  while
he  was  pursuing  his  studies.  In  1805  he  returned
to  this  country  and  l>ecame  a  partner  of  Charles  D.
(iambrill  in  the  firm  of  (iambrill  and  Richardson.
His  earliest  buildings  were  in  Springfield,  Mass.,
where  the  railroad  otlicesand  the  Agjiwam  Iwnk  at
once  gave  evidence  of  his  ()ower.  The  Church  of
the  L^iity  in  the  same  citv  is  a  Gt)thic  building,
and  quite  unlike  the  ecclesiastical  structures  t)f  his
later  years.  His  strongest  work  began  with  the
erection  of  Brattle  street  church  in  Boston  in
1871.  The  next  vear  he  presentetl  his  plans  for
Trinity  church,  t^oston  (shown  in  the  accom-
panying illustration),  for  which  he  was  chosen
to  lie  the  architect,  and  which  occujiietl  nmch  of
his  thought  and  time  till  it  w»is  finished  in  1877.  It
is  after  the  manner  of  the  church*^  of  Auvergne
in  France,  and  cets  its  character  fn)in  its  great
central  tower,  which.  \ro\\\  within  and  without,  is
the  feature  (»f  its  an-hitecture.  Before  he  had  done
with  Trinity,  Mr.  Richardson  was  alreatlv  at  work
uptm  the  Cheney  builtlings  at  Hartford.  Conn.,  and
not  much  later'on  the  Memorial  library  at  North
;  h^stt)n.  the  public  librar>-  at  Woburn.  and  the
I  state  capitol  at  Albany,  on  which  last  building  he


242


RICHARDSON


RICHARDSON


was  employed  for  many  years,  in  connection  with
LeojH)i(l  Eidlitz  and  Frederick  Law  Olmsted,  to
carry  forward  the  work  which  hatl  been  begun  by
others. These  buildings  and  others,  which  belong

to  the  same
period,  show
the  full  ripe-
ness of  nis
Eowers.  They
ave  the  qual-
ities that  be-
long to  all  his
future  work —
))readth  and
siinplicity.the

disposition  to

«-^ .k\  |ttp^^^|(Mp|iBk Z'  produce cf-
W  >!f  T '  ^JWLA(nSBm M.  feet  rather  by

the  power  of
great  mass
and  form  than
by  elabora-
tion of  detail,
the  free  use
of  conventional  types  and  models,  and  a  freshness
and  variety  that  sj)ring  from  sympathetic  feeling
of  the  meaning  and  necessities  of  each  new  struc-
ture. A  freely  treated  Romanesque  preponderates
in  all  his  style,  and  was  well  suited  to  his  own  exu-
berant but  solid  and  substantial  nature.  His  influ-
ence began  to  be  felt  very  soon  and  very  widely.
Without  any  efifort  or  desire  to  create  a  school,  he
drew  about  him  a  large  number  of  young  men,  on
whom  the  impress  that  he  made  was  very  strong.
After  he  came  from  New  York  to  Brookline,  in  the
neighborhood  of  Boston,  about  1875,  his  house  and
working-rooms  were  thronged  with  students  and
alive  with  work.  There  he  prepared  his  plans  for
Sever  Hall  and  Austin  Ilall  at  Harvard;  for  li-
braries at  Quincy,  Maiden,  and  Burlington ;  for
railroad-stations  along  the  Boston  and  Albany  and
other  roads;  for  the  cathedral  at  Albany,  which,
however,  was  not  given  to  him  to  build ;  for  the
Albany  city-hall ;  for  dwellings  in  Washington  and
Boston ;  for  the  two  great  buildings  that  he  left
unfinished  at  his  death,  the  Board  of  trade  in  Cin-
cinnati and  the  court-house  in  Pittsburg,  Pa. ;  for
great  warehouses  in  Boston  and  Chicago  ;  and  for
other  structures  of  many  sorts  throughout  the
land.  The  result  of  them  all  has  been  a  strengthen-
ing, widening,  and  ennobling  of  the  architecture
of  the  country  which  nmst  always  mark  an  epoch
in  its  history.  Mr.  Richardson  wjis  a  man  of  fas-
cinating intelligence  and  social  power.  He  died  in
the  midst  of  his  work,  although  his  last  ten  years
were  a  long,  brave,  cheerful  fight  with  feeble  health
and  constant  suffering.  His  life  has  been  written,
in  an  illustrated  quarto,  by  Mrs.  Schuyler  Van
Rensselaer  (Boston,  1888).

RICHARDSON,  Israel  Biish,  soldier,  b.  in
Fairfax,  Vt.,  26  Dec,  1815;  d.  in  Sharpsburg,  Md.,
3  Nov.,  1802.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1841.  entered  the  3d  infantry,  and
served  through  the  Florida  war.  He  became  1st
lieutenant  in  1846,  participated  in  the  principal
battles  of  the  Mexican  war,  and  received  the  bre-
vets of  captain  and  major  for  gallantry  at  Contreras,
Churubusco,  and  Chapultepec.  His  coolness  in  ac-
tion won  him  the  name  of  "  fighting  Dick  "  in  the
army.  He  became  captain  in  1851,  resigned  in
1855,  and  settled  on  a  farm  near  Pontiac,  Mich.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  apj)ointed
colonel  of  the  2d  Michigan  regiment,  and  when  he
reported  with  his  regiment  in  Washington.  D.  C„
Gen.  Winfield  Scott  greeted  him  with  "  I'm  glad


to  have  my 'Fighting  Dick 'with  me  again."  A
few  days  afterward  he  was  placed  at  the  liead  of  a
brigade  with  which  he  covered  the  retreat  of  the
army  at  Bull  Run,  his  commission  of  brigadier-

feneral  of  volunteers  dating  from  17  May,  1861.
le  commanded  a  division  of  Gen.  Edward  V.  Sum-
ner's corps  at  the  battle  of  the  Chickahominy,
where  he  acted  with  great  gallantry,  became  maio'r-
general  of  volunteers,  4  July,  1862,  was  engaged  at
the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  at  South  Mountain,
and  Antietam,  receiving  fatal  wounds  in  the  latter
fight.  He  was  a  lineal  descendant  of  Israel  Putnam.
RICHARDSON,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ded-
ham,  Mass.,  in  1817;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  10
Nov.,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1837,
and  during  his  course  aided  in  collecting  Thomas
Carlvle's  "  Miscellanies,"  which  were  published  un-
der Ralnh  Waldo  Emerson's  supervision  (Boston,
1836).  lie  afterward  became  a  clerk  of  a  county
court,  taught  in  New  Hampshire,  and  was  principal
of  a  school  near  Providence,  R.  I.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Harvard  divinity-school  in  1845,  ordained  in
Southington,  Conn.,  and  in  1847  became  pastor  of
the  Unitarian  society  in  Haverhill,  Mass.  He  took
charge  of  the  church  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in  1856,
but  was  compelled  by  the  failure  of  his  health  to
resign  in  1859,  and  returned  to  his  former  home  in
Dedham.  He  continued  to  preach  and  lecture  for
many  years,  and  constantly  contributed  to  the
press.  During  the  civil  war  his  services  were  given
to  the  hospitals  in  Washington,  D.  C.  He  pub-
lished several  discourses,  which  include  two  fare-
well sermons  at  Southington,  Conn.  (Boston,  1847).
RICHARDSON,  Sir  John,  Scottish  naturalist,
b.  in  Dumfries,  Scotland,  5  Nov.,  1787 ;  d.  near
Grasmere,  Scotland,  5  June,  1865.  He  studied  in
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Edin-
burgh, entered  the  navy  as  assistant  surgeon  in  1807,
and  was  at  the  taking  of  Copenhagen.  He  was
surgeon  and  naturalist  to  Sir  John  Franklin  in
his  arctic  expeditions  in  1819-'22  and  1825-'7,  and
in  the  latter,  with  one  detachment  of  the  party,  ex-
plored the  coast  east  of  Mackenzie  river  to  the  mouth
of  Coppermine  river.  He  commanded  one  of  the
three  expeditions  that  went  in  search  of  Sir  John
Franklin  in  1848,  and  returned  in  November,  1849.
He  retired  from  the  navy  in  1855.  His  most  im-
portant work  is  the  "  Farina  Boreali  Americana,"
in  which  he  was  assisted  by  William  Swainson  and
William  Kirby  (4  vols.,  London,  1829-'37).  He  also
is  the  author  of  the  "  Arctic  Searching  Expedition,
a  Journal  of  Boat  Voyage  through  Rupert's  Land  "
(2  vols.,  1851),  and  "The  Polar  Regions "  (Edin-
burgh, 1861).  See  his  "  Life  "  by  the  Rev.  John
Mcllraith  (1868).

RICHARDSON,  John,  Canadian  author,  b.
near  Niagara  Falls,  Ont.,  in  1797;  d.  in  the  United
States  absut  1863.  He  served  in  the  Canadian
militia  during  the  war  of  1812,  and  was  taken  pris-
oner at  the  battle  of  the  Thames,  After  his  libera-
tion he  entered  the  British  army,  and  served  in
Spain,  attaining  the  rank  of  major.  He  subse-
quently resided  for  several  years  in  Paris,  and  en-
gaged in  literary  work.  On  his  return  to  Canada,
III  1840,  he  established  at  Brockville,  Ont.,  "  The
New  Era,"  which  continued  two  years,  and  in  1843
he  began  to  publish  at  Kingston,  Ont.,  "  The  Na-
tive Canadian."  He  afterward  removed  to  the
United  States,  continued  his  literary  work,  and
wrote  for  the  press  till  his  death.  Though  he  was
a  prolific  writer,  he  does  not  rank  high  as  an  author.
His  novels  are  deficient  in  interest,  and  his  his-
tories are  inaccurate.  Among  other  works  he  pub-
lishetl  "  ftcArte,  or  the  Saloons  o(  Paris "  (New
York,  1832) ;  "  Wacousta,  or  the  Prophecy  "  (1833) ;


RICHARDSON


RICHARDSON


348


"  War  of  1H12  "  (1842):  "  Kijfht  Years  in  Canwla"
(1847);  "Matilda  Moiiigoiin.rie "  (1851):  "Wau-
mKn-g(>t>,  ur  the  MasMu-ro  of  ('hicu^i"(1802);  and
••  The  Kali  of  Chicap)  "  (1H.W).

RICHARDSON.  John  Frani.  educator,  h.  in
Vcnion,  Oiifida  c«...  N.  Y.,  7  Kol...  1808;  d.  in
Roihejitor.  N.  Y..  10  Feb..  1808.  On  his  gradua-
tion from  Miulison  univerxitv  in  \HiiH  he  wa»  made
tutor  and  then  professor  of  l^atin,  wliieh  plaee  he
held  till  IKW.  He  lu-eeptetl  in  that  year  the  same
chair  in  K<K'hester  university,  continuing  in  this
relation  until  his  death.  I'mfessor  Kichnrdson  l*e-
lieve«l  he  had  discovenMl  the  true  oronunciation  of
liatin,  as  spoken  by  the  ancient  Konians,  and  in
the  face  of  much  opixtsition  taught  it  to  his  pupils.
It  has  since  lnH-n  mlopttMl  by  many  of  the  foremost
e<lucators.  lie  published  "  Roman  UrthoPpy :  a
Plea  for  the  Restoration  of  the  True  System  of
liatin  Pronunciation  "  (New  York,  1859),  for  wliich
he  received  an  autogra{)h  letter  of  thanks  from
William  K.  (iladstone.

RICHARDSON,  John  Smythe,  jurist,  b.  in
Sumter  district,  S.  C,  11  April,  1777;  d.  in
Charleston.  S.  C,  8  May.  1850.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Charleston,  studied  law  under  John  J.
Pringle.  and  was  atlmiltiHl  to  the  Inir  in  1700.
While  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1810
he  was  the  author  of  the  general  suffrage  bill,
which  liecame  a  part  of  the  state  constitution,  was
speaker  of  the  house,  and  resigne<l  to  become  state
attorney-general.  He  was  appointed  law  judge  in
1818,  declined  the  nomination  of  the  Republican
party  for  congn>ss  in  1820,  and  in  1841  Ixxiame
president  of  the  law  court  of  appeals.  He  suc-
cectled  David  .lohnson  as  president  of  the  court  of
errors  in  184(5,  an<l  the  next  year  successfully  de-
fended himself  in  an  attempt  to  legislate  him  out  of
oflice  on  account  of  his  alleged  inability  to  ix>rform
his  judicial  duties. — His  son,  John  Siiiytne,  con-
gressman, b.  in  Sumter  district,  S.  C.,  29  Feb.,  1828,
was  graduate<l  at  the  College  of  South  Carolina  in
.  1850,  admitted  to  the  Sumter  bar  in  1852,  and,
while  practising  his  profession,  also  engagetl  in
planting.  He  served  in  the  (Confederate  army
throughout  the  civil  war.  attaine<l  the  nink  of  colo-
nel, and  was  a  meml)er  of  the  South  ('an>Iina  legis-
lature in  18(>5-'7,  of  the  Democratic  national  con-
vention in  1M7«5.  and  of  congress  in  1879-'83.

RICHARDSON,  Joseph,  clerg\'man,  b.  in  Bil-
lerica,  Mass.,  1  Feb.,  1778;  d.  in  Ilingham.  Ma.'w.,
25  Sept.,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1802,  and  ordained  p&stor  of  the  Unitarian
church  in  Ilingham  in  18045,  which  post  he  retained
until  his  death,  surviving  every  iiersijn  that  was  a
memlx'r  of  his  congregation  at  his  settlement.  At
his  death  he  was  the  oldest  native  citizen  of  Iling-
ham. He  served  in  the  Ma.ssachusetts  constitu-
tional convention  in  1820-'l,  in  the  lower  house  of
the  legislature  in  1821-';^,  and  in  the  state  s«'nate  in
1828,  1824,  an<l  1820.  He  became  a  memlx'r  of
congri»ssin  the  latter  year,  serve<l  by  re-election  till
18;J1,  and  was  succecditl  bv  John  (^uincy  Adams.
He  devote<l  his  sulist^uent  life  to  his  panx-hial  du-
ties, to  lecturing,  and  to  literary  work.  His  church
ediflce  is  said  to  be  the  oldest  in  the  United  States,
having  Ihhmi  built  in  1(181.

RKHARDSON.  Nathaniel  Smith,  clergy-
man. I».  in  Middlebury,  Conn..  8  Jan.,  1810;  d.  in
Bridge|Mirt.  Conn..  7  Aug.,  18S3.  He  wa.><graduate«l
at  Yale  in  IKM.  and  pursue<l  theological  studies  at
the  Kpis<'ojui|  general  th»H)logical  seminary,  but  was
not  graduateil.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in  Trinity
church,  Portland,  Conn..  8  July,  18:{8.  by  Bishop
Brownell,  and  priest  in  Christ  church.  Watertown,
Conn.,  in  1839,  by  tb«  same  bishop. He  was  assist-


ant minister  of  Christ  chun?h.  Watertown,  in
188H-'9.  and  its  rtM-tor  fn>m  1830  till  1845,  when
ho  accepte<l  a  call  to  Christ  church,  Ik-rby.  Conn.,
an<l  occu|ii»Hl  that  p(>8t  for  four  years.  In  1848  ho
removed  t<^>  New  Haven,  Conn.,  and  founde<i  tho
"  American  Church  iteview,"  of  which  he  was  editor
and  proprietor  for  twenty  years.  He  rtxMMved  the
degree  of  D.  D.  fnun  Itactne  college  in  1840.  He
lK><vame  n-f-tor  of  St.  Paul's  church,  BriflgeiKjrt,  in
18(58.  and  ialK)red  thereuntil  1«H1.  In  1H70  he  es-
talilisheil  a  new  we<>kly  |Hi|H>r  in  the  interi'sts  of  the
Prott-slant  Kpiscopal  church,  callwl  "The  (itianl-
ian."  which  hee»lite<l  until  his  death.  Dr.  Richard-
son's publications  include  "  Reasons  why  I  am
a  Churchman"  (Watertown,  1843);  "Historical
Sketch  of  Watertown,  Conn."  (New  Haven,  1845);
"Churchman's  Reastms  for  his  Faith  and  Practice"
(1840);  "  Rea.sons  why  I  am  not  a  Papist"  (1847);
and  "Sjxinsor's  (jift'^  (18.12;  new  ••d.,  18(57).  Ho
also  contributed  numerous  valuable  pafxTs  to  the
"  Church  Review."

RICHARDSON,  Richard,  patriot,  b.  near
Jamestown.  Va.,  in  1704;  d.  near  Salisbury,  S.C.,
in  September,  1780.  He  followed  the  profession  of
surveyor  in  Virginia,  but  in  1725  emigrated  to
South  Carolina,  an«l  settling  in  Sumter  district,
\vhich  was  then  calletl  "neutral  ground."  became
a  successful  fanner,  was  made  a  colonel  of  militia,
and  in  1775  was  electetl  fn»m  his  district  a  memlx-r
of  the  council  of  safety  of  Charleston.  He  was  in-
strumental in  the  same  year  in  quelling  a  danger-
ous revolt  among  the  loyalist  fX)pulation  of  what
was  known  as  the  "  back  country,'  for  which  he  re-
ceived the  thanks  of  the  Provincial  congress,  and
was  matle  brigadier-genend.  He  8erve<l  in  the
legislative  council  in  177(5,  and  in  the  Pnivincial
congress,  and  a.ssistotl  in  framing  th<T  constitution
of  South  Carolina.  He  8ubse<iuently  jwrticijMited
in  the  defence  of  Charleston,  was  made  a  prisoner
of  war  at  its  fall,  and  sent  to  St.  Augustine.  Lord
Cornwallis  made  fruitless  efforts  to  win  him  over
to  the  royalist  cause.  His  health  failing  from
confinement,  he  wa.s  sent  home,  but  died  soon
afterwanl.  Col.  Tarleton  subsequently  burne«l  his
house,  and  disinterred  his  body  to  verify  his  death.
— His  grands<in.  John  Peter,  statesman,  b.  at
Hickory  Hill,  Sumter  district,  S.  ('.,  14  April,  1801 ;
d.  in  F*ulton,  S.  C,  24  Jan.,  18(J4,  was  the  son  of
James,  who  was  governor  of  South  Carolina  in
1802-'4.  John  was  graduatinl  at  the  College  of
South  Carolina  in  1819,  admitted  to  the  Lwr  at
Fulton  in  1821.  and  extensively  engaged  in  plant-
ing. He  serve<l  in  the  legislature  in  1824-*3(5,
steadily  opposetl  nullification,  an«l  wa."*  an  active
member  of  the  Union  j)arty.  He  was  chosen  to
congress  as  a  Denux-rat  in  18:56  tosuccec<l  Richard
Manning,  served  till  March.  1K{9,  and  was  govenior
of  Stmth  Carolina  in  1840-'2.  He  then  returned
to  the  practice  of  his  profession,  in  which  he  con-
tinued until  his  death.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
southern  convention  in  1850.  president  of  the
Stuthern  rights  a.xsociation  in  1K51,  antl  a  memln-r
of  the  South  Carolina  c<in  vent  ion  in  18(50,  in  which
he  opiHised  secession.

RICHARDSON,  Williaui  Adams,  jurist,  b.  in
Tyngsborough.  Mass..  2  Nov.,  1821.  He  was  gratlu-
at'ed  at  Ilarvanl  in  184^1,  and  in  the  law  de|wrtment
there  in  184fi,  the  same  year  was  licensinl  to  prac-
tise, and  was  judge-a«lv(x-ate  and  governor's  aid  in
Mas!<ac-husi>tts.  He  was  president  of  the  common
council  of  liowell  in  185;i-'4.  of  the  Wames«>t  l>ank,
and  of  the  M«'chanics'  ass«x'iation. He  was  a|>-

fointed  to  revise  the  statutes  of  MassiwhuM'tts  in
855,  and  subse<iuently  chos^'ii  by  the  legislature  to
edit  the  annual  supplements  of  the  general  stat-


244


RICHARDSON


RICHEPANSE


utes,  which  he  continued  to  do  for  twenty-two
years.  He  became  judge  of  probate  in  1856,  and
was  jiul;;e  of  probate  and  insolvency  from  1858  till
1872.  He  declined  a  superior  court  judgeship  in
18(59,  and  the  same  year  became  assistant  secretary
of  the  U.  S.  treasury.  He  went  to  Europe  as  a
financial  agent  of  the  government  in  1871  to  ne-

fotiate  for  the  sale  of  the  funded  loan  of  the
Fnited  States,  and  made  the  first  contract  abroad
for  the  sale  of  the  bonds.  He  became  secretary
of  the  treasury  in  1873,  resigning  in  1874  to  accept
a  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  U.  S.  court  of  claims,  of
which  he  became  chief  justice  in  1885.  In  1863-'75
he  was  an  overseer  of  Harvard,  and  he  is  lecturer
and  professor  in  Georgetown  law-school,  D.  C.  Co-
lumbian university  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
in  1873.  His  publications  include  "  The  Banking
Laws  of  Massachusetts  "  (Lowell,  1855) ;  "  Supple-
ment to  the  General  Statutes  of  the  Commonwealth
of  Massachusetts,"  with  George  P.  Sanger  (Bos-
ton, 18(>0-'82) ;  "  Practical  Information  concerning
the  Debt  of  the  United  States  "  (Washington,  D.  C,
1872) ;  and  "  National  Banking  Ijaws  "  (1872) ;  and
he  prepared  and  edited  a  "  Supplement  to  the  Re-
vised Statutes  of  the  United  States"  (1881);  and
"Historv  of  the  Court  of  Claims"  (1882-'5).

RICHARDSON,  WiUiam  Alexander,  sena-
tor, b.  in  Fayette  county,  Ky..  11  Oct.,  1811 ;  d.  in
?uincy.  111.,  27  Dec,  1875.  He  was  educated  at
ransylvania  university,  came  to  the  bar  at  nine-
teen years  of  age,  and  settled  in  Illinois.  He  be-
came state  attorney  in  1835,  was  in  the  legislature
several  terms,  serving  as  its  speaker,  and  was  a
presidential  elector  on  the  Polk  and  Dallas  ticket
in  1844.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  captain  of  an
Illinois  company  in  1846,  and  was  promoted  major
for  gallantry  at  Buena  Vista.  He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1846,  served  in  1847-'56,
when  he  resigned,  and  in  1863  was  chosen  U.  S.
senator  to  fill  the  unexpired  terra  of  Stephen  A.
Douglas.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  New  York
Democratic  convention  in  1868,  but  after  that  date
retired  from  jpublic  life.

RICHARDSON,  WHliam  Merchant,  jurist,  b.
in  Pelham,  N.  H..  4  Jan.,  1774 ;  d.  in  Chester,  N.  H.,
8  March,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1797,  studied  law,  and  settled  in  Groton,  Mass.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist  in  1811,  and
served  one  year,  when  he  resigned  and  removed
to  Portsmouth.  He  was  at  once  appointed  chief
justice  of  New  Hampshire,  and  discharged  the
duties  of  that  ofiice  for  twenty-two  years.  He  was
a  jurist  of  great  industrv,  talent,  and  information,
and  was  highly  regarded  for  his  inflexible  integri-
ty. Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He
is  the  author  of  the  "New  Hampshire  Justice"
(Concord,  1824)  and  "The  Town  Officer"  (1824)
and  was  co-reporter  of  the  "  New  Hampshire  Supe-
rior Court  Cases,"  of  which  the  reports  of  several
volumes  are  his  alone  (11  vols.,  1819-'44).  See
his  "  Life,"  (Concord.  1839).

RICHE,  George  Inman,  educator,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 21  Jan.,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Philadelphia  high-school  in  1851,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia  in  1854.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  paymaster  of  U.  S.
volunteers,  and  in  1864-'7  he  was  a  member  of
the  common  council.  He  was  for  several  years
president  of  the  Republican  Invincibles,  apolitical
organization  in  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Riche  is  best
known  for  his  educational  work.  In  1867-'86  he
was  the  principal  of  the  Philadelphia  high-school.

RICHl^,  Jean  BaptiHte  (re-shay),  president  of
Hayti,  b.  in  Cape  Haytien  in  1780;  d.  in  Port  au
Prince,  28  Feb.,  1847! He  was  a  negro,  and  began


life  as  a  slave,  but  afterward  joined  the  army  of
the  insurrectionists,  and  took  part  in  the  struggle
for  indejxjndence  that  terminated  in  1808  after  the
surrender  of  Gen.  De  Rochaml)eau  {q.  v.)  to  the
English.  He  then  attached  himself  to  Henry
Christonhe,  who  promoted  him  general  in  1807,
and  made  him  his  lieutenant.  Riche  also  took  part
in  the  war  against  Alexandre  Petion  {q,  v.),  decided
the  success  of  the  battle  of  Siebert,  1  Jan.,  1807,
and  commanded  the  left  wing  of  the  army  under
Christophe  that  l)esieged  Port  au  Prince  in  1811.
By  his  readiness  in  executing  the  sanguinary  orders
of  Christophe  he  won  the  confidence  of  the  latter,
who  appointed  him  to  the  command  of  the  north-
ern provinces.  Here  he  followed  a  policy  of  ex-
termination against  the  mulattoes,  and  even,  to
please  Christophe,  murdered,  according  to  several
historians,  his  own  wife  and  children.  Notwith-
standing his  acknowledged  incapacity,  he  retained
his  command  under  the  following  administrations,
which  always  found  him  a  docile  instrument.  After
the  downfall  of  the  party  of  Riviere  Hcrard,  the
chiefs  of  the  oligarchic  faction  of  Boyer  (q.  v.)  es-
tablished a  system  of  government  which  continued
to  elect  to  the  presidency  an  old  negro  general,
noted  for  his  incapacity,  under  whose  name  they
could  rule,  but,  as  the  newly  elected  president,  Pier-
rot, showed  a  tendency  toward  reforming  the  abuses
of  the  administration,  they  organized  an  insurrec-
tion in  the  provinces  of  Port  au  Prince  and  Arbito-
nite,  and  proclaimed  Riche  president,  1  March,
1846.  Pierrot  endeavored  at  first  to  resist,  but  the
defection  of  his  army  compelled  him  to  make  his
submission,  24  March.  After  re-establisliing  the
constitution  of  1816,  Riche,  incited  by  the  foreign
population,  proposed  thoroughly  to  reform  the  ^-
ministration,  when,  on  returning  from  a  journey  of
inspection  in  the  department  of  the  north,  he  died
suddenly,  poisoned,  according  to  several  historians,
by  the  same  men  to  whom  he  owed  his  elevation.

RICHEL,  Nicolas  Antoine  (re-shel),  Haytian
naturalist,  b.  in  Jacmel  in  1745 ;  d.  in  Cape  Fran^ais
in  1799.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Acade-
my of  the  Philadelphes,  and  a  member  of  the
Scientific  society  of  Cape  Fran^ais,  and  the  privy
council  of  Gov.  Blancnelande.  He  also  tooK  an
active  part  in  the  troubles  in  Santo  Domingo  after
the  revolution  of  1789,  but  was  always  on  the  side
of  the  royal  authority.  At  the  arrival  of  the  com-
missioners of  the  Directory  he  raised  a  band  of  par-
tisans, and  once  nearly  succeeded  in  kidnapping
^^tienne  Polverel  {q.  v.),  but  was  taken  prisoner
afterward  and  transported  to  France,  where  he  was
kept  in  confinement  for  several  years.  Toward  the
close  of  1798  he  obtained  permission  to  return  to
his  country,  where  he  livea  in  retirement  till  his
death.  His  works  include  "  Histoire  et  description
de  rile  de  Saint  Domingue"  (1785) ;  "  Tableau  de  la
flore  de  Saint  Domingue  "  (6  vols.,  1785-'90);  and
"  Expose  de  la  theorie  d'acclimatation  dos  plantes
Europeennes  dans  les  lies  Antilles"  (1791).

RICHEPANSE,  Antoine (reesh-pahns),  French
soldier,  b.  in  Metz,  jJ6  March,  1770;  d.  in  Basse-
Terre,  Guadeloupe,  8  Sept.,  1803.  He  was  a  ser-
geant at  the  beginning  of  the  French  revolution,
and  soon  rose  by  his  valor  to  high  rank.  He
was  appointed  in  1802  captain  -  general  of  the
French  possessions  in  South  America,  and,  landing
in  Guadeloupe,  forced  the  entrance  of  Pointe  a
Pitre.  compelled  the  northern  provinces  to  make
their  submission,  and,  after  defeating  Magloire
Pelage  (q.  v.),  restored  the  exiled  governor.  La-
crosse {q.  v.).  After  suppressing  a  new  insurrec-
tion, and  compelling  the  rest  of  the  insurgents  to
make their submission at  Anglemont, ne  pre-


KICHKRY


RICHMOND


246


pared  to  pass  to  Santo  r>t)miii);c)  to  o<w>|)cnite  in
the  fomiuwt  of  the  iitland.  when  he  die^i  of  yellow
fever.  KifhejMiii.se  whm  held  in  high  esteein  by
NaiKileon,  who  pive  his  name  to  a  strtH't  in  i'ariti.

KICHKRY,  Joseph  de  (nvsh-nf),  French  na-
ral  oflhtT.  \>.  ill  Alons,  I'rovonre.  Vi  Sept.,  1757;
d.  then*.  21  Man-h,  I7W».  He  enlisted  an  a  cabin-
boy  in  I7U0,  iNi-anic  midshipman  in  1774, and  lieu-
tenant in  1778,  and  c<>-o[H>nited  in  the  c^ipture  of
Ncw|)ort  by  Count  d'K.staing,  taking  part  in  the
engagement  with  the  Knglish  fleet  >i.s  coinmantler
of  the  long  Ixmt.s  that  wen»  orderitl  to  destroy  the
flre-ships  at  the  entrance  of  the  l>ay.  He  servi'd
afterwanl  at  Siivannah  in  Octol)er,  1779,  was  pres-
ent at  the  capture  of  St.  Vincent  and  Grenada,  and
took  part  in  most  of  the  engagements  in  the  West
Indies  till  17H1,  when  he  wa-s  attached  to  the
squadrtm  of  Bailli  de  SufTreii,  and  scrvni  in  the
Indian  cx-ean  till  the  conclusion  of  jH'nce.  He  was
promotcil  captain  in  1798  and  rear-admiral  in  1795,
and  apjiointi'd  to  the  comnwmd  of  a  fleet  to  destroy
the  flsheries  of  Newfoundland.  Sailing  from  Tou-
lon, 14  Sept.,  1795,  with  five  ships  of  the  line  and
two  frigates,  he  attacked,  on  7  Oct.,  an  English  mer-
chant fleet  escorted  by  three  ships  of  the  line,  took
one  of  the  latter  and  cHptuRtl  tnirty  other  vessels,
which  ho  sold  at  Cadiz.  He  left  Cadiz,  2  Aug.,
179G,  and,  arriving  on  2H  Aug.  u|»on  the  great  bank
of  Newfoundland,  ruined  all  the  flsheries,  not  only
upon  the  coast  but  also  at  Saint  Pierre  and  Mique-
lon  island,  w^hilc  he  detached  Capt.  Georges  AUe-
mand  with  two  ships  and  one  frigate  to  destroy  the
fishing  stations  along  the  coast  of  Labrador.  In
fifteen  days  he  sank  or  captured  upward  of  100
vessels,  destroyed  the  settlements  in  Hull  bay,  and
■  when  he  left  for  France  the  fishing  industry  was
niine<I  in  Newfoundland  for  several  years.  He
arrived  safely  with  his  prizes  at  Rochefort  on  5
Nov.  in  time  to  take  part  in  the  expedition  to  Ire-
land. Declining  health  compelled  him  to  retire
from  active  service  in  1797.

RICUET,  Jules  C*»ar  (re-shay).  West  Indian
author,  b.  in  St.  Pierre,  Martinique,  in  1697;  d.
there  in  177(5.  He  was  for  manv  vears  civil  judge
of  the  tribunal  of  St.  Pierre.  Ills  works  include
"  Rssai  sur  I'art  de  la  culture  de  la  canne  k  sucre  "
(St.  Pierre,  174*i);  "  Recueil  de  jurisprudence,  k
i'usage  des  iles  du  vent"  (Paris,  1761);  "Traits
de  legislation  coloniale"  (2  vols.,  1766);  "  Memoire
sur  !e  cannellier  de  la  Martinique"  (1767);  "Ob-
servations sur  la  culture  du  cafe"  (1769);  and
"  Description  abregeede  la  Martinique  "(2  vols.,  St.
Pierre.  17?2).

RICHEY,  Matthew,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in
Ramelton.  Ireland.  25  May,  1803;  d.  in  Halifax,
Nova  Scotia,  24  Oct.,  188:3.  He  was  educated  in
Ireland,  and  afterward  ctime  to  Canada,  where  he
was  princi[)al  of  the  Methotiist  academy  at  ColK>urg
in  1H;j6-*9.  He  was  subsetjuently  stationetl  as  a
minister  of  the  Metho<list  church  at  various  places.
Mr.  Richey  wa-s  su[)erintendent  of  Meth<xlist  mis-
sions in  Cana4la  and  Huds<^)n  liay  in  1846-'7,  i)n»si-
dent  of  Canada  conference  in  1849,  and  president
of  the  conference  of  eastern  British  America  in
1856-'60.  He  was  eminent  as  a  puli)it  orator,  and
publishtnl  "  Memoir  of  Rev.  William  Hlack,  includ-
mg  an  Aw-ount  of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  Meth-
odism in  Nova  Scotia"  (Halifax,  1836).  and  a  vol-
ume of  sermons.  The  degree  of  I).  D.  was  con-
ferred urx>n  him  by  Wesleyan  university.  Conn.,  in
1847. — His  son.  Matthew  Henry,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  in  Windsor,  Nova  SMttia,  10  June.  1828,  was
educated  at  the  collegiate  school,  Windsor,  at
Upper  Canada  college,  Toronto,  and  at  (Queen's
university,  KingBton. He  studied  law,  was  ad-


mitte<l  to  the  bar  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1850,  Ijecamc

aueen's  counsel  in  18m3,  and  received  the  honorary
etrree  of  D.  (-.  L.  fn)m  Mount  Allison  Wmlevan
collego  in  1884.  He  was  a  member  of  the  bo-
minion  iiarliament  for  Halifax  from  1878  until  4
July,  1883,  when  he  was  ap|Mjinte«l  lieutenant-goT>
ernor  of  Nova  Scotia.  He  was  mayor  of  Ilamaz
in  1864-'7  and  l875-'8,  and  has  IxH'n  a  member  of
the  senate  of  the  university  «>f  that  <-itv.

RICHlNtJS,  Peter,  actor,  b.  in  lA.ndon,  Eng-
land, 19  May.  1797;  d.  in  Miilia,  Pa..  18  Jan..  1871.
His  full  name  was  Peter  Richings  Puget,  an«l  his
father  was  Vice- Admiral  Puget,  of  the  Hritish  navy.
The  son  was  educate<l  for  the  ministry  at  Pem-
broke college.  Ijater  he  became  successively  clerk
in  the  India  service  at  Madras,  a  lieutenant  in  the
Hritish  army.  an<l  a  student  of  law  in  Lincoln's
Inn.  None  of  these  pursuits  proving  congenial,  he
fiifunil  for  a  time  as  a  comedian  at  several  minor
theatres  in  the  British  provinces.  In  1821  he  came
to  this  countrv,  where  he  made  his  flrst  appearance
at  the  New  Vork  Park  theatre,  on  25  Sept.,  1821,
as  Harry  Bertram  in  Bishop's  o|M<ra  "Guy  Manner-
ing."  Here  he  remained  among  the  stock-comi)any
until  1839.  In  the  autumn  of  that  year  he  Ixx-ame
stage-manager  of  the  National  theatre,  Philadel-
phia. In  1843  he  was  lessee  of  the  Ilolliday  street
theatre,  Baltimore,  and  from  1845  until  1854  he
was  connected  with  the  Walnut  street  theatre,
Philadelphia,  both  as  stage-manager  and  manager.
From  that  time  onward,  for  about  eleven  years,
he  conducted  the  Richings  opera  trou[)e.  a  travel-
ling company,  apix^iring  on  frequent  oc*casions  as
an  ojx?ratic  artist.  At  the  close  of  this  venture  he
retired  permanently  to  a  fann.  Richings  was  one
of  the  time-honorwl  galaxy  of  the  old  Park  theatre,
and  in  romantic  plavs  and  mehxlramas  lx*came  a
general  favorite.  F'ops,  military  officers,  eccentric
characters,  and  stage-villains  were  efiually  well
represented  by  him.  but  he  had  no  holu  on  the  le-
gitimate drama.  His  voice  was  a  Imritone,  and
was  used  judiciously  on  many  occasions.  Dandini
in  "  Cinderella,"  Bepix)  in  "  Fra  Diavolo."  Pietro
in  '•  Ma.saniello,"  and  Olifour  in  "  Ija  Bayadere,"
were  rendered  by  him  with  remarkable  effecl. —
Caroline  Mary,  his  adopted  daughter,  came  to
this  country  from  England  in  her  infancy.  She
first  ap()eareil  in  public  as  a  pianist,  and  subse-
quently became  leading  soprano  of  the  Richings
English  opera  troupe.  In  1867  Miss  Richings
married  Pierre  Barnard,  and  retire<l  from  the  stage,
but  returned  in  18823.  Her  later  life  was  six>nt  at
Richmoinl.  Va..  where  she  died  in  1HH4.

RICHMOND,  Charles  (jordon  Lennox,  fourth
Duke  of,  governor-general  of  Cana<Ia,  b.  in  17W;
d.  in  Richmond,  Ijower  Canada,  28  Aug.,  1820.
His  father,  Lieut.-Gen.  Lord  George  Henry  I^en-
nox,  was  a  grandson  of  the  first  Duke  of  Richmond,
a  w)n  of  Charles  II.  and  the  Duchess  of  Portsmouth.
Charles  entered  the  army  in  his  youth,  and  in  1806
succetnltHl  to  the  dukedom  at  the  <leath  of  his  uncle.
In  1808  he  was  ap]Miinteil  lord  lieutenant  of  Ire-
land, where  his  administration  of  affairs  was  pro-
ductive of  the  happiest  results  in  quieting  the  pub-
lic discontent.  lie  succeede<l  Gen.  Sherbrooke  as
governor-general  of  Canada.  29  July.  1819,  and  ad-
ministere<l  its  government  till  his  death.  He  was
very  popular,  and  though  by  nature  conciliatory,
was  determine<l  and  energetic.  an»l  di«l  not  hesitate
to  draw  U5)on  the  fumls  in  the  hands  of  the  re-
ceiver-general when  the  legislature  n-ftiseil  to
grant  supplies  to  defray  the  civil  list.  While  mak-
ing a  tour  of  Canada  he  purchased  a  tame  fox,
which,  becoming  rabid,  bit  him  on  the  hand,  and
hydrophobia  resulted,  causing  his  death. In  IWSi


246


RICHMOND


RICKETTS


he  married  Charlotte,  dauchter  of  the  fourth  Duke
of  Gordon.  Charles  Gordon-Lennox,  the  present
Duke  of  Richmond,  is  his  grandson. — His  uncle,
Charles  Lennox,  third  Duke  of  Richmond  (1785-
1806).  was  appointed  in  1765  ambassador  to  France,
in  1766  was  constituted  chief  secretary  of  state,  and
in  1782  master-general  of  the  ordnance.  He  was
a  man  of  superior  talents,  a  friend  of  liberty  and
reform,  and  in  1778  proposed  to  recognize  tlie  in-
dependence of  the  revolted  American  colonies.

RICHMOND,  Dean,  capitalist,  b.  in  Rarnard,
Vt.,  31  March,  1804 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  27  Aug.,
1866.  His  ancestors  were  farmers,  living  in  and
about  Taunton,  Mass.,  but  his  father,  Hathaway,
removed  to  Vermont.  In  1812  the  family  removed
again  to  Salina,  N.  Y,  Business  reverses  overtook
the  elder  Richmond,  and  he  went  to  the  south  and
soon  afterward  died  in  Mobile.  At  the  age  of  fif-
teen years  Dean  entered  upon  the  business  of  manu-
facturing and  selling  salt  at  Salina  with  success.
Before  he  had  attained  his  majority  he  was  chosen
a  director  in  a  Syracuse  bank.  In  1842  he  estab-
lished himself  in  business  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  as  a
dealer  and  shipper  of  western  produce,  with  his
residence  at  Attica,  and  subsequently  at  Batavia.
He  won  a  reputation  for  upright  dealing  and  re-
sponsibility that  was  not  surpassed  by  any  resident
in  the  lake  region.  He  became  interested  in  rail-
ways, was  a  leader  in  the  movement  to  consolidate
the  seven  separate  corporations  that  subsequently
constituted  the  New  York  Central  railroad,  and
chiefly  by  his  personal  efforts  procured  the  passage
of  the  act  of  consolidation  by  the  legislature.  Upon
the  organization  of  the  company  in  1853  Mr.  Rich-
mond was  made  vice-president,  and  in  1864  he  was
chosen  president,  which  post  he  held  till  his  death.
Mr.  Richmond  diid  not  have  the  advantages  of  an
early  education,  but  his  extensive  and  careful  read-
ing in  later  years,  and  his  observation  of  men  and
things,  made  him  most  intelligent.  Early  in  life
he  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Democratic  party,  and
while  yet  a  boy  he  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  the
leaders  that  constituted  the  "Albany  regency."
He  became  the  leader  of  his  party  in  the  state  of
New  York,  and  for  several  years  he  was  chairman
of  the  Democratic  state  committee,  but  he  never
sought  nor  held  public  office.

RICHMOND,  James  Cook,  clergyman,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1808;  d.  in  Poughkeepsie,
N.  Y.,  20  July,  1866.  After  graduation  at  Har-
vard in  1828,  he  studied  in  Gottingen  and  Halle,
and  was  ordained  deacon  in  the  Protestant  Episco-
pal church  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  on  12  Oct.,  1832,
and  priest  on  13  Nov.,  1833.  In  1834-'5  he  served
as  a  missionary  in  Maine  and  Illinois,  subsequently
held  pastorates  in  various  cities,  and  succeeded  his
brother,  William,  as  rector  of  St.  James  church,
New  York,  remaining  till  1842.  While  he  was  in
Milwaukee  in  1861  he  became  chaplain  of  the  2d
Wisconsin  regiment.  He  travelled  extensively  in
Europe,  and  was  the  author  of  a  "  Visit  to  lona  in
1846  ;  "A  Midsummer  Day  Dream  " ;  and  "  Meta-
comet,"  the  first  canto  of  an  epic  poem. — His  elder
brother,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dighton,  Mass.,
11  Dec,  1797;  d.  in  New  York  city,  I'J  Sept.,  1858,
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1814,  was  ordained  in
the  Episcopal  church  and  held  various  pastorates
in  New  York  city. — William's  wife.  Sarah  Abigail
Adams,  b.  in  Maine  in  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
1  Jan.,  1866,  founded  the  House  of  mercy,  and  the
New  York  infant  asvlum.

RICHTER,  Henrv  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishon,  b.  in
Neuenkirchen,  Oldenburg,  Germany,  9  April,  1838.
He  came  to  this  country  in  1854,  was  educated  at
St.  Paul's  school  and  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,


'^^.^ii^SS-


Cincinnati,  and  in  1860  entered  the  American  col-
lege in  Rome,  being  graduated  at  the  Propaganda
as  D.  D.,  and  receiving  his  ordination  in  1865.  lie-
turning  to  Cincinnati  in  that  year,  he  was  made
vice-president  of  Mount  St.  Mary's  seminary,  where
he  was  professor  of  dogma,  philosophy,  and  litur-
gy until  1870.  He  founded  the  Church  of  St.  Lau-
rence, and  was  director  of  the  Academy  of  Mount
St.  Vincent.  On  the  establishment  of  the  diocese
of  Grand  Rapids  he  was  consecrated  its  first  bishop,
on  22  April,  1883,  which  diocese  contains  about  100
churches.  60  priests,  and  32  parish  schools.

RICKETTS,  James  Brewerton,  soldier,  b.  in
New  York  city,  21  June.  1817;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  22  Sept.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1839,  assigned  to  the
1st  artillery, "  and
served  during  the
Canada  border  dis-
turbances on  gar-
rison duty,  and  in
the  war  with  Mexi-
co, taking  part  in
the  battle  of  Mon-
terey, and  hold-
ing the  Rinconada
pass  during  the
battle  of  Buena
Vista.  He  had
been  made  1st  lieu-
tenant, 21  April,
1846,  became  cap-
tain on  3  Aug.,
1853,  and  served
in  Florida  against
the  Seminole  In-
dians, and  subsequently  on  frontier  duty  in  Texas.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  served  in  the
defence  of  Washington,  D.  C.»  commanded  a  bat-
ter}' in  the  capture  of  Alexandria,  Va.,  in  1861,  was
wounded  and  captured  at  Bull  Run  on  21  July,  and
on  that  day  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  and
made  brigadier-general  of  U.  S.  volunteers.  He  was
confined  as  a  prisoner  of  war,  and  afterward  was  on
sick  leave  of  absence  until  June,  1862,  when  he  en-
gaged in  operations  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  and
participated  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  the
northern  Virginia,  the  Maryland,  and  the  Rich-
mond campaigns,  fighting  in  all  the  chief  battles.
On  1  June,  1863,  he  became  major  of  the  1st  artil-
lery, and  he  received  the  brevet  of  colonel,  U.  S.
army,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services  at  Cc^d
Harbor,  Va,  3  June,  1864.  He  served  in  the  siege
of  Petersburg,  Va.,  in  that  year  in  the  defence  of
Maryland  against  Gen.  Jubal  Early's  raid,  and  in
the  Shenandoah  campaign,  receiving  the  brevet  of
major-general  of  volunteers  on  1  Aug.,  1864,  for
gallant  conduct  during  the  war,  particularly  in  the
battles  of  the  campaign  under  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant
and  Gen.  Philip  H.  Sheridan.  He  was  severely
wounded  at  Cedar  Creek,  Va,  19  Oct.,  1864,  and  was
on  sick-leave  from  that  date  until  7  April,  1865.  On
13  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,
U.  S.  array,  for  gallant  services  at  Cedar  Creek,  and
major-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  gallant  and  merito-
rious service  in  the  field.  On  28  Julv,  1865,  he  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  a  district  in  the  De-
partment of  Virginia,  which  post  he  held  until  30
April,  1866,  when  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  volun-
teer service.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel,
21st  infantry,  on  28  July,  1866,  but  declined  this
post.  He  was  retired  from  active  service  on  3  Jan.,
1867,  for  disability  from  wounds  recei^^ed  in  battle,
and  served  on  courts-martial  from  that  date  until
22  Jan.,  1869.


RICKOPF


RICORD


247


RICKOFF,  Andrew  Jarknon.  whuntor,  b.  In
MenuT  fomUy.  \.  .1..  2'.i  Au^..  1H24.  Aft«r  rooeiv-
iiij;  his  t'diu'Htion  in  VVtxxIwanl  colh'pt'.CincinnHti,
he  Uiiight,  and  has  l)Cfn  8ii|M>riiitt>n<hMit  <if  schools
In  Portsmouth.  Cincinnati,  and  (Mercland,  Ohio,
and  Yonkcrs.  N.  Y.  The  cn>dit  i«  awanled  him  of
reorpinizin^c  the  schools  l)oth  of  Cincinnati  and
CIevfliiM<l.  and  larp^ly  influencing;  the  school  sys-
tems in  Ohio.  The  nulical  chaufjes  that  he  car-
ried into  effect  in  organization  ami  methcMls.of  in-
struction have  been  widely  approved  by  adoption
throughout  the  north  and  west.  The  system  of
schools  in  Cleveland  was  commended,  by  the  Eng-
lish commissioners  to  the  International  exposition
in  Philadelpliia  in  1876,  as  sufierior  to  any  other  in
the  United  States.  At  this  exposition  Mr.  Rickoff
received  a  medal  as  the  designer  of  the  l)cst  plans
for  school-buildings.  In  their  report  to  the  gov-
ernment, the  French  commissioners  pronounce<l
these  buildings  the  \test  in  the  country.  Since
ISNH  Mr.  Rickoff  has  held  charge  of  Vv\'\x  Adler's
workingman's  school,  established  in  1880.  He  is
the  author  of  many  M-hool-books,  and  has  edited  a
series  of  six  readers,  which  are  extensively  used.

RICORI).  Jean  Baptiste  (ree-cor),  physician,  b.
in  Paris.  Fniiico,  in  1777 :  d.  in  the  island  of  Guade-
louiK'.  \V.  I.,  in  18;i7.  lie  was  e<lucated  in  France
and  in  Italy,  whither  his  father  hiwl  fled  during  the
French  revolution,  and  subsequently  accompanied
the  latter  to  this  country,  and  settleci  in  Baltimore,
Md.  After  graduation  at  the  New  York  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons  in  1810,  he  went  to  the
West  Indies  to  make  researches  in  botany  and  natu-
ral history,  and  travelled  and  practiseil  medicine
extensively  in  the  islands  until  he  returned  to  New
York,  lie  was  an  accomplished  scholar,  musician,
and  jMiintor,  an<l  a  member  of  various  learned  so-
cieties in  France  and  the  United  States.  Many  of
his  writings  were  signed  *•  Miuliana,"  the  name  of
his  homesteati  in  trance.  In  addition  to  contri-
butions to  scientific  and  other  journals.  Dr.  Ricord
published  "An  Improve<l  French  Grammar"  (New
York,  1812),  and  "Recherches  et  exneriences  sur
les  poissons  d'Amdrique,"  illustrated  by  his  own
pencil  (Bonleaux,  1826).  He  left  many  manu-
scripts, which  have  not  been  publishe<l. — llis  wife,
Elizabeth,  etlucator,  b.  in  New  Utrecht,  L.  I.,  2
April,  1788;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  10  Oct.,  1865,  was
the  daughter  of  Rev.  Peter  Stryker.  She  was  edu-
cated by  private  tutors,  nuirried  Dr.  Ricord  in
1810.  and  accompanied  him  in  his  exjieditions  to
the  West  Indies.  In  1829  she  opened  a  young
ladies'  seminary  in  Geneva  N.  Y.,  of  which  she
was  princijml  until  1842.  The  great  religious  re-
vival that  spri'ad  through  western  New  York  in
\KM  originated  in  her  seminary.  In  1845  she
ni^'tMl  to  Newark,  where  she  l)ecame  interested  in
v^rks  of  charity,  and  was  a  founder  of  the  Newark
orphan  asylum,  and  its  directress  until  her  death.
She  contributed  largely  to  magazines  and  journals,
was  the  author  of  "Philosophy  of  the  Mind"
((tencva,  1840),  and  "  Zamba,  or  the  Insurrection,
a  Dramatic  Poem"  (Cambridge,  Mass.,  1842),  and
left  several  manuscript.s. — Their  son.  Frederick
William,  author,  b.  in  Ouatleloupe,  W.  I.,  7  Oct.,
18H>.  was  educated  at  Hobart  and  Rutgers,-  and
studied  law  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  but  did  not  practise
his  profession.  lie  taught  for  twelve  years  in
Newark.  N.  .1.,  was  a  meml)er  of  the  board  of  etlu-
cation  of  that  city  from  1852  till  1869,  serving  as
president  in  lS(!7-'9.  He  was  state  su|>erintenm>nt
of  Dublic  schools  of  New  .Jersey  in  1860-":i.  sheriff
of  Kssex  county  in  1865-'7,  mayor  of  Newark  in
1870-'8,  and  associate  jud^  of  the  various  county
courts  of Kssex  county  in  1875-'9. He  is  now


(1888)  librarian  of  the  New  .lerwy  historical  soci-
ety. Judge  Ricfinl  rec«'ive«l  the  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Rutgers  in  1845  an<l  Princeton  in  1861.  He
is  one  of  the  e<litors  of  the  "  New  Jersey  Ar-
chives." and  has  publishe<l  a  "  Histftr^' of  Rome"
(New  York.  18,V2) :  "  The  Youth's  (iramiiiar  "  (1853);
"  Lifeof  Madame de  liongueville,"  from  the  French
of  Victor  Cousin  (18.54):  "The  Henria<le."  from
Voltaire  (18.59);  "English  Songs  fnmi  Foreign
Tongues"  (1H79);  and  "The  S«'lf-Tnnnentor.  from
the  Latin  of  Terentius,  with  nu>re  English  Songs"
(1885).  He  has  ready  for  publication  "The  Gov-
ernors of  New  Jersey."  which  gives  the  history  of
the  state  from  it-s  settlement  to  the  Revolution. —
Jean  Baptiste's  brother,  Alexander,  physician,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  175)8;  d.  in  Pans,  France.  8
Oct.,  187(5,  was  educated  in  his  native  city,  removed
to  France  in  order  to  study  under  Cuvier,  and  re-
ceived his  diploma  as  doctor  in  medicine  in  Paris
in  1824.  He  was  assistant  surgeon  in  the  French
navy,  and  correspondent  of  the  Academy  of  medi-
cine, but  devotea  his  life  chiefly  to  natural  history^,
received  the  decoration  of  the  Legion  of  honor  m
1845,  and  contributed  largely  to  scientific  journals.
— Another  brother  of  Jean  Baptiste.  Philippe,
French  surgwm.  b.  in  Baltimore.  Md..  10  Dec,  18(KJ;
d.  in  Paris,  France,  22  Oct..  1889,  was  the  grandson
of  a  distinguished  physician  of  Marseilles,  and  the
son  of  a  meml)er  of  the  Compagnie  des  Indes,
who  came  to  the  United  States  in  1790  in  the  hope
of  retrieving  his  fortunes.  After  pursuing  a  course
of  scientific  studies  with  his  brother,  Jean  B.
Ricord,  Philippe  began  the  study  of  me<licine  in
Philadelphia  In  1820  he  visited  Paris,  taking  with
him  a  collection  of  animals  and  plants  as  a  j»resent
to  the  National  museum.  In  March,  1826,  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  M.  D.,  and  Ix'gan  to  practise  at
Olivet,  near  (Orleans,  afterward  removing  to  CroQy-
sur-Ourcq.  In  1828  he  returned  to  Paris,  and  de-
livered a  course  of  lectures  on  surgery,  and  in  1881
he  was  appointed  sur^eon-in-chief  to  the  Hopital
des  veneriens  du  Midi.  At  this  hospital,  from
which  he  retired  on  account  of  age  in  18()0,  he
gained  a  great  reputation  as  a  s[)ecialist.  By  a  de-
cree bearing  date,  28  July,  1862,  he  was  ajipointed
physician  in  ordinary  to  l*rince  Najjoleon,  and  on
26  Oct.,  1869,  he  was"  named  consultmg  surgeon  to
Napoleon  III.,  whom  he  had  assiduously  attended
during  a  recent  illness,  and  who  in  return  had  pre-
sented him  with  a  snuff-l)ox  and  20.(XX)  francs.  He
was  promoted  commander  of  the  Lecion  of  honor,
12  Aug.,  1860,  and  grand  officer,  28  June,  1871,  for
services  as  president  of  the  ambulance  corps  during
the  siege  of  Paris.  He  also  receivwl  many  foreign
decorations.  Besides  writing  the  works  mentioned
lielow.  Dr.  Ricord  devised  and  first  i)erformed  many
surgical  operations,  several  of  wiiich  have  since
l)een  "  crowned  "  by  the  Academy  of  sciences.  Dr.
Riconl  in  his  eighty-ninth  year  was  still  engaged
in  the  practice  of  his  profession,  dailv  visiting
his  numerous  patients,  and  during  his  oftlce  hours
receiving  the  crowds  that  came  to  consult  him.
For  many  years  he  was  known  in  Paris  as  "the
great  American  doctor,"  and  he  ever  cherished
a  warm  affliction  for  his  native  land.  He  pub-
lished "  De  I'emploi  du  s|>eculum,"  treating  of  his
invention  of  the  "bivalvular  speculum"  (Paris,
1833) ;  "  De  la  blennorrhjigie  de  la  lemme  "  (1884);
"  Emploi  de  I'onguent  mercuriel  dans  le  traite-
ment  de  ren'>sii»ele "  (18;i6);  "  .Monographie  du
chancre,"  being  a  thorough  ex|)Ianalion  of  his
systenj  (18J37);  "Th<k)rie  sur  la  nature  et  le  traite-
ment  de  Tepididymite"  (1838);  "Traite  des  mala-
dies veneriennes"  (8  vols..  1888;  new  ed.,  1863);
"De  I'ophthalmie  blennorrhagique"  (1842);  "Cli-


248


RIDDELL


RIDDLEBERGER


nique  iconographique  de  I'hopital  des  v^n^riens"
(1843-'51) ;  "  De  la  syphilisation,  etc."  (1853) ;  "  Let-
tres  8ur  la  syphilis  '^  (1854 ;  3d  ed.,  1857) ;  and  a
great  number  of  •*  Memoires,"  "  Observations,"  •'  Re-
cherches."  "  Communications,"  etc.,  contributed
principally  to  the  "  Memoires  "  and  "  Bulletins  "  of
till'  Academy  of  medicine  (1834-'50).

RIDDELL,  John  Leonard,  physician,  b.  in
Leyden,  Mass.,  20  Feb.,  1807 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans.
La.,  7  Oct.,  1807.  He  was  graduated  at  Rensselaer
institute,  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1835  at  the  Medical
college  of  Cincinnati,  where  he  became  professor  of
botany  and  adjunct  professor  of  chemistry.  He
occupied  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  Louisiana  from  1836
till  1865.  Dr.  Riddell  was  melter  and  refiner  at
the  U.  S.  mint  in  New  Orleans,  the  inventor  of  a
binocular  microscope  and  magnifying-glass,  and
discovered  the  microscopical  characteristics  of  the
blood  and  black  vomit  in  yellow  fever.  He  first
brought  to  notice  the  botanical  genus  "  Riddellia,"
which  was  named  for  him.  He  contributed  to  the
"  London  Microscopical  Journal,"  the  "  American
Journal  of  Science  and  Arts,"  and  other  periodicals,
and  published  '*  SjTiopsis  of  the  Flora  of  the  West-
em  States"  (Cincinnati,  1835);  "Memoir  advo-
cating the  Organic  Nature  of  Miasm  and  Conta-
gion "  (1836) ;  "  A  Monograph  on  the  Silver  Dollar  "
(New  Orleans.  1845) ;  "  A  Memoir  on  the  Constitu-
tion of  Matter"  (1847) ;  and  a  "  Report  on  the  Epi-
•demic  of  1853  "  (1854).

RIDDLE,  Albert  Oallatin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mon-
son,  Mass.,  28  May,  1816,  His  father  removed  to
Geauga  county,  Ohio,  in  1817,  where  the  son  re-
ceived a  common-school  education,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.  practised  law,  and
was  prosecuting  attorney  from  1840  till  1846.  He
served  in  the  legislature  in  1848-'9,  and  called  the
first  Free-soil  convention  in  Ohio  in  1848.  In  1850
he  removed  to  Cleveland,  was  elected  prosecuting
attorney  in  1856,  defended  the  Oberlin  slave-res-
cuers in  1859,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Re-
publican, serving  from  4  July,  1861,  till  3  March,
1863.  He  made  speeches  then  in  favor  of  arming
slaves,  the  first  on  this  subject  that  were  delivered
in  congress,  and  others  on  emancipation  in  the  Dis-
trict of  Columbia  and  in  vindication  of  President
Lincoln.  In  October,  1863,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.
consul  at  Matanzas.  Since  1864  he  has  practised
law  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and,  under  a  retainer
of  the  state  department,  aided  in  the  prosecution  of
John  H.  Surratt  for  the  murder  of  President  Lin-
coln. In  1877  he  was  appointed  law-officer  to  the
District  of  Columbia,  which  office  he  now  (1888)
holds.  For  several  years,  from  its  organization,  he
had  charge  of  the  law  department  in  Howard  uni-
versity. Mr.  Riddle  is  the  author  of  "  Students  and
Lawyers,"  lectures  (Washington,  1873) ;  "  Bart
Ridgely,  a  Story  of  Northern  Ohio  "  (Boston,  1873) ;
"  The  Portrait,  a  Romance  of  Cuvahoga  Vallev  "
(1874) ;  "  Alice  Brand,  a  Tale  of  the  Capitol  "  (New
York,  1875) ;  "  Life,  Character,  and  Public  Ser-
vices of  James  A.  Garfield  "  (Cleveland,  1880) ;  "  The
House  of  Ross  "  (Boston,  1881) ;  "  Castle  Gregory  "
(Cleveland,  1882);  "Hart  and  his  Bear"  (Wash-
ington, 1883);  "The  Sugar-Makers  of  the  West
Woods  "  (Cleveland,  1885) ;  "  The  Hunter  of  the
Chagrin "  (1882) ;  "  Mark  Loan,  a  Tale  of  the
Western  Reserve"  (1883);  "Old  Newberry  and  the
Pioneers  "  (1884) ;  "  Speeches  and  Arguments "
(Washington,  1886);  and  "Life  of  Benjamin  F.
Wade  "  (Cleveland,  1886).

RIDDLE,  tieorge,  elocutionist,  b.  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  22  Sept.,  1853.  He  was  gra<luated  at
Harvard  in  1874,  made  his  first  appearance  as  a


reader  in  Boston  in  that  year,  and  in  1875  made
his  debut  as  an  actor  in  that  city,  playing  Romeo  '
after  which  he  became  connected  with  stock-com-
panies in  Boston,  Montreal,  and  Philadelphia.
From  1878  till  1881  he  was  instructor  in  elocution
at  Harvard.  He  appeared  as  CEdipus  in  the
"OEdipus  Tyrannus  of  Sophocles  at  Harvard
in  May,  1881,  which  was  the  first  production  in
this  country  of  a  Greek  play  in  the  original.  Mr.
Riddle  has  given  reatlings  in  the  principal  cities  of
the  United  States,  the  most  successful  of  which  are
Shakespeare's  "  Midsummer-Night's  Dream  "  with
Mendelssohn's  music,  Byron's  "  Manfred "  with
Schumann's  music,  and  the  "  GBdipus  Tyrannus  "■
with  the  music  of  John  K.  Paine.

RIDDLE,  George  Reade,  senator,  b.  in  New-
castle. Del.,  in  1817;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  2&
March,  1867.  He  was  educated  at  Delaware  col-
lege, studied  engineering,  and  engaged  in  locating-
and  constructing  railroads  and  canals  in  different
states.  He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1848,  and  was  deputy  attorney-general  of
Newcastle  county  till  1850.  In  1849  he  was  ap-
pointed a  commissioner  to  retrace  Mason  and  Dix-
on's line.  (See  Mason,  Chakles.)  He  was  elected
to  conp^ress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  1  Dec,
1851,  till  3  March,  1855,  and  was  afterward  chosen
U.  S.  senator  in  place  of  James  A.  Bayard,  serving
from  2  Feb.,  1864,  till  29  March,  1867.  Mr.  Riddle
was  a  delegate  to  the  Democratic  national  conven-
tions of  1844,  1848,  and  1856.

RIDDLE,  Matthew  Brown,  clergyman,  b.  in
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  17  Oct.,  1836.  He  was  graduated
at  Jefferson  college.  Pa.,  in  1852,  and  at  the  New
Brunswick  theological  seminary  in  1859,  after  which
he  studied  at  Heidelberg.  In  1861  he  was  chaplain
of  the  2d  New  Jersey  regiment,  and  in  1862-'^
he  was  pastor  successively  of  Dutch  Reformed
churches  in  Hoboken  and  Newark,  N.  J.  He
travelled  in  Europe  from  1869  till  1871,  and  in  the
latter  year  was  appointed  professor  of  New  Testa-
ment exegesis  in  the  theological  seminary  of  Hart-
ford, Conn.  In  1887  he  accepted  the  same  chair
in  Western  theological  seminary,  Alleghany,  Pa.
Franklin  and  Marshall  college,  Pa.,  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1870.  He  was  an  original  mem-
ber of  the  New  Testament  revision  committee
formed  in  1871,  translated  and  edited  the  epistles
to  the  Romans,  Galatians,  Ephesians,  and  Colos-
sians  in  the  American  edition  of  Lange's  "  Commen-
tary "  (New  York,  1869 ;  new  ed.,  1886) ;  contributed
to  Rev.  Dr.  Philip  Schaff's  "  Popular  Illustrated
Commentary  on  the  New  Testament "  (4  vols..  New
York  and  Edinburgh,  1878-'83),  and  to  his  "Inter-
national Revision  Commentary  "  (New  York,  1882) ;
edited  the  gospels  of  Mark  and  Luke  for  the  Amer-
ican edition  of  H.  A.  W.  Meyer's  "  Commentary  ""
(New  York,  1884) ;  revised  and  edited  Edward  Rob-
inson's "  Greek  Harmony  of  the  Gospels"  (Boston,^
1885),  and  Robinson's  "finglish  Harmony"  (1886)^
and  edit«d  parts  of  Bishop  Arthur  Cleveland  Coxe's
edition  of  tlie  "  Ante-Nicene  Fathers,"  contributing
the  "  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  "  and  the
"Second  Clement"  (Buffalo,  1886);  Augustine's
"  Harmony  of  the  Gospels  "  (New  York,  1888) ;  and
Chrvsostom's  "  Homilies  on  Matthew,"  in  "  Nicene
Fathers  "  (1888).  With  Rev.  John  E.  Todd,  D.  D.,
he  prepared  the  notes  on  the  International  Sunday-
school  lessons  for  the  Congregational  publishing
society  of  Boston  in  1877-81.

RIDDLEBERGER,  Harrison  Holt,  senator^
b.  in  Edinhurg,  Va.,  4  Oct.,  1844;  d.  in  Woodstock,.
Va.,  24  Jan.,  1890.  After  receiving*  a  common-
school  education  he  studied  at  home  under  a  tutor.
During  the  civil  war  he  served  for  three  years  in


RIDEINO


RIDGELEY


249


the  Confwlenito  army  iw  lieutenant  of  infnntrr  and
captain  <>f  cnvMlrv.  At  th«  ckwte  of  tlie  war  he
studit'd  law,  wivs  HtlnuttiHl  to  the  bar,  and  U-f^an  to
prartiso  at  \V<KMlst<K'k,  Va.,  wIktb  he  otintinmnl  to
reside.  liiii  flr^t  civil  olTlcc  was  lliat  of  common-
wealth's attornev  for  his  county,  which  he  held
for  two  terms,  lie  was  then  elec-ted  and  rp-electe<l
to  the  state  house  ot  delejrates.  servinjf  for  four
years.  an<l  .sul)se<|uentlv  sat  in  the  senate  of  Vir-
ginia for  the  same  imtuhI.  Since  1H70  he  t^lile<l
thri'c  local  news|m|>ers," The  Tenth  I^'fjion,**  "The
Shenandoah  IVmorrat,"and  "The  Virjjinian."  He
was  a  member  of  the  state  committee  of  the  Con-
servative i>artv  until  1875,  a  presidential  elector  on
the  Democratic  ticket  in  1876,  and  on  the  "  Read-
juster  "  ticket  in  1880.  He  was  commonwealth's
attorney  and  state  senator  when,  in  1881.  he  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Readjuster  in  the
place  of  John  W.  Johnstoti,  CoiiMTvative.  His
term  of  service  expired  on  3  March,  1881>.

RIDEING.  >VllUani  Henry,  author,  b.  in
Liverpool,  Knjfland,  17  Feb..  IK-W.  His  father  was
an  officer  in  the  service  of  the  Cunartl  line  of
steamers.  After  the  death  of  his  mother  the  son
went  to  Chicago,  111.,  where  he  remained  until
1870.  He  early  lx>pin  writing  for  the  press,  and
90tm  t)ecame  connecte<l  with  several  journals.  In
1874  ho  gave  up  new^sfMifRT  work  to  devote  himself
entirely  to  literature  and  magazine  writing.  He
ma^le  several  trips  to  Eurofw  and  elsewhere  with
different  artists  to  obtain  material  on  special  sub-
jects. In  1878  he  served  as  s|>ecial  correspondent
with  the  Wheeler  surveying  expe<lition  m  Colo-
rado, New  Mexico,  Nevada,  California,  and  Ari-
zona In  1881-'3  Mr.  Kideing  edited  "Dramatic
Notes"  in  London,  England.  On  his  return  he
again  entered  journalism  in  lioston,  where  he
still  remains  (1888).  Among  his  publications  are
"  Pacific  Railwavs  Illustrated  "  (New  York,  1878) ;
"A-Saddle  in  i\\e  Wild  West"  (London,  1879);
"  Stray  Moments  with  Thackerav "  (New  York,
1880) ;  •'  Boys  in  the  Mountains '"'  (1882) ;  "  Boys
Coastwise"  (1884);  "Thackeray's  London"  (Lon-
don, 1885);  "Young  Folks'  Historv  of  Ijondon"
(Boston,  1885):  "A  Little  Ui)st«rt'"  (1885);  and
"The  Bovhooil  of  Living  Authors"  (1887).

RlDEk,  (ileorge  Thonia.s  clergrman,  b.  in
Rice  City,  R.  I..  21  Feb.,  1829.  He  wa's  graduated
at  Trinity  in  1850,  studied  divinity,  and  took  orders
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  From  1853
till  1855  he  was  rector  of  St.  John's,  Canandaigiia,
N.  Y.,  and  from  185«  till  1860  of  St.  John's,  Pitts-
burg, Pa,  which  latter  church  edifice  was  built
under  his  supervision.  In  1800  he  removed  to
Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  where  he  conducted  the
Cottage  Ilill  seminary  for  young  ladies  till  1874.
He  has  since  devoted  his  time  to  literary  lal)or,
and  has  been  a  contributor  to  many  journals
and  periodicals.  At  present  (1888)  he  is  on  the
editorial  staff  of  the  New  Y^ork  "  Churchman."
Mr.  Rider  has  published  "  Plain  Music  for  the
Book  of  Common  Praver"  (New  York,  1854);
"  Lyra  Anglicana,  or  a  llvmnal  of  .Sacred  Poetry,
st'lectc«l  from  the  Best  F^nglish  Writers,  and  ar-
range^l  after  the  Onler  of  the  A|K)stle.s'  Creed";
and  "  Lyrii  Americana  or  Verses  of  Praise  and
Faith  from  American  Poets"  (1864).

RIIHfAWAY,  Henrj  Baitconi,  clergyman,  b.
in  Talljot  countv,  Md.,  7  .Sept.,  1830.  "  He  was
grailuaUnl  at  Dickinson  in  1849,  studied  theology,
and  was  onlaintnl  a  minister  of  the  Metho«list  Epis-
copal chun-li.  He  held  |>astorates  successively  in
Virginia  Baltimore,  Portland,  Me.,  New  York  city,
and  Cincinnati.  Ohio.  In  1882  he  i)ecame  professor
of  historical  theology  in  Garrett  biblical  institute.


Evanston,  111.,  and  in  1884  he  wan  transferred  to
the  chair  of  pra<'tical  theology.  He  was  fraternal
delegate  to  the  .Methodist  E|iis<-opal  chunh.  south,
in  1882,  and  was  one  of  the  regular  s|»eakerj»  in  the
Centennial  conference  at  Italtiniore  in  1881.  He  is
the  author  of  "The  Life  of  Alfr«'4lC<M>kman'*(New
York.  1871);  "The  I^.rd's  I^nd:  A  Narrative  of
Travels  in  Sinai  and  Palestine  in  1873t-'4  "  (1876) ;
"The  Life  of  Bishop  I-Mwanl  S.  Janea"  (18«2);
"Bishop  lieverlv  Waugh  "  (1883);  and  "Bishop
Mathew  .Simpson  "  (188.5).

RIIMiE.  MaJ<»r,  Chertikee  chief,  b.  in  Highwas-
se«>,  in  what  is  now  the  state  of  (Jeorgia  alxiut
1771 ;  d.  on  the  Cherokee  rewrvation,  22  .June,  1839.
F'rom  his  earlv  years  he  was  taught  patience  and
self-denial,  and  to  undergo  fatigue;  on  reaching
the  proper  age  he  was  initiated  as  one  of  the  warri-
ors of  tne  trilje  with  due  solemnities.  At  fourteen
he  joine<l  a  war-party  against  the  whites  at  Chees-
tovce.  and  afterward  another  that  attacked  Knox-
ville,  Tenn.  When  he  was  twenty-one  years  old  he
was  chosen  a  meml^er  of  the  Cherokee  council.  He
proved  a  valuable  counsellor,  and  at  the  second
session  proposed  many  useful  laws.  Subse<iuently
he  won  the  confidence  of  his  people,  and  itecame
one  of  the  chief  men  of  the  nation.  When  the
question  of  deporting  the  Cherokees  from  the  state
of  Georgia  to  a  reservation  west  of  Mississippi  was
mooted,  it  was  found  that  the  nation  was  divided
into  two  hostile  camps,  one  of  which  bitterly  op-
posed removal,  while  the  other  favore<l  it.  The
former  was  headed  by  John  Ros.s,  the  principal
chief,  while  the  other  was  represented  by  Major
Ridge,  his  son  John.  Elias  Ik>udinot,  Charles  Vann,
and  others.  Two  commissioners  on  the  part  of
the  United  States  held  several  meetings  with  Iwth
parties,  and  finally  made  a  treaty,  the  negotiations
extending  over  a  jxriod  of  three  years.  The  west-
ward journey  of  600  or  700  miles  was  j)erformed  in
four  or  five  months,  during  which  time,  on  account
of  the  intense  heat  and  other  discomforts,  over  4,000
Indians  |)erished.  In  June,  1839,  Major  Ridge,  his
son  John,  and  Elias  Boudinot  were  assassinated
by  members,  it  is  suppose<l,  of  the  jiarty  that  were
opix)sed  to  removal.  Major  Ridge  was  waylaid
aLK)ut  fifty  miles  from  his  home  and  shot. — His
son,  John,  Indian  chief,  was  the  second  of  five
children.  He  received  a  goo<l  education,  lieing  first
taught  hj  Moravian  missionaries,  then  at  an  acad-
emy at  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  and  finally  in  the  foreign
mission-school  in  Connecticut.  On  returning  home
he  began  his  career  as  a  public  man,  and  devoted  all
his  energies  to  endeavoring  to  organize  the  Cherokee
nation  into  an  inde|)endent  government.  Having
taken  an  active  part  in  negotiating  the  uniK)pular
treaty  at  New  fkihota,  bv  which  the  removal  of  his
nation  was  finally  agreed  u{)on,  he  was  taken  from
his  bed  in  the  early  morning  and  nearly  cut  to
pieces  with  knives.— John's  son,  John  K.,  journal-
ist, d.  in  Grass  Valley,  Nevada  co.,  Cal.,  5  Oct,,
1867,  was  a  writer  of  much  ability,  and  jwssessed
some  noetic  talent.  He  was  at  different  times  con-
nected with  several  California  journals.

RIUGKLEY.  Charles  (Joodnin,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Baltimore,  Md..  in  17S4 :  d.  there,  8  Feb.,  1848.
He  entered  the  navv  as  midshipman,  10  Oct.,  1799,
cruised  in  the  Mediterranean  with  Preble  in  the
Trii»olitan  war  in  1804-'5,  and  received  a  vote  of
thanks  and  sword  for  his  gallant  conduct.  He
was  commissione<I  lieutenant.  2  Feb.,  1807.  ser%*ed
on  the  lakes,  wa«  coinmissionetl  master-cH)mman-
dant.  24  Julv,  1813.  and  «-ommandetl  the  brig  "Jef-
ferson "on  l^ake  Ontario  in  1814.  and  the  "Erie"
and  "  Inde{)endence "  in  liainbridge's  squadron
during  and  after  the  Algerine  war  in  1815-'17. He


250


RIDGELY


RIDGWAY


was  miide  captain,  28  Feb.,  1815,  and  was  fla^-
ofTicer.  commanding  the  West  India  squadron,  in
1827- '30,  protecting  the  commerce  of  the  United
States  and  suppressing  piracy.  He  was  in  charge
of  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  from  1832  till  18;{9,
servetlas  flag-offlcer,  commanding  the  Brazil  squad-
ron from  1840  till  1842,  and  then  on  waiting  orders
until  his  death  in  1848.

RIDGELY,  Charles,  physician,  b.  in  Dover,
Del.,  20  Jan.,  1738;  d.  there,  25  Nov.,  1785.  He
was  educated  at  the  Philadelphia  academy,  studied
medicine  under  Dr.  Phineas  Bond,  and  began  to
practise  in  1758  at  Dover,  Del.,  where  he  passed
nis  life.  From  1765.  with  few  intervals,  till  his
death  he  was  a  member  of  the  Delaware  legisla-
tui;^.  He  was  presiding  judge  in  Kent  county  of
the  court  of  common  pleas,  and  before  the  Revolu-
tion of  tiie  quarter  sessions.  He  was  elected  a  dele-
gate to  the  State  constitutional  convention,  and
was  afterward  called  again  to  the  bench,  which  he
occupied  during  the  remainder  of  his  life. — His  son,
Nicholas,  jurist,  b.  in  Dover,  Del.,  30  Sept.,  1762;
d.  in  Georgetown,  Del.,  1  April,  1830,  stuuied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  his  native  state,  and
after  pnictising  several  years  became  successively
attorney-general  and  member  of  the  legislature.  In
1801  he  was  apjwinted  chancellor  of  the  state  of
Delaware,  and  held  that  office  for  twenty-nine
years  until  his  death,  that  event  occurring  while
the  court  over  which  he  presided  was  in  session.
— His  half-brother,  Henry  Moore,  senator,  b.  in
Dover,  Del.,  in  1778;  d.  there,  7  Aug.,  1847,  re-
ceived a  good  education,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise  at  Dover.
He  was  elected  and  re-elected  to  congress  as  a  Fed-
eralist, serving  from  4  Nov.,  1811,  till  2  March,
1815.  He  then  returned  to  Dover  and  continued
to  practise  his  profession  until  he  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  from  Delaware  in  place  of  Nicholas  Van
Dvke,  deceased.  He  held  the  seat  from  23  Jan.,
1827.  till  3  March,  1829,  when  he  retired  and  re-
sumed tlie  practice  of  his  profession.

RIUdrELY,  Charles,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.
6  Dec,  1762;  d.  at  Hampton,  his  estate,  Baltimore
CO.,  Md.,  17  July,  1829.  His  name  was  originally
Charles  Ridgely  Carnan,  but  he  was  adopted  by  his
uncle,  Cant.  Charles  Ridgely,  who  left  him  a  for-
tune at  his  death  in  1790,  on  condition  that  he
should  change  his  name.  He  served  in  the  state
senate,  and  was  chosen  governor  of  Maryland  three
times  successively,  in  1815-'17.  He  was  also  briga-
dier-general of  Maryland  militia.  Gov.  Ridgely
was  the  owner  of  about  400  slaves,  all  of  whom  he
manumitted  by  his  will.

RIDGELY,  Daniel  Boone,  naval  officer,  b.
near  Lexington,  Ky.,  1  Aug.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  5  May,  1868.  He  entered  the  navy  as
midshipman,  1  April,  1828,  and  was  commissioned
lieutenant,  10  Sent.,  1840.  During  the  Mexican
war  he  was  attached  to  the  sloop  "  Albany,"  and
participated  in  the  bombardment  and  capture  of
Vera  Cruz,  Tuspan,  Alvarado,  and  Tampico  in
1846-'9.  He  was  attached  to  the  naval  observa-
tory at  Washington  in  1850-"2,  cruised  in  the  sloop
"Germantown"  in  1854  in  the  West  Indies,  and
was  commissioned  commander,  14  Sept.,  1855.  In
1857-'8  he  commanded  the  steamer  "  Atalanta"  in
the  Paraguayan  expedition.  He  was  on  leave  when
the  civil  war"  began,  but  volunteered  for  active  ser-
vice promptly,  cofnmanded  the  steamer  "  Santiago
de Cuba"  in  the  West  Indies  during  the  early  part
of  the  contest,  from  1861  till  1863,  and  was  suc-
cessful in  capturing  blockade-runners.  He  was
commissioned  captain,  16  July,  1862.  In  1864-'5
he  commanded  the  steamer  "  Shenandoah  "  on  the


North  Atlantic  blockade,  and  assisted  in  both  at-
tacks on  Fort  Fisher.  In  the  year  1865  he  was
on  the  "  Powhatan  "  with  Admiral  Rodgers's  squad-
ron in  the  Pacific  ocean,  and  returned  in  com-
mand of  the  steamer  "  Lancaster  "  in  1867.  Capt.
Ilidgely  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  commodore,
25  July,  1866,  and  was  a  memlier  of  the  board  of
naval  examiners  at  Philadelphia  in  the  year  1867
and  at  the  time  of  his  death.

RIDGELY,  James  Lot^  author,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  27  Jan.,  1807 ;  d.  there,  16  Nov.,  1881.
He  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's  college,  Baltimore,
and  at  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  Emmettsburg,
Md.,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1828,
and  began  to  practise  in  his  native  city.  He  was
a  member  of  the  city  council  in  1834-'5,  of  the
state  house  of  delegates  in  \HS8,  and  of  the  Consti-
tutional conventions  of  1849  and  1864.  He  was  for
twelve  years  register  of  wills  for  lUltimore  county,
several  years  president  of  the  board  of  education,
and  aided  in  establishing  the  present  public-school
system  in  1848.  He  was  appointed  by  President
Lincoln  collector  of  internal  revenue,  and  for  many
years  was  president  of  a  fire-insurance  company.
He  became  an  Odd-Fellow  in  1829,  was  a  member
of  the  Grand  lodge  of  Maryland  in  1830.  and  of  the
Grand  lodge  of  the  United"  States  in  1831.  In  1836
he  was  elected  grand  sire  by  the  latter,  and  in  1842
he  became  grand  recording  and  corresponding  .sec-
retary. He  is  the  principal  author  of  the  various
rituals  that  are  now  in  use.  He  has  also  written
" Odd-Fellowship— What  is  Itt"  "The  Odd-Fel-
low's Pocket  Companion"  (Philadelphia,  1853);
and  many  other  works  of  a  similar  character.  He
was  the  editor  of  "  The  Covenant,"  the  official
magazine  of  the  order.

RIDGWAY,  Robert,  ornithologist,  b.  in  Mount
Carmel,  111.,  2  July,  1850.  He  was  educated  at
common  schools  in  his  native  town,  where  he
showed  a  special  fondness  for  natural  history.  A
correspondence  with  Spencer  F.  Baird  in  1864  led
to  his  appointment,  three  years  later,  as  naturalist
to  the  U.  S.  geological  exploration  of  the  40th
parallel,  under  Clarence  King.  Since  that  time  he
has  been  chiefly  occupied  in  government  work,  and
in  1879  he  was  appomted  curator  of  the  depart-
ment of  birds  in  the  U.  S.  national  museum,  which
place  he  now  (1888)  holds.  Mr.  Ridgway  received
the  degree  of  M.  S.  from  the  Indiana  state  univer-
sity in  1884,  and  has  been  vice-president  of  the  Or-
nithologists' imion  since  its  organization  in  1884.
He  is  also  corresponding  member  of  the  Zoological
society  of  London,  and  the  Academies  of  science
of  New  York,  Davenport,  and  Chicago,  foreign
member  of  the  British  ornithologists'  union,  and
member  of  the  permanent  ornithological  commit-
tee (Vienna),  also  honorary  member  of  the  Nuttall
ornithological  club  of  Cambridge,  Mass.,  the  Bnwk-
ville,  Ind.,  society  of  natural  history,  and  of  the
Ridgway  ornithological  club  of  Chicago,  111.  His
published  papers  exceed  200  in  number.  Many  of
them  have  appeared  in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the
U.  S.  National  Museum'"  and  are  descriptive  of
new  siMJcies  and  races  of  American  birds,  as  well  as
several  catalogues  of  North  American  and  other
birds  contained  in  the  museum.  He  was  joint
author  with  Spencer  F.  Baird  and  Thomas  M.
Brewer  of  "A  History  of  North  American  Birds"
(3  vols.,  Boston,  1874),  and  of  "The  Water  Birds  of
North  America"  (2  vols.,  1884),  in  which  he  wrote
the  technical  parts.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Report
on  Ornithology  of  the  Fortieth  Parallel "  (Washing-
ton, 1877) ;  "  A  Nomenclature  of  Colors  for  Natu-
ralists" (Boston,  1886);  and  "  Manftal  of  North
American  Birds"  (Philadelphia,  1887).


\


RIDPATII


RIBL


861


KIDPATII.  John  Clark.  o<lucator.  b.  in  Put-
iiHin  lounty.  Iml.. 20  A{>ril.  1H40.  His  |Hirpnt.4  wom
frnin  \V<'?<t  Virjfitiia,  hikI  U'^ti  lifu  iimltT  cirfuin-
KtuiK'o^  of  );n*at  (liscntirapniioiil  and  hanliiiitp.
The  son  had  no  early  edticatiotial  advantages  be*
sides  those  that  he  ulitaine<l  at  fronti«>r  schools,
but  hin  ap(H*tite  for  ImmiIcs  wa.s  insatinhle.  and  at
seventeen  he  wjw  a  teacher.  At  nineteen  lie  enteri'd
Asbury  (now  Dt!  I'atiw)  university,  where  he  wa>
ffraduatoil  with  the  hi|;hest  honors  of  his  elasx.
Before  jjra<liiation  he  hiul  Ufn  electe<l  to  an  in-
8tructor!*hii>  in  the  Thornlown,  Ind.,  a<'adeiny,  and
in  18414  he  was  made  Its  prineifml.  This  office  he
held  until  IKUT.  when  he  wasehos*'n  to  fill  thechair
of  lanfuageii  at  Itoker  universitv.  Baldwin  City,
Kan.  I)uring  the  same  periml  he  served  as  »u-
perinten<lent  of  the  Ijawrenceburg.  Ind.,  public
schools.  In  1WJ9  he  was  electe<l  pr«ifess<ir  of  Kng-
lisb  literature  in  Asbury  university,  and  two  years
later  he  was  assiijntHl  to  the  chair  of  U^Ues-lettres
and  historv  of  the  same  institution.  In  1879  he
was  electe«l  vice-president  of  the  universitv.  an<l  he
was  larjri'ly  the  originator  of  the  measures  by  which
that  institution  was  placed  under  the  patronage  of
Washington  C.  I)e  I'auw,  and  tof)k  his  name.  In
1880  he  received  the  degree  of  LI^  I),  from  the
University  of  Syracuse,  N.  Y.  He  has  published
"Academic  Historv  of  the  United  States  "(New
York,  1874-'r)) :  "  Popular  Historv  of  the  United
States  "  (18T«5) ;  "  Gram  mar-School  'History  "  (1877) :
"Inductive  (irammar  of  the  English  Ijanguage  "
(1878-'9);  "  Monograj)h  on  Alexander  Hamilton"
(1880);  "Life  and  Work  of  Garfield"  (1881-'2);
"  Life  of  James  G.  Blaine,"  and  a  "  History  of
Texas"  (1884);  and  a  "  A  Cyclopanlia  of  Universal
History  "(3  vols..  1880-'4).

RIKUESEU  Baron  Friedrlch  Adolph  (re-
deh-zcl),  (lerman  soldier,  b.  in  I>auterlmch,  Khine-
Hesse.  3  June,  17:i8  ;  d.  in  Brunswick.  G  Jan.,  1800.
His  father.  John  William,  was  government  a.ssessor
at  Eisenach,  and  his  mother,  Sophie  lle<lwig.  was  the
daughter  of  Baron  von  liorke,  a  Prussian  lieutenant-
general  and  governor  of  Stettin.  He  was  educated
at  the  law-school  of  Marburg,  but  while  attending
that  scho<il  l)ecame an  ensign  in  a  Hessian  Ixittalion
of  infantry  in  garrison  in  that  city,  which  so<m
afterward  was  ri»ceived  into  the  English  establish-
ment. He  servinl  as  general  aide  on  the  jwrsonal
staff  of  Prince  F'erdinantl  of  Brunswick  in  the
seven  years'  war,  and,  having  acquitted  himsi>lf
gallantly  in  the  execution  of  an  im|H>rtant  commis-
sion at  the  battle  of  Minden,  wasranidly  promoted.
He  lM>came  captain  of  the  Hessian  nussars  in  1700,
lieutenant-c'olonel  of  the  black  hussars  in  1702,
adjulant-getieml  of  the  Pnissian  army  in  1707,  and
colonel  of  carbineers  in  1772. .Soon  after  the  be-

S'nning  of  the  American  Revolution,  England
kving  hired  of  the  j>ettv  German  sovereigns  20,-
000  troon«,  of  which  4,0(iO  were  from  Brunswick,
Col.  Ricnesel  was  at  once  a<lvance<I  to  the  rank  of
major-general  and  given  the  command  of  the
Brunswickers.  On  his  arrival  at  (^ueljec,  I  June,
1770.  he  drille<l  his  men  to  meet  the  American
stvle  of  fighting,  exercising  them  on  snow-shoes  in
winter  and  making  them  fire  at'  long  range  and
from  behind  bushes  and  trees.  After  spending  a
year  in  Canada,  he  accompanied  Burgoyne  on  his
unfortunate  ex{)e<lition.  He  rendere<l  sfMnMal  ser-
vice at  thetakingof  Ticonderoga,  and,  by  bringing
up  re-enforcrements,  in  dis^iersing  the  Americans  at
Hubbardton :  and,  had  his  advice  b^'t-ii  fo||owe<l,
the  disastrous  raid  on  liennington  would  not  have
occurred.  At  the  liattle  of  19  Sept.,  1777.  he  alone,
by  bringing  up  his  Bninswickers  at  a  critical  mo-
ment, saved  the  English  army  from  a  complete


I  rout ;  and,  had  his  suggestions  been  carried  out
'  after  the  action  of  7  <K't.,  Burgoyne  would,  in  all
;  probability,  have  made  gixxl  his  n-treat  into  Can-
ada. He  was  made  prisoner  at  Saratoga  on  17
Oct..  exchanginl  in  1771),  and  in  November  of  tliat
year  re<-eiv»Ml  fn>m  Gen.  Clinton  a  crmimand  on
liong  Island,  with  lu'whiuarters  on  what  are  now
Brf>«>klyn  heights.  He  returne«l  to  Germany  in
the  summer  of  178:1,  was  advanctnl  to  the  rank
of  lieutenant-general  in  17H7,  and  ap[>ointed  to
the  command  of  the  Brunswick  contingi-nt  that
was  sent  into  Hollniid  to  supjMirt  the  cause  of  the
stadthotder.  In  1794  he  was  ap|ioint<'<l  comman-
dant of  the  city  of  Brunswick,  which  ofllce  he  held
until  his  death.  His  "  Memoirs,  Ix-tters,  and  Mili-
tary Journals,"  e<lited  bv  .Max  von  Eelking,  have
l»een  translate<l  bv  William  L.  .Stone  (2  v(>ls.,  Al-
liany.  IWW).  — Hi's  wife.  Frederira  Charlotte
liOiilsa,  b.  in  Brandenburg  in  1740;  d.  in  IkTiin,
29  March.  1808,  was  a  daughter  of  von  Massow,
coinmissary-in-chief  of  Frederick  11.,  and  married
Baron  Kii-desel,  after
a  romantic  courtship,
in  1702.  Shefolloweii
her  husltand  to  Can-
ada in  1777,  and  was
with  him  during  the
Burgovne  campaign,
and  wherever  he  was
afterward  stationed
in  this  country.  She
tenderlv  nursetl  Gen.
Simon  "Eraser  on  his
death-lxnl,  and.  while
the  British  army  were
besieged  by  Gen.  Ib)-
ratio  Gates,  minis-
teretl  to  the  sick  and
wounded  after  shar-
ing her  own  scanty
rations  with  the  half-
starvwl  sfjidiers  and
their  wives.  Her  let-
ters to  her  husband
Iwfore  joining  him  in
Canada,  and  to  her
mother  while  she  wils  in  this  country,  have  liecome
classic.  She  was  handsome,  and  ren«lered  herself
an  object  of  wonilcr  bv  riding  in  thick  Ijoots,  and
what  was  then  calle<l  "  t)ie  EurorH>an  fiLshion."  She
visited  s«ime  of  the  principal  families  near  Char-
lottesville, Va.,  being  always  a  welcome  guest.  Of
her  nine  children,  thnn;  were  living  in  18.">6.  Fred-
KRK'A,  the  second  daughter  of  Madame  Hie<lesel,
who  accom{)anie<l  her  in  her  wanderings  in  this
country,  became  one  of  the  most  distinguished
women  of  her  day.  She  marriwl  Count  Keden,
who  died  in  1854,  and  rt>side4l  at  Buchwald,  which
was  the  resort  of  manvcelebrat«Ml  men.  After  her
death  the  king  of  Prussia,  Frederick  William,
caused  a  l)eautiful  monument  to  lj«>  erected  to
her  memory.  She  left  one  daughter,  who  married
liaron  von  Hotenhan,  at  Keiitweinsdorf,  in  Ba-
varia, with  whom  this  branch  of  the  family  of  Uie-
desel  dies  out. Ma«lame HitHlesel's letters  were

r)ublishe<l  in  Ikrlin  in  1800.  and  adefe<-tive  F^ng-
ish  translation  in  New  York  in  1827.  -\  complete
translation  was  matle  by  William  L.Stone  with  the
title  "letters  and  Journals  relating  to  the  War  of
the  American  lb-volution  "  (.MImiiiv,  18(17).

RIEL,  LoiiIh,  Canadian  insurgent,  b.  in  St.
Boniface,  Manitol>a,  2^1  (M..  1H44  :  d.  in  Regina,
Northwest  territory.  10  Nov.,  188.5.  He  was  the
son  of  Lrmis  Riel,  a  |M>pular  lewler  of  the  Metis
race,  or  Franco-Indians  of  the  northwest,  who  in


%<^^iA


chjuL  <)c  yfUoiJujL


262


RIEL


RIGDON


1840  led  a  revolt  against  the  authority  of  the
Hudson  bay  company.  The  son  was  a  prot^g^  of
Archbishop  Tacht5,  and  after  completing  his  edu-
cation at  the  Jesuit  college  in  Montreal  he  re-
turned to  Red  river.  In  October,  1869,  he  became
secretary  of  the  "  Comity  national  des  Metis."  an
organization  formed  in  the  interests  of  the  native
people  to  resist  the  establishment  of  Canadian
authority  in  the  territories,  which  had  then  l)een
lately  acquired  from  the  Hudson  bay  company.
Riel,  on  behalf  of  the  half-breeds,  demanded  part
of  the  money  that  had  been  paid  by  Canada  to  the
company,  and  when  this  was  refused  he  opposed,
at  the  head  of  a  band  of  his  countrymen,  the  entry
of  William  McDougall,  the  first  lieutenant-gov-
ernor under  the  Dominion  government.  On  8  Dec.,
18(59,  he  was  elected  president  of  a  provisional
government  that  was  established  at  Fort  Garry,
after  his  followers  had  taken  possession  of  that
place,  and  captured  Dr.  John  Christian  Schultz
and  44  Canadians.  In  February,  1870,  Archbishop
Tache,  who  had  been  sent  for  from  Rome,  was
authorized  to  promise  Riel  and  his  followers  a
general  amnesty.  On  17  Feb.,  Kiel  captured  Maj.
Bolton  and  47  men,  and  on  4  March  one  of  his
prisoners,  Thomas  Scott,  an  Ontario  Orangeman,
was  executed  by  his  order.  On  the  approach  of  the
expeditionary  force  under  Sir  Garnet  (now  Lord)
Wolseley,  Riel  evacuated  Fort  Garry  and  escaped
from  the  country.  A  reward  of  $5,000  was  offered
by  the  Ontario  government  for  his  apprehension,
for  his  share  in  the  execution  of  Thomas  Scott.
He  soon  afterward  returned  to  Manitoba,  but  was
not  arrested,  and  in  October,  1873,  he  was  elected
to  the  Dominion  parliament  for  Provencher,  but
was  not  {jermitted  to  take  his  seat.  At  the  ensuing
election  in  January,  1874,  he  was  re-elected,  and
suddenly  appeared  in  Ottawa  and  signed  the  roll
of  membership,  after  which  he  disappeared.  He
was  expelled  from  parliament  on  IG  April,  but  was
again  returned  for  the  same  constituency  by  ac-
clamation on  3  Sept.,  1874.  On  15  Oct.  following
a  warrant  of  outlawry  was  issued  against  him  by
the  court  of  Queen's  bench  of  Manitoba,  and  in
February,  1875,  he  was  sentenced  to  five  years'
banishment  and  forfeiture  of  political  rights.  In
1877  he  was  confined  for  several  months  in  Beau-
fort lunatic  asylum,  Quebec,  under  an  assumed
name,  but  whether  this  was  owing  to  insanity,
or  fur  concealment  and  protection,  is  doubtful.
He  afterward  removed  to  Montana,  where,  in  the
summer  of  1884,  a  deputation  of  half-breeds  in-
vited him  to  lead  them  in  an  agitation  for  their
rights  in  Manitoba,  On  8  July,  1884,  Riel  arrived
at  Duck  Lake  with  his  family,  and  at  once  began
a  svsteraatic  agitation  among  the  half-breeds  and
Indians.  On  5  Sept.  he  stated  the  claims  of  his
followers,  which  were  not  granted,  and  in  March,
1885,  he  established  for  the  second  time  a  provisional
government  in  the  northwest.  On  the  18th  the
rebels  made  prisoners  of  the  Indian  agent  at  Duck
Lake  and  several  teamsters,  and  on  the  25th  they
seized  the  government  stores.  The  following  day
a  collision  occurred  between  the  insurgents  and  a
party  of  mounted  police  and  volunteers  under  the
command  of  Maj.  L.  N.  F.  Crozier,  in  which  the
former  were  successful.  After  the  arrival  of  Maj.-
Gen.  Frederick  D.  Middleton  with  Canadian  troops,
the  rebellion  was  speedily  suppressed.  Riel.  who
had  been  taken  prisoner  after  the  capture  of  Ba-
toche,  was  conveyed  to  Regina,  where  ne  was  tried
and  convicted  of  treason- felony,  and  sentenced  to
death.  The  execution  of  Riel  was  followed  by
great  public  excitement  in  the  province  of  Quebec,
and  the  government  was  bitterly  denounced  for


not  recommending  the  commutation  of  his  sen-
tence. It  also  led  to  a  serious,  though  only  tempo-
rary, defection  of  supporters  of  the  administration ;
but  finally  Riel's  French-Canadian  sympathizers
generally  recognized  the  justice  of  his  sentence,
and  admitted  that  his  mental  aberration  wai:  not
of  such  a  character  as  to  render  him  irresponsible.

RIWAUI),  Antolne,  Baron  (re-go).  French  sol-
dier, b.  in  Agen.  France,  14  May,  1758;  d.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  4  Sept.,  1820.  He  enlisted  in  early  life,
served  in  this  country  under  Rochambeau  during
the  Revolution,  was  promoted  a  colonel  in  1796,
and  major-general  in  1807,  and  created  baron,  19
March,  1808.  He  served  afterward  in  Spain  and
Germany,  and  at  Waterloo.  After  the  fall  of  Na-
poleon I.,  he  refused  to  make  his  submission  and
tried  to  incite  a  rebellion  in  l)ehalf  of  his  former
chief.  He  was  sentenced  to  death,  16  May,  1816.  but
escar)ed  to  the  United  States,  and  was  a  promoter
of  tne  Champ  d'Asile  in  Texas  that  was  founded
by  exiled  French  officers.  In  1828  he  removed  to
New  Orleans,  and  was  attached  to  the  U.  S.  en-
gineering department.  He  executed  some  works
m  Mississippi  river,  and  then  went  to  Mexico,  where
he  took  part  in  a  revolution.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  a  teacher  of  mathematics  in  New  Or-
leans. Napoleon,  in  his  "iVlemorial  de  Saint  Helene,"
names  him  "  the  martyr  of  glory,"  and  left  him  in
his  will  120,000.

RI6AUD,  Beuoit  Joseph  Andr£  (re-go),  Hay-
tian  soldier,  b.  in  Les  Caves,  Hayti,  in  1761 ;  d.
there  in  1811.  He  was  a  mulatto,  and  held  a  sub-
ordinate command  in  the  militia  of  the  colony  at
the  time  of  the  revolution  of  1789.  At  first  he
fought  against  the  French,  but  he  afterward  es-
poused their  cause,  was  made  a  brigadier-general,
and  in  1798  became  commander  against  the  British.
In  association  with  Alexandre  Petion  (o.  v.),  he  de-
feated Dessalines  at  Grand  Goave,  took  Jacmel,  and
defeated  Toussaint  L'Ouverture  near  that  place ;
but,  his  resources  being  exhausted  and  his  army
reduced  to  a  few  hundred  men,  he  abandoned  the
colony  in  August,  1800,  and  passed  to  France,
where  he  lived  in  retirement.  In  1810  he  landed
at  Port  au  Prince,  and  was  appointed  by  Petion
commander  of  the  Cayes;  but  he  had  scarcely  ar-
rived in  the  latter  place  when  he  proclaimetl  him-
self dictator  of  the  southern  counties.  Potion's
advisers  urged  an  expedition  against  the  rebel,  but
the  president,  being  afraid  of  the  popularity  and
military  talents  of  his  rival,  acknowledged  his  in-
dependence. Rigaud  died  a  few  months  later  after
thoroughly  organizing  the  administration  of  his
republic.  He  was  noteworthy  for  his  magnanimity
in  contrast  with  the  useless  cruelties  of  the  other
Havtian  chiefs.

RiGDON,  Sidney,  Mormon  elder,  b.  in  St.
Clair  township,  Alleghany  county.  Pa.,  19  Feb.,
1793 ;  d.  in  Friendship,  N.  Y.,  14  July,  1876.  He
worked  on  a  farm  till  1817,  and  after  some  expe-
rience as  a  printer  studied  for  the  ministry,  and
was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Baptist  church  on
1  April.  1819.  In  January,  1822,  he  becan)e  pastor
of  tne  first  church  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  where  he  la-
bored successfully.  Following  the  example  of  Alex-
ander Campbell  and  Walter  Scott,  he  withdrew  from
that  churcn  and  assisted  in  establishing  the  Disci-
ples, or  Campl)ell  denomination.  He  began  preach-
ing the  new  doctrine  in  Bainbridge,  Ohio,  in  1828,
and  a  year  later  went  to  Mentor,  where  he  was  very
successful.  In  the  autumn  of  18JiO  four  Mormon
elders.  Parley  P.  Pratt,  Ziba  Peterson,  Oliver  Cow-
dery,  and  Peter  Whitmer,  on  their  wav  U)  Missouri,
stopped  at  Mentor.  Mr.  Pratt,  whA  had  been  a
Baptist  clergyman,  obtained  permission  to  preach


RIOGS


RI008


203


in  Mr.  Uijr«lon'«  churfh,  ami  the  latter  liecame  In-
tfrt'stwi.  reml  |M^rtil>n^•  of  the  "  Iknik  of  Moniion,"
was  eon  vert  4h1  to  tiie  doctrine  of  the  I<atter-<Iay
.•giint.s,  and  Imptized  in  OctolHT,  IKM).  lie  at  once
btfwine  zealous,  and  in  Uwenilier,  IHJM).  met  JoM-ph
Smith  at  Fayette,  N.  Y.  It  has  U>en  chiimiMl  that,
through  Kiplon's  ajfcncy  (ami  tlien*  is  no  doubt  of
their  asxK-iation  in  the  »<chenu'|.  Smith  IxH-amc
jK)s.se,«>eil  of  a  copy  of  S)lomon  SiMiuldiiicV  manu-
script, which  he  read  from  iM-hinu  a  hlauKet  to  his
amanuensis,  Oliver  fowdery.  with  such  additions
•8  suitcfl  the  pur]N)ses(>f  Higdon  and  himself.  (See
SPAf  LUINO,  Soi^iNoN.)  Ki^don  transferred  to  Smith
as  many  of  his  f(»lIowers  as  he  could  inthienco,  and
the  two  men  were  thenceforth  partners  in  all  their
onterpris«»s,  even  to  the  practice  of  |H>lygamv,  and
both  claimtHl  to  have  received  revelati<»ns.  \Vhen
Smith  removed  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in  January,  IKil,
Uigdon  went  with  him,  and  was  his  most  efTlcient
prwicher.  Sul)senuently  they  preached  in  Hiram,
Ohio,  where,  on  tne  night  of  25  Marc-h,  18.'{2,  they
were  dniggwl  from  their  U>ds  by  a  mob  and  tarred
and  feathered.  They  n*turned  to  Kirtland,  and  a
year  later  a  church  hierarchy  was  estabiishtnl,  con-
sisting of  Smith,  Kigdon,  and  Frederick  (i.  Will-
iams, who  were  elected  presidents  and  styletl  "the
first  presidency."  They  established  a  mill  and  a
store,  and  set  up  a  "  wild-cat "  bank  without  a  char-
ter. Smith  ap[M>inting  himself  president  and  mak-
ing Kigdon  cashier.  The  neighlwring  ctiuntrj'  was
sof)n  flo<xUHl  with  notes  of  doubtful  value,  and,  in
consequence  of  this  and  other  business  transactions,
the  partners  were  accused  of  fraudident  dealing.
At  the  same  time  it  was  said  that  "a  revelation
from  the  Ijonl "  had  declared  that  the  sins  of  Kig-
don and  Williams  were  forgjven,  and  that  hence-
forth they  were  "to  lie  at^counted  as  efjual  with
Joseph  Smith,  Jr.,  in  holding  the  keys  of  His  last
kingdom."  In  18JJ8,  the  luink  having  failetl  in  No-
vemlwr,  ISJT,  Smith  and  Kigdon  fled  in  the  night
to  avoid  arrest,  pursued  by  their  creditors,  and
took  refuge  in  Missouri.  Ijarge  numlx>rs  of  Mor-
mr)ns  luul  pre<'e<led  them.  and.  having  lx?come  in-
volved in  quarrels  with  the  inhabitant^:,  had  been
driven  bv  mobs  from  place  to  place  until  thev  set-
tle<l  in  Oaldwell  county,  in  the  town  of  V&r  West.
Here  the  fugitives  joined  them,  and  Itigilon  liecame
noted  for  the  vigor  of  his  denunciations  against
the  p«»rsecut<^)rs  of  "  God's  chosen  {HMiple."  After
spending  some  time  in  jail,  having  iHM'n  arrested
by  the  state  authorities  on  charges  of  trea.son,  mur-
der, and  felony,  .Smith  and  Kigdon  were  found
guilty,  but  after  some  months'  imprisonment  were
allowed  to  esctiiio,  and  joine<i  the  Monnon  exodus
to  Illinois.  When  the  church  was  established  at
Nauvoo,  Kigdon  was  still  one  of  its  presidents.  In
the  course  of  his  connection  with  that  \ycn\\  he  hatl
been  twice  tarred  and  feathere<l.  and  several  times
imprisoned  for  his  alleged  consj)iracies  and  misde-
meanors. When  Joseph  and  ilyrum  Smith  were
shot  at  Tarthage,  III.,  27  June,  1844.  Kigdon  aspireil
to  the  leadership  of  the  sect,  but  the  twelve  apos-
tles preferred  Hrigham  Young.  Kigdon  n»fus»d  to
submit  to  his  authority,  and,  for  nis  contumacy,
was  dwlareil  to  Iw  "cutoff  from  the  communion
of  the  faithful,  and  delivcre<l  to  the  devil,  to  l)e
buffetisl  in  the  flesh  for  a  thousand  years."  Thus
cast  out,  he  left  the  town  of  Nauvoo  in  the  autumn
of  1M44  and  went  to  Pittsburg.  Pa.,  ami  thence  to
Friendship,  N.  Y.,  where  he  died  declaring  firm
belief  in  tlie  doctrines  and  truthfulness  of  the
"  Br>ok  of  Mormon."

RI<i!(*S.  Elian,  missionary,  b.  in  New  Provi-
denc<»,  I'liion  co..  N.  J.,  1J»  Nov.,  1810.  He  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  1829,  and  at  Andover


Ch-CyUtSL^ /c><^o-


theological  seminary  in  1882.  He  waa  a  mimion-
arv  at  Athens  and  Argos,  (irecce.  for  the  American
lM«rd.  from  1882  till  IKM,  and  in  Smvnia.  Aula
Minor,  from  1888  till  1853.  Since  the  latter  date
he  has  lalKtred  at
Constant  inojde.  He
visitwl  the  Unit«Ml
States  in  18.'HJ,ta>ight
Hebn-w  in  I'nion
theological  seminary
in  18.')7-'8,  and  was
invitetl  to  become
pnjfess«»r  there,  but
j)refern*d  to  return
to  his  foreign  field.
The  translation  of
the  S<Tijitures  into
theTurkish  language
wa.s  p]ace<l  in  1873
by  the  British  and
foreign  Bible  society
and  the  American
Bible  society  in  the

hands  of  a  commit-  y  ,

tee,  of  which  he  was  iA/

a  memlier.  As  a  result  of  its  lalKirs,  the  entire
Bible  was  published  in  both  Arabic  and  Armenian
characters  in  1878.  A  revision  was  made  by  a
larger  committee,  including  Dr.  Kiggs.  and  the
new  work  was  issued  in  1886.  Mr.  Kiggs  receive«l
the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  Hanover  college,  Ind.,  in
185:1.  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Amherst  in  1871.
He  is  the  author  of  "A  Manual  of  the  Chaldee
I^anguage,  etc."  (Andover,  18^12;  revised  ed..  New
York,  1858:  and  several  later  e<litions);  "The
Young  F'orester.  a  Brief  Memoir  of  the  Early
Life  of  the  Swedish  Missionary.  Fjelste<lt  "  (1840);
"  Translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  the  Modem  Ar-
menian I^anguage,"  completed  with  the  aid  of  na-
tive scholars  (Smyrna,  18.W ;  reprinte<l  in  many  e<ii-
t  ions  in  Constantinople  and  New  York) ; "  Grammat-
ical Notes  on  the  Bulgarian  Ijanguage  "  (Smynia,
1844);  "  Grammar  of  the  Mo<lern  Armenian  I^an-
guage,  with  a  Vocabulary"  (1847;  2d  e<i,.  Constan-
tinople, 1856);  "Grammar  of  the  Turkish  I^an-
guage  as  written  in  the  Armenian  Character";
"Translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  the  Bulgarian
Ijanguage"  (1871 ;  .several  editions,  Constantinople
and  Vienna);  "Suggested  Emendations  of  the  Au-
thorized F^nglish  Version  of  the  Old  Testament"
(Andover.  1878);  "A  Harmony  of  the  Gos|>els  in
Bulgarian"  (Constantinople.  1880);  "Suggested
Mo<lification8  of  the  Revise<l  Version  of  the  New
Testament "  (Andover,  1883) ;  "A  Bible  Dictionarj-,"
in  Bulgarian  (Constantinople,  1884);  and  minor
publications,  including  tracts,  hymns,  and  collec-
tions of  hvmns.  in  (in'ck.  Armenian,  and  Bulgarian.
KI(f<>}4,  (jeorge  Washington,  luinker,  b.  in
Georgetown,  I).  ('..  4  July.  1S18;  d.  at  (Jrei'n  Hill,
Prince  (tcorge's  co.,  Md.,  near  Washington.  24
Aug.,  1881,  He  was  e<lucate«l  at  Yale,  and  in  1836,
with  William  W.  Corcoran,  forme«l  the  banking-
house  of  Corcoran  and  Kitrgs,  which  accjuired  a
naticmal  fame  during  the  Mexican  war  by  taking
up  the  entire  loan  that  was  called  for  bv  the  gov-
ernment in  1847  and  1848.  This  prove<l  a  profita-
ble transaction  from  the  large  commission  that  wju?
receivwl  and  indire«-tly  bv  bringing  the  firm  into
gn^at  publicity.  When  Mr.  Corcoran  retired  from
business  Mr.  Kiggs  fornuHl  the  present  firm  of
Kiggs  and  Co.  lie  also  entere<I  largely  into  the
purchase  of  real  estate  in  Washington  and  other
{larts  of  the  District  of  Columbia.  Mr.  Kiggs  toolc
a  great  interest  in  the  management  of  the  affairs
of  the  District,  and  in  187:{  he  acte<l  as  chairman  of


254


RIOGS


RILEY


the  committee  that  presented  a  petition  to  congress
asking  for  an  investigation  into  the  conduct  of  the
board  of  public  worl<s.  The  result  of  the  investiga-
tion was  that  the  congressional  committee  reported
in  favor  of  alnjlishing  the  existing  territorial  gov-
ernment, and  a  new  system  was  inaugurated,  which
vesttnl  all  authority  in  congress  itself,  Mr.  Kiggs
possessed  literary  and  artistic  taste,  and  collected  a
library  of  valuable  books  and  many  works  of  art.

RUiiGS,  Stephen  Return,  missionary,  b.  in
Steubenville,  Ohio,  23  March,  1812:  d.  iii  Beloit.
Wis.,  24  Aug.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Jeffer-
son college,  Pa.,  in  1834,  and  after  spending  a  year
in  Western  theological  seminary  at  Allegheny,  Pa.,
was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  t'hilli-
cothe.  Having  been  sent  out  as  a  missionary  by
the  American  board,  he  proceeded  to  Ijake  Harriet
mission,  near  Fort  Snelling  in  1837.  Here  he
spent  several  months  in  studying  the  Dakota
language,  and  subsequently  joined  the  mission  at
Lac-qui-parle,  where,  in  1839,  he  entertained  John
C.  Fremont  and  Jean  Nicollet  (q.  v.).  In  1843  he
opened  a  new  mission  station  at  1  ra verse  des  Sioux,
and  was  in  charge  of  it  until  December,  1846,  when
he  returned  to  Ijac-qui-parle,  and  remained  there
until  1854.  In  that  year  he  removed  to  Hazelwood
station,  near  the  mouth  of  Yellow  Medicine  river,
and  built  a  boarding-school  for  Dakota  children.
Here,  assisted  after  1858  by  his  son,  Alfred,  he
labored  until  the  summer  of  1862,  when  his  work
was  interrupted  by  the  Indian  insurrection  of  that
year.  (See  Little  Crow.)  Mr.  Riggs  and  his  family
left  their  home  on  19  Aug.,  and,  after  travelling  sev-
eral days  and  after  many  hair-breadth  escapes,  suc-
ceeded in  reaching  a  place  of  safety.  Hastening
to  St.  Paul,  Dr.  Riggs  offered  his  services  to  Gov.
Ramsey,  of  Minnesota,  who  commissioned  him
chaplain  of  the  military  expedition  that  was  sent
out  to  protect  the  frontier  and  punish  the  hostile
Indians.  After  the  campaign  closed,  Dr.  Riggs
employed  his  summers  m  visiting  mission  sta-
tions, and  his  winters  in  completing  the  transla-
tion of  the  Bible  into  the  Dakota  language,  which
was  published  before  his  death.  Nearly  fifty  books,
consisting  of  translations  and  original  writings  in
connection  with  Dakota  history,  customs  and  lan-
guage, represent  the  literary  work  of  his  lifetime.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Beloit  college
in  1873  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Jefferson.  He
also  wrote  "  The  Dakota  First  Reading- Book."  with
Gideon  H.  Pond  (Cincinnati,  1839) ;  "  Wowapi
Mitawi,  Tamakece  Kiigu :  JNIy  Own  Book "  (Bos-
ton, 1842) ;  "  Dakota  Tawoonspe,  or  Dakota  Les-
sons "  (Louisville,  1850) ;  and  "  Dakota  Vocabulary  "
(New  York,  1852) ;  and  edited  "  A  Grammar  and
Dictionary  of  the  Dakota  Language,  collected  by
the  Members  of  the  Dakota  Mission  "  (Washing-
ton, 1852,  being  vol.  iv.  of  "  Smithsonian  Contri-
butions ;  revised  ed.,  1883) ;  "  Tahkoo  Wakan,  or
the  Gospel  among  the  Dakotas  "  (1869) ;  "  The  Bi-
ble in  Dakota,"  with  Dr.  J.  S.  Williamson  "  (1879) ;
and  "Forty  Years  among  the  Sioux"  (1880).  He
also  edited,  with  Rev.  J.  P.  Williamson,  "  Hymns
in  the  Dakota  Language"  (New  York,  1869).

RIGHTER,  Chester  Newell,  missionary,  b.  in
Parsippany,  Morris  co.,  N,  J.,  25  Sept.,  1824  ;  d.  in
DiarbeKir,  Turkey,  16  Dec,  1856.  He  was  gnwlu-
ated  at  Yale  in  1846,  and  subsequently  studied  the-
ology at  New  Haven  and  Andover.  After  travel-
ling in  Europe  for  his  health,  he  was  ordained,  22
Sept.,  1854,  and  sailed  for  the  Levant  the  same
year,  where,  on  his  arrival,  he  acted  as  an  agent  of
the  American  Bible  society.  Extracts  from  his
letters  and  journals  will  be  found  in  "The  Bible
in  the  Levant ; or,  The  Life  and  Letters  of  the


Rev.  C.  N.  Righter,  Agent  of  the  American  Bible
Society  in  the  Levant,"  by  Rev.  Samuel  I.  Prime,
D.  D.  (New  York,  1859).

RIKER,  James,  historian,  b.  in  New  York  city,
11  May,  1822;  d.  in  Waverly,  N.  Y.,  15  July,  1889.
He  traced  his  lineage  from  Abraham  Rycker.  of
Amsterdam,  who  came  to  this  country  with  Wil-
helm  Kieft  in  1638.  After  receiving  his  education
at  Cornelius  institute,  he  taught  m  1850-'8,  and
served  in  the  office  of  the  American  home  mission-
ary society  in  1858-'63  and  in  the  U.  S.  revenue
service  in  1864-'7.  In  1869  he  removed  to  Waver-
ly, where  he  lived  twenty  years.  He  established  a
library  there,  which  was  opened  in  1885,  and  of
which  he  was  made  librarian.  He  was  a  member
of  the  historical  societies  of  New  York  and  Massa-
chusetts, and  of  other  similar  associations.  In
addition  to  addresses  and  brochures  upon  the  his-
tory of  the  Dutch  settlers  of  New  York,  Mr.  Riker
is  the  author  of  "A  Brief  History  of  the  Riker
Family  "  (New  York.  1851);  "The  Annals  of  New-
town "  (1852) ;  "  Harlem  ;  its  Origin  and  Early  An-
nals "(1881);  and  "The  Indian  History  of  tioga
County,"  in  a  gazetteer  of  that  county  (Syracuse,
1888).  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  preparing
a  "  Dictionary  of  the  First  Settlers  of  New  Nether-
land  Prior  to  the  Year  1700." — His  brother,  John
Lafayette,  a  colonel  in  the  National  army,  was
kilk"(l  at  the  battle  of  Fair  Oaks,  31  May,  1862.

RIKER,  Richard,  lawyer,  b.  in  Newtown,  Long
Island,  N.  Y.,  9  Sept.,  1773;  d.  in  New  York  city,

26  Sept.,  1842.  He  was  educated  under  Dr.  John
Witherspoon,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1795.  From  1802  till  1840  he  was  district
attorney  for  New  York,  Westchester,  and  Queens
counties,  and  he  was  recorder  of  the  city  in  1815-'19,
1821-3.  and  1824-'38.  Mr.  Riker  was  an  earnest
Republican,  and  on  14  Nov.,  1803,  was  wounded  in
a  political  duel  with  Robert  Swartwout.  He  was
known  for  his  geniality  and  patience  on  the  bench,
and  possessed  a  profound  knowledge  of  criminal
law.  Fitz-Greene  Halleck  made  Mr.  Riker  the
subject  of  his  poem  "  The  Recorder."

RILET,  Bennett,  soldier,  b.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,

27  Nov.,  1787;  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  9  June,  1^53.
He  entered  the  army  from  civil  life  at  an  early
period,  being  appointed  from  Maryland  an  ensign
of  rifles,  19  Jan.,  1813,  and  continued  in  the  service
until  he  died.  He  became  lieutenant  on  12  March,
served  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  was  promoted  captain,
6  Aug.,  1818,  major,  26  Sept.,  1837,  and  lieutenant-
colonel,  1  Dec.,  1839.  He  served  with  gallantry  ia
1823  in  an  action  with  the  Arickaree  Indians,  and
for  his  services  at  Chakotta,  Fla.,  2  June,  1840,  he
was  bre vetted  colonel.  In  the  Mexican  war  of
1846-'7  he  was  given  important  commands.  He
led  the  2d  infantry  under  Scott,  and  the  2d  brigade
of  Twiggs's  division  in  the  valley  of  Mexico.  He
received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general,  18  April,
1847.  for  gallantry  at  Cerro  Gordo,  and  that  of
major-general,  20  Aug.,  1847,  for  Contrei"as.  After
one  of  his  successful  engagements  with  the  enemy
Gen.  Winfield  Scott  asjiured  him  that  his  bravery
had  secured  a  victory  for  the  American  army.  At
the  conclusion  of  the  war  Gen.  Riley  was  placed  in
command  of  the  Pacific  department,  with  head-
quarters at  Monterey.  He  was  appointed  military
governor  of  California,  and  served  as  the  first  chief
magistrate  of  the  territory  and  until  the  admission
of  the  state  into  the  Union.  He  became  colonel
of  the  1st  infantry  on  31  Jan.,  1850.

RILET,  Charles  Valentine,  entomologist,  b.
in  London,  England,  18  Sept.,  1843.  He  attended
schools  at  Chelsea  and  Bayswater  ufltil  he  was
eleven  years  old,  was  then  sent  to  the  College  of


RILEY


RII.KY


9S5


St.  PhjiI  In  nipppe.  France,  and  three  yoare  later  '
went  t«»  lionn,  (lerinHnv.  In  1H(J()  he  (;hmu'  to  the
Unit«Hl  Slates  and  settknl  on  a  fiirrn  in  Illinois,  '
when'  he  iu'<jiiire«l  a  practical  knowled^je  of  affri-
cultiire.  S»t»s«'(|iiently  he  iKM-anie  (Hlitnrially  fon-
nwt«Ml  with  the"  Kvenin^'.liiurnal  "  and  the  "  Prai-
rie Fanner"  in  Chicafjo.  He  relin((uisht><i  t he.se a|>-
{MtintnienU  in  May.  IS<M.  to  serve  with  the  lIMlh
Uinois  volunteers:  an<l  when  his  rejjiinent  was
distmndiHl,  toward  the  clofte  of  the  war,  lie  rosuniwl
his  eonn«'<"tion  with  the  "  Prairie  Fanner."  In  1H(W
he  accTptwl  the  ofllce  of  state  entomologist  of  Mis-  i
douri.  which  ho  held  until  1H77,  and  then  ho  was  '
•pf>oint»Ml  chief  of  the  U.S.  entomological  commis-  '
sion  that  hud  Ihhmi  forme«l  under  the  auspices  of
the  dejuirtment  of  the  interior  for  the  puriM>se  of
investigating  the  Ilocky  mountain  hn-ust.  lie  was
made  entomologist  to  the  department  of  agricul-
ture in  187H,  but  8«K>n  gave  up  this  ofTlee  and  re-
tunie<I  to  his  work  in  the  entomological  commis-  i
sion,  for  which  he  edite<I  and  wr«)te  the  more  im-
portant original  an«l  practical  j)ortions  of  its  four  [
large  reports  (lH77-'8<t).  In  1881  he  organize<l  the
entomological  division  of  the  de{)artment  of  agri-
cult  un\  to  which  the  work  of  the  commission  was
transferre<l.  and  he  has  since  continue<l  in  charge  of
that  division,  also  holding  the  olTlce  of  curator  of  .
insects  in  the  U.  S.  national  museum,  to  which  he
presented  his  private  entomological  collection  of
more  than  115,000  mounted  specimens,  including  |
at)out  15.000  species.  This  is  now  the  largest  gen-  !
eral  collei-tion  in  the  United  States,  He  has  lec-
ture<ton  entomology  at  Cornell  university,  Kansas  |
state  agricultural  colle^,  Washington  university,
and  Missouri  state  university,  which  institution
conferred  on  him,  in  187;i,  the  honorary  degree  of
Ph.  l>.  Prof.  Riley's  great  services  to  the  com-
munity have  lH»en  accomplished  bv  his  valuable
researches  on  the  insect.s  most  injurious  to  Ameri-
can agriculture,  including  the  R<x'ky  mountain
locust,  the  army  worm,  the  chinch-bugi  the  canker-
worm,  the  cotton-worm,  the  potato-beetle,  and  the
phylloxera.  His  researches  on  the  latter  attractetl
the  attention  of  the  French  authorities,  and  in  187J:}
he  was  presented  by  that  government  with  a  gold
medal  that  was  designed  for  the  occasion.  In
1884  he  received  a  gold  medal  for  a  colle<'tion  of
insects  that  he  made  at  the  International  forestry
exhibition  in  Kdinburgh.  He  is  a  meinljerof  many
scientific  societies  in  the  United  States  and  abroad,
was  general  secretary  of  the  American  association
for  the  mlvaticement  of  science  in  1881,  and  vice-
president  of  the  section  of  biology  in  1888,  presi-
dent of  the  St.  Ixiuis  academy  of  sciences  in
1876-'8,  and  first  president  of  the  Kntomologic^il
society  of  Washington  in  188;}.  In  1878,  with
Benjamin  D.Walsh,  he  founded  "The  American
Entomologist,"  but  it  was  discontinued  at  the  en(l
of  its  second  volume. It  was  resume<l  in  1880.  i)ut

K'yen  up  again  at  the  close  of  the  volume.  Prof,
iley  has  contribut«>d  largely  to  the  press  and  to
cvclop«Mlias.  The  titles  of  his  sefwrate  papers  are
anout  200  in  number, and  he  haspublishe<l  in  book-
form  **  R<'|K)rts  on  the  Noxious,  Beneficial,  and
other  Ins«'cts  of  the  State  of  Missouri  "  (U  annual
volumes,  Jefferson  Citv.  18CJ)-'77) ;  "  Potato  Pests  "
(New  York,  187«):  •'The  liocust  Plague  in  the
Unite<l  States"  (Chicago,  1877):  and  "  Annual  Re-
ports as  Entomologist  of  the  DoiMirtmeut  of  Agri-
culture " ;  also  a  numl)er  of  bulletins  from  the  ento-
mological division  (Washington,  1881  et  tteq.).

RILEY,  Hpnrj  ChMiinrejr,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Santiago,  Chili,  15  Dec,  1H:{,j.  He  was  grailuatf^l
at  Columbia  in  1><58,  studiinl  theoh»gy  in  England,
was  ordainwl  in  ISCM,  and  went  to  Mexico,  where  he  i


laboHNl  an  a  missionary.  He  devoted  his  strength
and  his  fortune  to  building  up  an  Epi«co|inlian  or-
ganization in  that  country,  which  was  calle<l  the
f 'hurch  of  Jesus,  and  was  consecrated  bishop  of  the
valley  of  Mexico  in  1M79.  DifTerences  aroM  be-
tw(>en  him  and  other  clercy men  interested  in  the
undertaking,  and  in  1MH4  he  resigned  his  ofBce.

RILEY.  Henry  Hiram,  lawyer,  b.  in  (treat  B«r-
rington,  .Mass.,  1  .Sept.,  1H13;  d.  in  ConMantine,
Mich..  8  Feb.,  1888.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at  the
age  of  ten,  receive<l  a  common-school  i><lucation  in
New  Hartfonl,  N.  V.,  learned  the  printer's  trade  in
Hudson,  N.  v.,  worked  in  New  York  citv  as  a  jour-
nevman  printer  from  IKM  till  IKJ7,  and  from  1887
till  1842  edite<l  the  "  S-neca  (H»server,"  a  Demo-
cratic pa|M'r.  at  Watertown,  N.  Y..  at  the  same  time
pursuing  the  .study  of  law.  He  .sold  this  and  went
to  KalamazfK),  Mich.,  where  he  was  admitteil  to
the  bar,  and  entered  into  practice  in  Constantine,
taking  a  high  rank  in  his  i)rofeHsion.  He  was
prosecuting  attorney  for  St.  J<)seph  county  for  six
years,  a  memlter  of  the  state  senate  in  1850-*!,  a
delegate  to  the  Democratic  convention  of  18<K)  at
Charleston,  where  he  sut)|K)rted  the  candidacy  of
Stephen  A.  Douglas  for  the  presi«lency.  a  .state  sena-
tor again  in  18(52.  an  active  memt»erof  the  commis-
sion that  revi.sed  the  state  constitution  in  187Ji.  and
afterward  judge  of  the  circuit  court.  He  contrib-
iite<l  to  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"  under  the
pen-name  of  "Simon  Oakleaf,"  a  .serii>s  of  articles
called  "  Puddleford  Papers,  or  Humors  of  the
West,"  which  were  followetl  b^  "  Puddleford  and
its  Peoole."  The  latter  wiis  issued  in  lKK)k-forra
(New  York,  1854),  and  the  earlier  |)a|>ers.  which
were  partly  humorous  and  partly  desc-riptive  of
nature,  were  sul)«equently  published  in  a  volume
in  a  revised  form,  anil  attaine<l  jwpularity  (1857).

RILEY,  James,  mariner,  b.  in  Middletown,
Conn.,  27  Oct..  1777  :  d.  at  sea.  15  March.  1840.  He
became  a  sailor  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  was  soon  made
master  of  a  vessel,  and  comman«le<l  in  1808  the
"  Two  Marys,"  which  was  seizwl  and  confiscate<l
by  the  French.  In  April,  1815,  he  sailed  from
Hartford  in  the  brig  "Commerce."  On  the  course
from  Gibraltar  to  the  Cape  Verde  islands  he  was
shipwrecked  on  the  coast  of  Africa  in  August,
1815.  Ho  was  kept  as  a  slave  bv  the  Aral)s  for
eighteen  months,  and  suffered  such  hard.ships  and
cruelties  that  his  weight  was  re<luced  from  240  to
()0  pound.s.  He  was  finally  ransomed,  with  his
companion.s,  by  W.  Willshire,  the  Briti.><h  ctmsul  at
M()ga<lore,  whom  the  U.  S.  government  reimburse<l
during  the  presidency  of  James  Monroe.  Riley
settled  in  1821  in  Van  Wert  county,  Ohio,  where
he  founded  the  town  of  Willshire,  an<l  in  1823  was
electe<l  to  the  legislature.  During  that  im|>ortant
se.ssi<m  he  a.ssiste<l  in  maturing  the  measures  for
impn)ving  the  state  by  navigable  canals,  establish-
ing an  ad  valorem  system  of  taxation,  providing  a
sinking  fund  for  the  debt,  and  atlvancing  the  com-
mon-school system  of  the  state.  In  18Jil  he  re-
sumed a  seafaring  life,  and  traded  between  Mopa-
dore  and  American  |)orts  till  his  death.  During
his  last  visit  to  Morocco  he  received  from  the  em-
peror a  license  to  trade  with  peo|)Ie  of  the  seajwrts
that  was  mort^  favorable  than  any  that  had  lx*fore
l»een  granteil  to  a  Chri.stian  merchant.  .After  his
escaiHj  from  captivity  an  ".\uthentic  .N'arrative  of
the  lioss  of  the  American  Brig  'Commen-e'  on  the
Western  Coast  of  .\frica,  with  a  Description  of
Tombuctoo  "  was  prejwretl  from  his  journals  and
log-books  by  Anthony  Bleecker  (New  York.  18I6>,
and  was  reprinted  in  England,  obtaining  a  wide
circulation  in  Utth  countries  though  it  was  sup-
posed to  be  a  fiction  until  others  of  the  crew  arrived


256


RILEY


RINGGOLD


to  corroborate  tho  story.  Another  survivor  of  the
shipwreck,  Archibald  Itobbins,  published  a  narra-
tive (Hartford,  1842),  Riley's  son,  William  Will-
shirk,  published  a  "Sequel"  to  his  narrative,  em-
bracing the  story  of  his  life,  voyages,  and  travels
after  the  shipwreck  (Columbus.  1851).

RILEY,  James  Whitcoiub,  poet,  b.  in  Green-
field. Ind.,  about  1852.  He  acquired  a  knowletlge
of  men  and  a  taste  for  a  wandering  life  by  trav-
elling with  his  father,  an  attorney,  and  early  left
school  and  adopted  the  calling  of  a  vagabond  sign-
writer,  sometimes  simulating  blindness  in  order  to
attract  custom.  For  some  time  he  jwrformed  in  a
theatrical  troupe, and  became  proficient  in  recasting
plays  and  improvising  songs.  About  1875  he  be-
gan to  contribute  to  tlie  local  papers  verses  in  the
western  dialect,  which  he  found  more  popular  than
serious  poetry.  He  exhibited  his  imitative  powers
also  by  writing  a  short  piece  called  "  Leoiiainie,"
which  many  literary  critics  were  deluded  into  ac-
cepting as  a  poem  of  Edgar  A.  Poe.  He  finally
obtained  regular  employment  in  the  otTice  of  the
Indianapolis  "Journal,  and  in  that  paper,  and
latterly  in  the  magazines,  he  has  published  nu-
merous dialect  and  serious  poems.  His  collected
works  arc  "  The  Old  Swimmin'-Hole,  and  'Leven
More  Poems,"  by  "  Benj.  P.  Johnson,  of  Boone  "
(1883) ;  "  The  Boss  Girl,  and  other  Sketches,"  con-
sisting of  stories  and  poems  (Indianapolis,  1886);
" Afterwhiles"  (1887);  and  "Character  Sketches
and  Poems"  (1887).

RILEY,  John  Campbell,  physician,  b.  in
Georgetown,  D.  C,  16  Dec,  1828 ;  cf.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  22  Feb.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at
Georgetown  college  in  1848,  studied  in  the  Na-
tional medical  college  at  Washington,  taking  his
degree  in  1851,  and  entered  into  practice  in  that
city.  In  1859  he  became  professor  of  materia
medica  and  therapeutics  in  the  National  medical
college.  He  was  secretary  to  the  National  conven-
tion for  revising  the  pharmacopceia,  and  is  the  au-
thor of  a  "  Comnend  of  Materia  Medica  and  Thera-
peutics "  (Philadelphia,  1869).

RIMMER,  William,  artist,  b.  in  Liverpool,
England,  20  Feb.,  1816;  d.  in  South  Milford,
Mass.,  20  Aug.,  1879.  His  family  emigrated  to
this  country  in  1818,  and  he  began  early  to  carve
figures  in  gypsum  and  to  paint.  In  1846  he  be-
gan the  study  of  medicine,  going  to  Bridgewater
and  then  to  South  Boston,  and  supporting  himself
by  painting.  He  remained  in  the  profession  six-
teen years,  and  it  was  not  until  1860  that  he  pro-
duced his  first  important  work  of  art.  This  was  a
colossal  head  of  "St.  Stephen,"  carved  directly
from  granite  without  a  model.  It  was  followed  by
the  "Falling  Gladiator"  (1861),  which  is  now  in
the  Museum  of  fine  arts,  Boston,  and  which  at-
tracted wide  attention.  It  was  remarkable  espe-
cially as  showing  his  profound  knowledge  of  the
construction  and  movement  of  the  human  figure.
He  was  urged  to  come  to  Boston  and  open  an  art-
school,  which  he  did,  lecturing  also  before  the
Lowell  institute  and  at  Harvard  on  art  anatomy.
In  1867  he  became  director  of  the  School  of  design
for  women  in  the  Cooper  institute,  New  York  city,
where  he  remained  four  years,  after  which  he  re-
turned to  Boston.  His  other  works  include  a  statue
of  Alexander  Hamilton,  in  Boston,  and  "  Lions
Fighting"  (1874).  Dr.  Rimmer  also  executed  nu-
merous paintings,  but  he  felt  too  deeply  the  want
of  opportunity  and  of  a  proper  appreciation  of  his
advanced  idetis  to  produce  many  original  works.
His  life  was  mainly  devoted  to  teaching.  He  pub-
lished "  Elements  of  Design  "  (Boston,  1872  ;  re-
vised ed.,  1879)  and  "Art  Anatomy  "  (Boston,  1877).


RINALDINI,Benito(ree-nal-dee'-nee),  Spanish
missionary,  t).  in  Brijia,  province  of  Valencia,  15
June,  1695;  d.  in  Michoacan  a)x>ut  1760.  He  en-
tered the  Jesuit  order  in  1712.  and  was  sent  to
Mexico  about  1730,  and  assigned  to  the  missions  of
the  Tej)ehuan  Indians.  lie  wrote  "Arte  para
aprender  la  lengua  Tepehuana"  (Mexico,  1745).

RINCON,  Antonio  del  (reen-con),  Mexican
missionary,  b.  in  Tezcoco  in  1541 ;  d.  in  San  Mar-
tin, Texmelucan,  2  March,  1601,  He  entered  the
Jesuit  order  in  Tepotzotlan  in  1573,  twught  in  their
colleges  of  Mexico  and  Puebla,  and  afterward  gave
his  life  to  the  teaching  and  conversion  of  the  na-
tives. Although  paralytic,  he  continued  exercising
his  ministry,  was  carried  by  his  converts  from  one
village  to  the  other,  and  died  while  preaching  to
the  Indians.  He  wrote  "  Gramatica  6  Arte  de  la
lengua  Mexicana"  (Mexico,  1595;  reprinted  by  An-
tonio Penafiei.  18a5).

RINEHART,  William  Henry,  sculptor,  b.
near  Union  Bridge,  Carroll  co.,  Md.,  13  Sept.,  1825;
d.  in  Rome,  Italy,  28  Oct.,  1874.  His  youth  was
passed  at  the  homestead,  and  he  attended  school
until  he  was  nearly  eighteen  years  of  age,  when  he
began  to  work-  on  his  father's  farm,  but  became  the
assistant  of  a  stone-cutter  in  the  neighborhood.
By  strict  attention  to  duty  he  soon  excelled  his
einployer,  and  in  1844  secured  an  apprenticeship  in
a  Baltimore  marble-yard,  where  he  also  took  up
drawing  and  other  studies  in  his  leisure  hours.  His
energy  and  talent  attracted  the  attention  of  his
employers,  who  not  only  advanced  him,  but  built
a  studio  for  him  on  their  own  premises.  Many  of
the  works  that  he  produced  during  this  time  still
exist  in  Baltimore.  But  after  several  years  he  de-
cided to  devote  himself  wholly  to  the  art  to  which
he  had  become  attached,  and  m  1855  went  to  Italy
to  continue  his  studies.  While  there  he  executed
two  bas-reliefs  in  marble,  "  Night "  and  "  Morning."
On  his  return,  two  years  later,  he  opened  a  studio
in  Baltimore,  where  he  executed,  besides  numerous
busts,  a  fountain-figure  for  the  post-office  at  Wash-
ington, and  two  figures,  "  Indian "  and  "  Back-
woodsman," to  support  the  clock  in  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives. In  1858  he  settled  in  Rome.  During
the  succeeding  eight  years  there  came  from  his  stu-
dio "  Hero  and  Leander  " ;  "Indian  Girl"  ;  "  St.  Ce-
cilia " ;  "  Sleeping  Babes  " ;  "  Woman  of  Samaria  " ;
"Christ  "and  the  "Angel  of  Resurrection  "  (both
now  in  Loudoun  cemetery);  and  the  bronze  statue,
"Love,  reconciled  with  Death,"  in  Greenmount  cem-
etery, Baltimore.  He  completed  also  the  bronze
doors  of  the  capitol,  which  Thomas  Crawford  lett
unfinished  at  his  death.  He  made  visits  to  this
country  in  1866  and  in  1872,  bringing  with  him  in
the  latter  year  his  statue  of  Chief-Justice  Roger  B.
Taney,  which  in  the  same  year  was  unveiled  in
Annapolis,  Md.  In  1873  he  set  sail  once  more  for
Italy  with  a  large  number  of  orders.  A  desire  to  fill
these  all  in  time  induced  him  to  remain  in  Rome
longer  than  usual  during  the  summer,  and  he  fell  a
victim  to  malaria.  Besides  those  already  mentioned,
Rinehart's  principal  works  include  "  Antigone  "  ;
"  Nymph  " ;  "  Clytie,"  which  he  has  called  his  mas-
terpiece, and  which  is  owned  by  the  Peabody  insti-
tute ;  "  Atalanta " ;  "  Latona  and  her  Chilciren  " ;
"Diana  and  Apollo";  "Endvmion"  (1874);  and
"  Kel)eccn,"  in  the  Corcoran  gallery  at  Washington.

RINGGOLD,  Samuel,  congressman,  b.  in  Ches-
tertown,  Kent  co.,  Md..  15  Jan.,  1 770 ;  d.  in
Frederick  county,  Md.,  18  Oct.,  1829.  He  was
educated  by  private  tutors,  served  in  the  state
senate  for  several  years,  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Democrat  in  1810  in  place  of  Rog^  Nelson,  re-
signed, served  till  1815,  was  re-elected  in  1816,  and


RINOGOLD


RIO  DE  LA IX)ZA


267


wnrctl  till  1821.  After  liiii  marriafre  with  his  flret
wife,  Maria,  ilau^lilvr  of  Ovii.  John  Catlwaladur,
he  settled  on  his  f^tnte  in  Washiufctoii  fimntv,
when*  he  built  <»iu>  «»f  thf  hnmlsomfM  rtvsiileiuvH  in
the  state.  Mis  Mx'ond  wifr,  Kliuilteth,  was  the
dauffhter  of  Col.  h^lwanl  Lluyd,  «>f  TMil)ot  founty.
Md. — His  son,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Washington
county.  Md.,  in  IHOO;  d.  in  Point  IsitU>l,  Tex.,  11
May,  1840.  lie  wh.s  gnwluated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary ai-adeniy  in  IHIM,  wrviil  for  several  years  as
aide-«le-eanip  to  (Jen.  Winfield  Scott,  became  Ist
lieutenant  in  1H22,  and  wiu*  brevet te<l  captain  in
1832.  He  lH>cMme  captain  in  IKKt,  participated  in
the  Florida  war.  and  was  bn'vettwl  major  "  for  ac-
tive and  enicient  conduct"  during  hostilities.  He
then  organized  a  corps  of  flying  artillery,  and  was
mortally  wounde<l  at  Palo  Alto,  the  tirst  battle  of
the  Mexican  war.  He  intro<luced  flying  artillery
into  this  country,  invented  a  saddfo-trec.  which
was  sulhsecpiently  known  as  the  Mct'lelland  saddle,
and  a  n«l)<)unding  hammer  mmle  of  brass  for  ex-
ploding the  fulminating  primers  for  field-guns,  that
prevented  the  blowing  away  of  the  hammer. — An-
other son,  Cadnalader,  naval  ofllcer,  b.  in  Wash-
ington county,  Md.,  *^  Aug.,  1802 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  29  April,  1867.  Ho  entered  the  navv  as
miilshipman,  4  March,  1819,  serve<l  in  Com.  Por-
ter's "  mosipiito  fleet "  in  the  West  Indies  in
1823-'4  for  the  suppression  of  piracy,  and  was
commissionoil  lieutenant,  17  May.  182^.  In  1838
he  was  ap|x)inted  to  c»immand  the  brig  "  Porpoise  "
in  Lieut.  Charles  Wilkes's  exploring  expedition,
and  participate<l  in  making  the  discovery  of  the
Antarctic  continent.  In  August,  1840,  he  took
part  in  an  attack  on  the  natives  of  Suahib,  Feejee
islands,  where  two  of  the  officers  of  the  exploring
expeilition  had  been  killed  by  cannibals.  He  as-
sisted in  the  sur^'ey  of  Columbia  river,  Puget
sound,  the  harlK>r  of  ?>an  Francisco  and  .Sacramento
river,  and  among  the  South  sea  islands.  He  re-
turne<l  to  New  York  in  June,  1842,  by  way  of  the
Cai)e  of  Good  Hone,  after  circumnavigating  the
globe,  and  collectea  valuable  scientific  information
concerning  the  Pacific  and  Antarctic  oceans.  On
Itt  July,  1849,  he  was  commissioned  a  commander.
He  was  rtn  s|>ccial  duty  in  California  in  1849- T) I,
and  in  the  buri'au  of  construction  at  the  navv  de-

1)artment  in  IH-Vi,  and  took  command  of  the  North
^acriflc  exploring  expedition,  sailing  in  the"Vin-
cennes,"  but  feeble  tiealth  compelled  him  to  re-
turn home.  In  September,  1855,  he  was  |)laced  on
the  reserved  list,  and  on  2  April.  1850,  he  was  pro-
moted to  captain  on  the  active*  list.  He  had  spe-
cial duty  in  Washington  in  1859-'60.  When  the
civil  war  U-gan  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the
frigate  "  Sabine."  He  was  commissioned  commo-
dore. 16  July,  1862,  and  place«l  on  the  retiretl  list,
20  Aug.,  18(M.  He  was  promoted  to  rear-atlmiral
on  the  retirwl  list,  25  July,  18(J6.— Their  half-
brother,  tieorg:e  Hay,  soldier,  b.  in  Hagerstown,
Md..  in  1814;  d.  in  San  Francisco.  Cal.,  4  April,
1864,  was  gnuluated  at  the  V.  S.  military  academy
in  1H;W.  and  liecame  2^1  lieutenant.  6th  infantry,  on
15  .\ug..  18;i6.  He  resigrunl  from  the  army  in  18;{7
and  engag**^l  in  farming.  He  was  reaptN)inte4l  with
the  rank  of  additional  paymaster  in  1846,  and  be-
came major  on  the  staff,  and  {mymaster  in  1847.
Heserve<I  in  the  j)ay  department  during  the  Mexi-
can war,  IxH-ame  lieutenant-colonel  and  deputy  pay-
master-geni-nil  in  May,  1802.  ami  was  in  charge  of
the  paymastt'rs  of  the  Deitartment  of  the  Pai-ific
from  1801  till  his  death.  He  wiis  an  accomplished
scholar,  draughtsman,  and  jtainter,  and  pul>lish«><l
"Fountain  U<K-k,  Amv  Weir,  and  other  Metrical
Pastimes"  (New  York,'  I860).

TOL.  T. — 17


RIO,  Antonio  del  (ree'-o).  Spaninh  aoldier.  h.  in
Ijft  Mancha  in  1745;  d.  in  Ouatemala  about  178B.
He  came  in  1775  to  this  country  as  a  captain,  and
was  serving  in  Central  America  when,  in  1786,  the
king  of  .S{»ain  ai>[>ointe<l  him  commander  of  an
ex|N>dition  to  make  an  examination  of  whatever
ruins  might  Ite  fouixl  in  the  territory  of  Guatemala,
in  order  to  settle  the  cpiestion,  which  was  then
jjreatlv  discusse<l,  of  whence  .\merica  derived  its
inhabitants.  Hio  un<lertook  his  task  in  the  same
year  with  great  z«'al.  and  found  the  ruins  of  an  an-
cient city  near  PaleiKpie,  in  the  present  slate  of
Chiapas,  Mexico,  the  splendor  of  which  suggested
to  him  the  idea  that  it  was  built  by  the  first  Vha-
nician  a<l venturers  that  are  tlumght  by  seme  to
have  sailed  across  the  Atlantic  (K-ean. '  Kio  died
shortly  after  his  return  to  Guatemala,  but  left  a
manuscript  altout  his  explorations,  which  some
years  afterward  fell  into  the  hands  of  Dr.  Pablo
Velix  Cabrera,  who  translatefl  it  into  Knglish  and
published  it  under  the  title  of  "  I)es<-ripfi<m  <if  the
Ruins  of  an  Ancient  City  disco vereil  near  Palenque,
in  the  Kingdom  of  Guatemala"  (Ixmdon.  1794).
The  volume  also  contains  an  investigation  into  the
history  of  the  American  races,  by  Cabrera.

RiO,  Diero  del  (ree'-o),  Spanish  missionarj',  b.
in  Burgos  atxmt  1580;  «1.  in  TIajiaco,  Mexico,  in
1644.  He  went  to  Mexico  in  1595  with  the  family
of  the  viceroy,  the  Count  of  Monterey,  studied  in
the  Jesuit  college,  and  entered  the  Dtmiinican
order  in  Puebia  de  los  Angeles  in  1603,  when  his
protector  was  proinote<l  to  the  viceroyalty  of  Peru.
»oon  afterward  he  was  sent  to  the  missions  of
Oajaca,  and  began  to  study  the  Mistec  language,
until  he  was  able  to  preach  fluently  to  the  Indians
in  that  tongue.  lie  was  guardian  of  .several
convents,  including  the  chief  one  of  his  onler  at
Oajaca,  and  is  buried  in  the  church  of  the  convent
of  TIajiaco,  He  wrote  "  Diccionario  coiiioso  y
erudito  de  la  lingua  Misteca "  and  "  Tratados
espirituales  y  Sermones  en  Misteco,"  the  manu-
scripts of  which,  according  to  Hiirgoa,  wen*  in  the
library  of  the  convent  of  TIajiaco.  but  were  re-
moved on  the  secularization  of  the  monastic  orders.

RIO  DE  LA  LOZA,  I^opoldo  (ree  -o-<lav-lah-
lo-thah),  Mexican  chemist,  b.  in  the  citvof  Mexico
in  November,  1807;  d.  there,  2  May,' 1873.  His
father  was  an  ajtothecary.  and  fn)m  early  youth
the  l)oy  assisted  him  in  the  laltoratory,  thus  actjuir-
in^  a  taste  for  chemistry. After  finishing  his

rnmary  education,  he  entered  the  College  of  San
Idefonso,  and  was  graduated  in  surgery  in  1827,
but  he  continued  his  scientific  studies,  and  was
graduated  in  1830  in  pharmacy,  and  in  1833  in
me<licine.  In  that  year,  when  the  cholera  ravaged
the  country,  Rio  de  la  Imzhl  receive<l  a  i)ublic  testi-
monial from  President  Gomez  Farias  for  his  ser-
vices. In  1835  he  began  to  give  jirivate  lessons  in
chemistry  and  natunil  history,  and  in  1843  he  was
appointeil  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  Medical
sch<K»l  and  the  College  of  mines.  He  IxM-ame  suc-
cessively professor  of  inorganic  chemistry  and
chemistry  applie<l  to  trades  and  agriculture  in
five  different  colleges,  and  in  1868  professor
of  analytical  chemistry  in  the  National  school
of  nuMiicine.  Ihiring  the  American  invaaion
of  1847,  Rio  de  la  I>»za,  as  lieutenant  of  the
academical  coinftany,  t<K>k  i^art  in  the  Itattles  of
Pefion,  Churubusco,'and  San  Antonio.  During  the
French  intervention  and  the  em|>ire  he  was  pre-
ventwl  by  sickness  fmm  leaving  the  capital.  l»ut
refuM'il  to  accept  any  public  employment.  He  was
a  memU'r  of  many  scientific  societies  in  Europe,
the  Cnited  States,' and  the  S{>anish- American  r&-
publics,  and  in  1856  received  from  the  Society  for


268


RIONS


RIPLEY


the  protection  of  industrial  arts  in  London  a  gold
nicdiil  for  his  chemical  discoveries.  He  was  one  of
the  i)rincij)al  niemliers  of  the  commission  for  pre-
paring the  new  Mexican  pharmacopceia  (1874).  His
works  include  "  Introduccion  al  estudio  de  la  Qui-
mica  "  (Mexico,  1849) ;  "  Estudio  sobre  el  cstafiate  "
(1850) ;  '*  Sobre  los  pozos  artesianos  y  las  a^uas
naturales  de  mas  uso  en  la  ciudatl  de  Mexico "
(1854);  "  Un  vistazo  al  lago  de  Texcoco;  su  influ-
encia  en  la  salubridad  de  Mexico ;  sus  aguas ;  y
procedencia  de  las  sales  que  contiene  "  and  "  hi
Ahuautli  "  (1864);  "  El  liquido  tintoreo  de  la  Baia
California"  and  "  Dictamen  sobre  el  aerolito  de  la
Descubridora  "  (1873);  and  scientific  pamphlets.

KiONS,  Francois  Charles  Hector  a*Albert,
Count  de  (re-ong),  French  naval  officer,  b.  in
Avignon,  10  Feb.,  1728 ;  d.  in  Paris,  3  Oct.,  1802.
He  entered  the  navy  in  1743,  served  in  Canada
during  the  war  of  175()-'63,  and  was  placed  in
charge  of  the  station  of  Santo  Domingo  in  1769,
where  he  made  a  survey  of  the  coast  of  the  Leeward
islands.  He  served  under  D'Estaing  at  Newport,
in  the  campaign  of  the  Antilles  in  1778-'81,  and
under  Vaudreuil  in  the  engagement  with  Admiral
Arbuthnot  in  Chesapeake  bay.  He  continued  to
serve  under  De  Grasse  in  the  following  campaign,
assisted  in  the  battles  olf  St.  Christopher  and  Do-
minica in  April,  1782,  and  joined  Vaudreuil  at
Boston.  He  emigrated  in  1792,  serving  in  Ger-
many in  the  army  of  Conde,  returned  to  France  in
1800,  and  was  pensioned  in  1802.  His  works  in-
clude "  liesume  des  operations  de  I'armee  navale  du
Comte  de  Grasse  pendant  les  annees  1781-1782"
(Toulon,  1786).

RIORDAN,  Patrick  WHliani,  R.  C.  arch-
bishop, b.  in  Ireland,  27  Aug.,  1841.  He  was
taken  by  his  parents  to  Chicago,  111.,  in  1848,  and
was  educated  at  the  University  of  St.  Mary's  of  the
Lake  in  that  city.  He  was  then  sent  to  the  Ameri-
can college  at  Rome,  but,  being  attacked  by  malaria,
he  completed  his  studies  in  Paris  and  Louvain.
He  was  ordained  a  priest  in  Belgium  in  1865  by
Cardinal  Sterckx,  and  on  his  return  to  the  United
States  was  apj)ointed  professor  of  ecclesiastical
history  and  canon  law  in  the  theological  seminary
of  St.  Mary's  of  the  Lake.  In  1867  he  was  trans-
ferred to  the  chair  of  dogmatic  theology.  From
1868  till  1871  he  was  engaged  in  missionary  work
at  Jolict,  111.,  after  which  he  became  rector  of  St.
James's  church,  Chicago.  There  he  devoted  him-
self to  sustaining  and  extending  the  parochial
schools  under  the  charge  of  the  Sistere  of  Mercy.
While  he  was  thus  engaged  he  received  notice  of
his  appointment  as  titular  bishop  of  Cabasa,  and
coadjutor,  with  the  right  of  succession,  to  Arch-
bishop Joseph  S.  Alemany,  of  San  Francisco.  He
was  consecrated  at  St.  James's.  16  Sept.,  1883,  ar-
rived in  San  Francisco  in  the  following  November,
and  at  once,  by  visitations  and  in  other  ways,  re-
lieved his  superior  of  many  of  the  heavier  burdens
of  the  episcopate.  After  taking  part  with  Dr.
Alemany  in  the  3d  plenary  council  of  Baltimore,
he  succeeded  to  the  archbishopric  on  the  resigna-
tion of  the  former  in  1884.

RIPLEY,  Eleazar  Wheelock,  soldier,  b.  in
Hanover,  N.  H.,  15  April,  1782 :  d.  in  West  Feliciana,
La.,  2  March,  1839.  His  father,  Sylvanus,  was  pro-
fessor of  divinity  for  many  yeai"s  in  Dartmouth,
where  the  son  was  graduated  in  1800.  He  then
began  the  practice  of  law,  settled  in  Portland,  Me.,
was  a  njember  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  in
1810-'12,  its  speaker,  and  state  senator  the  latter
year.  At  the  beginning  of  the  second  war  with
trreat  Britain  he  was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the
21st  infantry,  became  colonel  in  March,  1813,  and


was  wounded  in  the  attack  on  York  (  now  Toronto),
Canada,  13  April,  1813.  He  was  actively  engaged
on  the  frontier  till  14  April,  1814,  when  he  was  ap-
jx)inted  brigadier-general,  commanded  the  second
urigade  of  Gen.  Jacob  Brown's  army  in  July  fol-
lowing, and  led  it  with  gallantry  in  the  battles
of  Chippewa  and  Niagara,  winning  the  brevet  of
major-general  for  his  conduct,  and  receiving  se-
vere wounds  in  the  latter  engagement.  In  the  de-
fence of  Fort  Erie,  15  Aug.,  and  the  sortie  of  17
Sept..  1814,  in  which  he  was  shot  through  the  neck,
he  bore  a  gallant  part,  and  for  his  services  during
that  campaign  he  received  a  gold  medal  from  con-

fress,  on  which  was  inscril)ed  "  Niagara,  Chippewa,
Irie."  At  the  reduction  of  the  army  in  1815  he
was  retained  in  the  service,  but  he  resigned  in  1820
and  removed  to  Louisiana,  where  he  practised  law,
and  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  Jackson  Democrat  in  1834,
and  served  until  his  death,  which  was  the  result  of
his  old  wounds.  He  published  a  Fourth-of-July
oration  (1805).

RIPLEY,  Ezra,  clergyman,  b.  in  Woodstock,
Conn.,  1  May,  1751 ;  d.  in  Concord,  Mass.,  21  Sept.,
1841.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1776,
taught,  and  subseouently  studied  theology,  and  in
1778  was  ordainea  to  the  ministry  in  Concord,
Mass.,  where  he  continued  for  sixty-three  years,
preaching  his  last  sermon  the  day  after  his  nine-
tieth birthday.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1818.  Dr.  Ripley  was  a  leader  in  the
temperance  cause.  At  the  time  of  his  settlement
in  Concord  the  town  was  divided  into  two  religious
factions,  but  he  quicklv  succeeded  in  binding  them
in  a  union  that  existed  for  nearly  fifty  years.  He
married  the  widow  of  the  Rev.  William  Emerson,
and  his  stepson,  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  said  of
him:  "With  a  limited  acquaintance  with  books,
his  knowledge  was  an  external  exf)erience,  an  In-
dian wisdom.  In  him  perished  more  personal  and
local  anecdote  of  Concord  and  its  vicinity  than  is
possessed  by  any  survivor,  and  in  his  constitu-
tional leaning  to  their  religion  he  was  one  of  the
rear-guard  of  the  great  camp  and  army  of  the
Puritans."  He  gave  the  land  in  1836  u|X)n  which
the  monument  is  built  to  commemorate  the  battle
of  Concord,  19  April,  1775.  From  the  Revolution
for  fifty  years  there  was  a  controversy  between
Concord  and  Lexington  for  the  honor  of  "  makine
the  first  forcible  resistance  to  British  aggression.
Dr.  Ripley  wrote  an  interesting  pamphlet  on  that
subject,  entitled  a  "History  of  the  Jight  at  Coo-
cord,"  in  which  he  proved  that,  though  the  enemy
had  fired  first  in  Lexington,  the  Americans  fired
first  in  his  own  town  (Concord,  1827).  He  also
published  several  sermons  and  addresses,  and  a
"  Half-Century  Discourse  "  (1828).

RIPLEY,  George,  scholar,  b.  in  Greenfield,
Mass.,  3  Oct.,  1802;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  July,
1880.  He  was  the  youngest  but  one  of  ten  chil-
dren, four  boys  and  six  girls,  all  of  whom  he  sur-
vived. His  father,  Jerome  Ripley,  was  a  merchant,
a  justice  of  the  peace  for  nearly  half  a  century,  a
representative  in  the  legislature,  and  one  of  the
justices  of  the  court  of  sessions.  His  mother  was  a
formal,  precise,  stately,  but  kind-hearted  woman,  a
connection  of  Benjamin  Franklin.  She  was  ortho-
dox in  religion,  and  her  husband  was  a  Unitarian,
which  accounts  for  the  singular  mingling  of  con-
servative feeling  with  radical  tendencies  in  their
child.  George  loved  to  hear  the  old  tunes  at  Brook
Farm,  and  always  had  on  his  table  a  copy  of  Dr.
Watts's  hymns,  even  when  he  was  writing  philo-
sophical articles  for  the  "  Tribune,'  and  worship-
ping in  New  York  with  an  indeiiendent  society  of


RIPLKY


RIPLKY


359


fering  the  prayer  of  ordination,  and Dr.  Ht
Ware,  Jr.,  K'^'>"g  the  charge. The  conier-ston


the  mottt  liberal  type.  He  wam  gnwiuated  at  Ilar-
vartl  in  lH2^i,  the  tintt  .s^'holar  in  a  cIuhh  that  in-
cluded men  of  Home  intclli*«-tual  ilislinction.  Wis
only  rival  wa.<«  John  P.  iCnbinson,  who  might  havt*
out^tlriniMHl  him,  hut  wan  (iu.«iM>nded  for  the  part
he  tooK  in  a  "  rebellion,"  and  so  lost  his  degree.
At  Cambridge  youug  Kipley  was  known  as  an  ex-
cellent scholar,  e8pe>
cially  in  languages
an<l  literaturi'.  ilo
was  also  prt^lh-ient
in  niathvmatics,
which  h<!  taught  for
some  tiinu  at  the  col-
lego  while  he  was
studying  theology.
Three  years  were
8|)ent  at  the  «livin-
ity-8ch<K>l,  and  on  H
Nov.,  1826,  he  was
ordained  j«storof  a
new  r(>ligious  socie-
ty in  Hoston,  Presi-
dent Kirkland,  of
Ilarvanl,  preach-
ing the  sermon,  Dr.
Charles  Ijowell  of-
lenry
-stone  of
the  new  meeting-house,  at  the  junction  of  Pur-
chase and  Pearl  streets,  was  laid  on  7  Sept.,  1825,
and  the  iledieation  took  place  on  24  Aug.,  182(5.
In  the  same  vear  Mr.  Kipley  married  Sophia  Wil-
lard  Dana,  tfaughter  of  Francis  Dana,  of  Cam-
bridge. He  was  devoted  to  his  work,  and  it  was
not  his  fault  that  his  ministry  was  unsuccess-
ful in  a  material  jioint  of  view.  The  po[)ulation
moved  to  other  parts  of  the  town,  and  in  less  than
twenty-flve  years  the  building  was  sold  to  the
Roman  Catholics.  The  fire  of  1872  swept  it  out  of
■existence.  Business  occupied  the  spot,  and  every
trace  of  it  was  lost.  At  this  time  Mr.  Ripley  was
a  stutlcnt  of  philosophical  questions,  a  disciple
of  the  intuitional  sclux)!,  a  theoretical  sympathizer
with  reformers,  an«l  a  warm  friend  o?  advanced
opinions.  The  first  meeting  of  the  Transcendental
•club  was  at  his  house,  on  19  Sept.,  183G.  His  library
WHS  large  and  fine,  especially  rich  in  German  and
French  i)ooks.  He  wrote  articles  on  "  Degerando,''
"Religion  in  France,"  "  Pestalozzi,"  "Ethical
Philosophy,"  and  "Martineau's  '  Rationale  of  Re-
ligious Inquiry,'"  thus  going  over  the  whole  ground
•of  philosophical  speculation.  In  18:{M  It^ilph  VValilo
Emerson  delivered  his  famous  address  before  the
alumni  of  the  divinity-school  which  led  to  the  con-
troversy between  the  old  and  the  new  onlers  of
thought,  Andrews  Norton  speaking  for  the  former.
Oeorge  Ripley  for  the  other.  In  1838  appeannl  the
first  two  volumes  of  the  "  Foreign  Standard  Lit-
erature." a  series  that  extended  to  fourteen.  This
publication  exerte<l  a  large  influence  on  the  edu-
•cateil  mintl  of  New  England,  and  the  o|)ening  vol-
umes. entitle<l  "Philosophical  Miscellanies."  were
republished  in  18r>7  in  Edinburgh.  In  1840  the
"Dial"  was  established,  in  conjunction  with  Mr.
Emerson  and  Margaret  Fuller,  who  conductetl  it
after  his  short  editorship  was  closeil.  He  wrote
but  two  jMiiiers.  one  on  "Orestes  A.  Brownson  "
and  one  a  "  ix'tter  to  a  Theological  Student."  The
Brook  Farm  exiK>riraent,  begun  immeiliately  on  his
l.a\in;,'  the  pulpit,  in  the  spring  of  1841.  was  a
pr.ii  Ileal  continuation  of  the  ministry,  its  transfer-
rence  from  the  speculative  to  the  working  domain,
the  literal  interpretation  of  the  New  Testament,  as
Mr  Ripley  understood  it,  a  reduction  of  his  preach-


ing to  pnu'tico,  the  fulfilment  of  a  dream  that  Dr.
Channing  ha4l  long  entt^rtaincd, of  "an  amociation
in  which  the  meniVwrs,  insteail  of  preying  on  one
another  and  si'cking  to  put  one  amrther  down,
after  the  fashion  of  this  world,  should  live  t4>geth-
er  as  brothers,  Mt-king  one  another's  elevation  and
spiritual  growth."  'Fhe  name  of  the  ccmimunity
was  "The  BriKik  P'arm  Institute  of  Agriculture
and  F^lueation,"  and  its  aim  was  to  (>Ktablish  an
agricultural,  literary,  and  M-ientific  scho<>l  or  col-
lege, "in  order  to  live  a  religious  an<l  moral  life
worthy  the  name."  A  stock  com|Htny  was  formed,
and  a  farm  and  utensils  were  pun-ha.>«e«l.  The  liest
minds  were  attracte^l,  and  the  plan  at  first  seemed
full  of  prrmiise.  The  free<lom  from  care,  the  sjion-
tane<jusness  of  lalxtr,  the  alisence  of  all  signs  of  toil
and  anxiety,  the  sense  of  equality  in  conilition.  and
the  alK)lition  of  all  cliuts  distinctions,  made  work  a
delight.  There  was  exhilamtion.  joy.  gavety.  The
new  earth  had  come.  Wealth  was  nothing,  fame
was  nothing:  natural  development  was  all.  Mr.
Ripley  was  over,  in,  and  through  the  whole.  He
taught  intellectual  and  moral  philosophy  and  mathe-
matics, administered,  wrote  letters,  milktil  (!ows,
drove  oxen,  talke<l,  lent  a  cheerful  tem|ier  to  every
part  of  the  arrangement,  animated  the  various
groups,  an<l  sent  his  ringing  laugh  to  all  comers  of
the  institution.  When  the  BnK)k  Farm  uixlertak-
ing  faile«l,  in  1847,  frcjin  several  causes,  chief  among
which  were  financial  embarrassmenti>,  infertility  of
the  soil,  and  want  of  public  interest  in  the  scheme,
Mr.  Ripley  went  to  Flatbush,  L.  I.,  for  several
months,  where  his  wife  taught  and  he  laltored  at
iournalism.  In  1848  they  came  to  New  York.  She
became  an  eiithusia'<tic  Roman  Catholic,  and  died
in  1801,  after  a  |minful.  lingering  illness,  arising
from  an  accident  that  induced  cancer.  The  hus-
band went  into  retirement,  busy  in  the  mean  time
with  various  literary  enterprises.  His  ventures
were  too  many  to  mention.  The  "  New  American
CyclopRKlia,"  of  which  he  was  joint  e<litor  with
Cliarles  A.  Dana,  begun  in  1857.  was  finished  in
186;},  and  under  the  same  e<litors  it  was  completely
I  revised  in  187;i-'0.  liate  in  1861  he  emerged  from
seclusion  in  Brooklyn,  came  again  to  New  York,
went  into  society  moderately,  read  for  the  press,
wrote  for  the  "  'Tribune  "  and  other  f)a|>ers,  stient
hours  daily  in  his  study,  noticed,  planneil.  helped
edit  boiiks.  There  was  the  sjune  earnestness  in  the
cause  of  humanity,  but  now  his  aim  was  to  elevate
the  intellectual  standanl,  refine  the  taste,  purify
the  sentiments  of  the  community.  In  18<i5  he  mar-
ried Augusta  Schlossl)erger.  a  young  widow,  tier-
man  by  birth.  Parisian  by  inlucation.  She  married
Alphonse  Pine<le  after  Mr.  Ripley's  death,  and
lives  in  Agen,  F'rance.  The  union  'vith  Mr.  Ripley
was  entirely  happy;  the  new  life  wa.s  bright  and
prosperou.>!.  He  travelknl  abroml.  saw  many  j»eo-
ple,  lived  in  the  world,  did  a  va^t  amount  of  lit-
erary lalH)r.  was  hearty  and  chwrful.  the  hononnl
centre  of  a  brilliant  intellectual  circle.  The  I'ni-
versitv  of  Michigan  c-onferretl  on  him  the  degree
of  Lfi.  D.  in  1874.  He  die«l  of  angina  i»ectoris.
Besides  his  work  as  a  critic,  in  which  he  endeavored
to  raise  the  level  of  literary  achievement  and  en-
courage talent.  George  Ripley  was  the  friend  of
aspiring  young  men.  poets,  prose-writers,  thinkers,
without  ri'gard  to  cree«l  or  nationality.  He  was  a
cheery  com|)Hnion,  a  warm-heartiNl,  genial,  loval
comnule;  modest,  unassuming,  reH4lv  t«>  serve.  To
strangers  he  seeme<l  formal.  reserve<(.  and  c«)ld.  but
to  his  intimat(>s  he  was  frank  and  jovial,  fond  of

t'okes  and  laughter,  res|)onsive,  ami  sympathetic
le  left  no  extendeii  work,  though  he  projected  a
series  of  critical  and  biographical  sketches. As  a


260


RIPLEY


RISING


promoter  of  sound  loaminp  he  will  be  pratefully
rememlH're<l.  His  "  Life  "  has  been  written  for  the
"  Anierican  Men  of  Letters  "  series,  by  Octavius  B.
Frothiiifrliain  (Boston,  1882).

RIPLEY,  Henry  Jones,  dergyman,  b.  in  Bos-
ton. Mass.,  28  Jan.,  17U8;  d.  in  Newton  Centre,
Mass.,  21  ^av,  1875.  From  the  Boston  Latin-
school,  where  ne  was  a  "  medal  scholar,"  he  passed
to  Harvard,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1816.  On
closing  his  course  in  Andover  theological  seminary,
he  was  ordained  to  the  Baptist  ministry  in  Boston
in  Noveml)er,  1819.  The  early  years  oj  his  minis-
try were  spent  in  preaching  to  the  colored  people
of  Georgia.  In  182(5  he  was  elected  professor  of
biblical  literature  and  pastoral  duties  in  Newton
theological  institution,  where  he  continued  until
his  resignation  in  1860.  After  his  resignation  he
lal)ored  again  for  some  time  among  the  colored
people  of  Georgia.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  the  University  of  Alabama  in  1844  and  from
Harvard  in  1845.  Besides  numerous  articles  for
magazines  and  reviews.  Dr.  Kipley  was  the  author
of  "  Memoir  of  Rev.  Thonuis  S.  Winn  "  (Boston,
1824);  "Christian  Baptism"  (1833);  "Notes  on
the  Four  Gospels  "  (2  vols.,  1837-8) ;  "  Notes  on  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles"  (1844);  "Sacred  Rhetoric"
(1849) ;  "  Notes  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans "
(1857);  "Church  Polity"  (1867);  and  "Notes  on
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  "  (1868).

RIPLEY,  James  Wolfe,  soldier,  b.  in  Wind-
ham. Conn.,  10  Dec,  1794;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
16  March,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1814,  entered  the  artillery,
served  in  the  second  war  with  Great  Britain,  and

Earticipated  in  the  defence  of  Sackett's  Harbor,
le  became  battalion  quartermaster  of  artillery  in
1816,  1st  lieutenant  in  1818,  was  engaged  during
the  Seminole  war  in  the  seizure  of  Pensacola  and
the  capture  of  San  Carlos  de  Barrancas,  and  was
commissioner  for  running  the  bouiulary-Jine  of  the
Forida  Indian  reservations  in  1823-'4.  He  became
captain  in  1825,  was  in  command  at  Charleston
harl)or  during  the  threatened  South  Carolina
nullification  disturbances  in  1832-'3,  and  became
major  in  1838.  He  was  superintendent  of  the
Springfield  armory  in  1841-'54,  and  in  May,  1848,
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  "for  the  perform-
ance of  his  duty  in  the  prosecution  of  the  Mexican
war."  He  became  full  lieutenant-colonel  in  1854,
was  chief  of  ordnance  in  the  Department  of  the
Pacific  in  1855-'7,  and  became  colonel  and  chief  of
ordnance,  U.  S.  army,  which  he  held  till  his  re-
tirement in  18()3.  He  received  the  brevet  of  briga-
dier-general, U.  S.  army,  in  July,  1861,  and  in
August  was  promoted  to  the  full  rank.  From
his  retirement  until  his  death  he  was  inspector  of
the  armament  of  fortifications  on  the  New  England
coast.  In  March,  1865,  he  received  the  brevet  of
major-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  "  long  and  faithful
service." — His  nephew,  Roswell  Sabine,  soldier,
b.  in  Worthington,  Franklin  co.,  Ohio,  14  March,
1823;  d.  in  New  York  city,  26  March,  1887,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1843,
served  in  the  Mexican  war,  where  he  was  engaged
at  Monterey,  Vera  Cruz,  Cerro  Gordo,  Contreras,
Churubusco,  Molino  del  Rey,  Chapultepec,  and  the
capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  was  brevetted
captain  for  Cerro  Gordo  and  major  for  Chapulte-
pec. He  engaged  in  the  Florida  war  in  1849,  but
resigned  from  the  army  in  1853  and  engaged  in
busmess  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  entered  the  Confederate  service,
directed  the  fire  on  Fort  Sumter,  13  April,  1861,
and  in  August  of  that  year  was  appointed  briga-
dier-general, with  command  of  the  Department  of


South  Carolina  and  its  coast  defences.  ITe  was  in
charge  of  the  2d  military  district  of  that  state
from  Deceml)er,  1861,  till  May,  1862,  commanded
a  brigade  that  was  composed  of  two  Georgia  and
two  North  Carolina  regiments  in  the  defence  of
Richmond,  Va.,  in  June,  1862,  and  with  it  partici-
pated in  the  battles  of  Mechanicsville.  Gaines's
Mills,  Malvern  Hill,  South  Mountain,  Antietam,
and  Fredericksburg.  He  then  returned  to  South
Carolina  in  charge  of  the  1st  military  district  of
that  state,  constructed  the  defences  of  Charleston,
and  met  the  naval  attack  on  7  April,  1863.  After
the  evacuation  of  that  city  he  jomed  Gen.  Robert
K.  Lee  in  Richmond,  and  continued  with  him  till
the  surrender.  He  went  abroad  after  the  war,  re-
sided in  Paris  for  several  years,  and  sul^sequently
returned  and  engaged  in  business  in  Charleston,
S.  C.  He  published  a  "History  of  the  Mexican
War"  (2  vols..  New  York,  1849).

RISING,  Joban  Claesson,  colonial  governor,  b.
in  Sweden  about  1600.  He  was  secretary  of  the
College  of  commerce  at  Stockholm,  and  was  sent
over  in  1654  to  act  as  commissary  and  assistant
governor  in  New  Sweden,  taking  with  him  a  com-
pany of  emigrants  in  the  "  Ornen,"  which  arrived
m  t)elaware  bay  on  18  May.  He  expelled  the
Dutch  garrison  from  Fort  Casimir,  forced  the
Dutch  settlers  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to
Sweden,  concluded  a  treaty  of  friendship  with  the
Indians  on  17  June,  and  denied  to  the  English  the
privilege  of  buying  lands  in  Swedish  territory,  at
the  same  time  inviting  Swedes  who  had  gone  ta
Virginia  to  return  to  the  Delaware.  As  soon  as
Queen  Christina  knew  of  the  departure  of  Gov.
Johan  Printz  (q.  v.),  she  sent  to  Rising  a  commis-
sion as  temporary  governor,  dated  28  Feb.,  1654.
In  August,  1655,  Gov.  Peter  Stuyvesant,  of  New-
Amsterdam,  conducted  an  expedition  against  the
Swedish  colony,  recaptured  the  fort  that  he  had
erected  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Delaware,  invested
the  town  of  Christina,  and  demanded  that  the
Swedes  should  evacuate  the  country,  except  such
as  were  willing  to  accept  Dutch  rule.  The  direc-
tor-general paid  no  attention  to  the  proposal  to-
have  the  territorial  dispute  settled  by  commission-
ers, and,  on  15  Sept.,  Rising  was  compelled  to  yield
to  his  ultimatum.  The  Dutch  offered  to  permit
the  Swedes  to  retain  possession  of  the  lands  higher
up  the  river,  but  Rising  and  his  counsellors  were
unwilling  to  compromise  the  claim  of  their  sov-
ereign to  the  whole  of  New  Sweden.  The  governor
and  other  officials,  the  soldiers,  and  such  colonists
as  were  unwilling  to  become  Dutch  subjects,  were
taken  back  to  Eurojje.  Rising  presented  a  plan  in
1656  for  the  reconquest  of  New  Sweden,  but  the
government  was  occupied  with  other  projects,  and
contented  itself  with  presenting  a  fruitless  demand
for  indemnification  to  the  states-general.

RISING,  Willard  Bradley,  chemist,  b.  in
Mecklenburg,  N.  Y.,  26  Sept.,  1839.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Hamilton  college  in  1864,  and  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Michigan  as  a  mining  engineer  in  1867.
After  a  short  experience  as  instructor  in  the  chem-
ical laboratory  in  Ann  'Arbor,  he  was  called  in  1867
to  the  chair  of  natural  science  in  the  University  of
California,  where  he  remained  for  two  years.  Prof.
Rising  then  spent  some  time  at  the  University  of
Heidelberg,  where  in  1871  he  received  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.,  and  at  the  University  of  Berlin,  where
he  made  a  specialty  of  chemistry  under  the  direc-
tion of  August  W.  Hofmann.  On  his  return  in
1872  he  was  appointed  professor  of  chemistry  in
the  University  of  California,  and  he  has  since  filli*d
that  chair,  i^'or  several  years  he  \fiis  consulting
analyst  to  the  state  viticiiltural  commission,  and


RISLEY


RITC'niR


961


WM  cntrustoil  with  important  Ktudios  connected
with  the  chpinixtrv  of  wino.  In  1885  ho  waa  a|>-
puintml  state  nnnlyst  nf  CiilironiiH,  with  charfre  of
the  oxHtniuHtion  of  variouH  f«KKl-|inKluct!«,  Prof.
Rii«in(;  is  a  nu>mlN>r  of  the  Chemical  wit-icty  of  Her-
lin,  ami  of  .similiir  H<x-ieti('.H  in  this  muntrv.  ilis
writing!*  include  ntt'«>uiiti(  of  original  investipitions
in  KMentiflc  journals,  an<l,  in  addition  to  his  oHicial
reports,  he  has  nuhlished  the  n'sults  of  his  stMK'ial  j
studies  pri'pared  at  the  instance  of  the  state  iRiard
of  healtli  and  other  state  IxMlies.

RISIiKY,  Saniiipl  Iloty  (riz-lv).  physician, b.  in
Cincinnati. Ohio,  lO.lan.,  1H4.').  lfeenteri><l  the  Na-
tional arnjy  in  IWS'i  as  a  private,  serve«l  thrtn*  years,
and  attainwl  the  rank  of  serjfeant.  He  was  );radu-
ated  at  the  University  of  Iowa  in  18<I8.  at  the  me<li-
cal  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsvlvania
in  18«0,  and  settknl  in  Phila<lelphia.  A^ter  his
appointment  as  surjfeon  to  the  dis|H'nsttry  staff  of
the  Episco|tal  hospital  he  at)andoniHl  p-neral  prm--
tioe,  devotin);  himself  to  eye  and  ear  diseases,  Ix'-
came  chief  of  the  dispensjirv  for  thes«>  diseases  on
the  openinjr  of  the  hospitaf  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1875,  lecturer  on  ophthalmoscopy
in  its  medical  dejtartment  in  18(7,  and  subse-
quently assistant  surgeon  there  in  the  same  branch.
He  is  a  meml)er  of  various  me<lical  societies,  and
has  inventwl  an  optometer  with  |)erimeter  attach-
ment for  measuring  errors  of  refraction  in  the
human  eye  and  mapping  the  field  of  vision,  and
an  ophthalmoscorH'  with  cylindrical  lenses,  securing
a  wide  range  of  spherico-cylindrical  lenses.  He
has  published  numerous  fwipers  on  his  specialty,
which  include  "The  More  Frequently  Occurring
Forms  of  Conjunctival  Disease"  (1877),  and  the
"Mydriatics  Compared  "  (1884).

RISTORI.  Adelaide.  Italian  actress, b.  in  Civi-
dale,  Friuli,  21)  Jan.,  1822.  Her  parents,  who  were
comedians,  placed  her  upon  the  stage  at  a  very  early
age.  ami  she  soon  gained  reputation  in  comedy.
Soldoni's  plays  being  her  favorite  pieces.  She
subsequently  tunied  to  tragnly.  and  attaine<l  emi-
nence in  that  line.  After  her  marriage  with  the
Manpiis  (iiuliano  Capranica  del  Grillo  she  with-
drew from  the  stage  for  several  years.  In  1855  she
made  her  debut  in  Paris,  where  she  met  with  great
success.  During  the  succeetling  ten  years  Ristori
ina<Ie  various  tours  in  Europe,  visiting  all  of  the
principal  cities.  In  Septemner,  18(MJ,  she  began
ner  first  American  tour,  which  lasteil  until  May  of
the  following  year,  and  during  1809  she  travelled
through  South  America.  In  May,  1874,  she  ltx>gan
a  journey  around  the  world,  in  the  course  of  which
she  apj)eare<l  again  in  South  America  and  in
Mexico,  going  thence  to  the  United  States.  Her
la.st  visit  to  this  country  was  during  the  season  of
1884-'5,  and  lasted  seven  months.  During  this
time,  besides  ap[iearing  in  her  principal  roles,  she
played  in  "  Maclxjth  "  with  E<lwin  Booth,  and  gave
also  one  performance  of  '•  Marv  Stuart"  at  the
Thalia  theatre,  s|)eaking  English,  while  the  other
actors  stHike  German.  The  traiiedies  in  which  she
wix-cially  excels  are  "(^ueen  Elizidwth."  "Marie
Antoinette."  "Maria  Stuart."  "Mvrrha,"  "  Kran-
oesca  <le  Kimini."  "  Maclieth,"  "  Piik  dei  Tolomei,"
and  "  Me<lea."  Her  autobiography,  which  is  largi'ly
made  up  of  analyses  of  her  acting  in  some  of  her
best  n'tles.  has  b^'ii  tninslated  and  published  un-
der the  title  "Stmlii-s  and  Memoirs"  (Ix)ndon.
England,  1888)  and  in  the  "Famous  Women"
series  (I^>ston.  .Mass..  1888).

BITCH,  Juhn  Warren,  architect,  b.  in  Putnam
county,  N.  Y.,  22  June,  1822.  He  came  to  New
York  in  IKM,  and.  after  spending  eleven  years  in
the  office  of  William  Hurry,  the  architect,  he  estab-


Ushed  himw'If  in  1846  in  the  practice  of  his  pro-
fession in  New  York  city,  where  he  has  since  «-on-
tinned.  Among  his  im(Nirtant  works  in  New  York
city  an*  the  liank  of  commerce,  the  Union  «lime
savings  imnk.  the  btiildinirs  of  the  American  ex-
press company  ami  the  .>If>rchants' des|uttch  (*nm-
[mny,  St.  Luke's  hospital,  the  State  emigrant  hos-
pital, the  Nursery  and  child's  hospital,  and  the
artificial  islands  and  (^uaniiitine  hospital  in  the
lower  l»ay.  He  also  ilf»i^iic(l  and  erw-tetl  the
bridge  that  crossetl  Broadway  at  Fulton  street
from  18(17  till  its  removal  two  years  later.  During
1847-'8  he  (Mlited  the  "American  Anhiti-ct."

RITCHIE.  Alexander  Har.  artist,  b.  in  Glas-
gow, Scotlan<l.  14  Jan.,  182*2.  He  stii<lit><l  drawing
under  Sir  William  Allan  at  the  Hoyal  institution,
nt-eiving  a  premium  during  the  first  year.  In
1841  h*"  came  to  New  Y'ork,  whence,  after  si-veral
years,  he  removetl  to  Brooklyn,  where  he  has  since
resided.  He  was  elected  an  ass4K-iate  of  the  Na-
tional academy  in  18(W  and  an  juwlemician  in  1871,
and  has  exhibited  frmuently  at  the  lu-ademy  since
1848.  Mr.  Ritchie  is  Known  l>oth  as  a  {winter  and
as  an  engmver.  His  works  in  oil  include  "  Mercy
knocking  at  the  Gate"(18<i()):  "  Fitting  out  Moses
for  the  Fair"  (1802):  "  Death  of  Lincoln"  (1WJ9);
"Baby,  who's  that  f"  (1871):  and  numerous  |wr-
traits,  among  which  are  those  of  Prof.  Charles
Hcxlge  (\m.\)  and  Dr.  James  McCosh  (1870).
Among  his  numerous  engravings,  mostiv  executed
in  the  mezzo-tinto  manner,  are  "Amos  Kendall  ";
"Mercy's  Dream  "  (1850):  "(Jeorge  Washington,"
after  a'lwinting  by  Peter  F.  Uothermel  (1852) :  and
"  Lad v  Washington's  Recepticm- Day."  after  Daniel
Huntington:  "On  the  March  to  the  Si-a."  after
Felix  O.  C.  Dariey  (18<'kS)  ;  and  "  Henry  Clay  "  (1848),
"Washington  and  his  Generals,"  and  "Death  of
Lincoln."  after  his  own  paintings.  He  has  en-
graved a  large  numl>er  of  portraits.

RITCHIE,  David,  revenue  officer,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  18;}«;  d.  in  Bay  Shore,  L.  I.,  3  March.  1874.
He  was  ap[)oint(><l  to  xixe  U.  S.  revenue  service  from
the  District  of  Columbia  in  18(52  as  3ti  lieutenant,
and  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1807,  and  captain  in
1871.  While  in  command  of  the  revenue  steamer
"  Moccasin,"  30  Aug.,  187*2,  he  went  to  the  rest'ue
of  the  passengers  and  crew  of  the  steamer  "  Metis,"
which  was  wrecked  off  Watch  Hill.  R.  I.,  fie  and
his  crew  picked  up  forty-two  persons  out  of  a
rough  and  dangerous  sea  and  recovere<l  seventeen
dead  bodies.  For  this  service  ('apt.  Ritchie  and
his  command  nx-eived  the  thanks  of  congress  by
joint  resolution.  '24  Jan..  1873.

RITCHIE,  John  WUUani.  Canadian  jurist,  b.
in  Anna|>olis.  Nova  Scotia.  '20  Marc-h.  1808.  He  is
the  stm  of  Thtnnas  Ritchie,  a  Nova  Scotia  judge,
of  Scottish  origin.  He  was  educated  at  Pictou.
studieil  law.  and  was  admitted  to  the  tmr  of  Nova
Scotia  in  1832,  and  to  that  of  Prince  Edward  isl-
and in  1K16.  In  1850  he  was  a  commissioner  for
consf)lidating  the  statutes  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  sub-
se(pientlv  to  adjust  the  tenant's  right  «iuestion  in
Prince  Kdward  island.  In  18(i4  he  Waiiie  a  mem-
l)er  of  the  executive  council  of  Nova  Sc«»tia,  and  in
1867  he  was  ap|>ointe<l  to  the  Canadian  S4>nate.  In
June.  1870,  Mr.  Ritchie  was  appointed  judge  of
the  supri'ine  court  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  in  1878  he
iH'came  judge  in  efjuity. — His  brother.  Sir  William
Johnston.  Canadinn'jurist.  b.  in  .\nnaj>olis.  N.  S.,
*28  Oct.,  18i:j,  was  wlucated  at  the  Pictou  academy,
studie«l  law  with  his  brother,  and  wa.s  admitted  to
the  bar  of  New  Brunswick  in  lKi8.  He  was  np-
|K»intc<l  quwn's  counsel  in  1H54,  and  was  a  mera'oer
of  the  executive  council  of  the  province  fr«)m  Octo-
ber, 1854,  until  he  was  appointed  puisne  judge  of


262


RITCHIE


RITTENHOUSE


the  supreme  court  of  New  Brunswick,  17  Aug.,
1855.  He  held  this  place  on  the  bench  till  6  Dec,
18(55,  when  he  became  chief  justice  of  New  Bruns-
wick, He  was  ap(>ointed  a  puisne  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  Dominion,  8  Oct.,  1875,  and
chief  justice  of  Canada,  11  Jan.,  1879,  He  repre-
sented the  city  and  county  of  St.  John  in  the  New
Bninswick  assembly  from  1846  till  1851,  when  he
retired,  and  served  again  from  1854  till  his  eleva-
tion to  the  l)ench.  He  was  knighted  by  the  queen,
1  Nov.,  1881.  Sir  William  was  deputy  governor  of
Canada  during  the  absence  of  Lord  Lome  in  Eng-
land, from  6  July,  1881,  till  January,  1882,  and
aeain  from  6  Sept.  till  December,  1882,  On  5
March,  1884,  he  was  appointed  deputy  of  the  gov-
ernor-general, Lord  Lansdowne.

RITCHIE,  Robert,  naval  officer,  b,  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  21  Jan.,  1798;  d.  there,  6  July,  1870.
He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  1  Feb.,  1814,
and  cruised  in  the  sloop  "  Peacock,"  in  the  Medi-
terranean squadron,  in  1814-'18,  and  in  the  "Guer-
riere,"  on  the  same  station  in  1819-20.  In  1821-2
he  was  attached  to  the  Philadelphia  navy-vard.
He  served  in  Com.  Porter's  '*  mosquito  fleet  '  for
the  suppression  of  piracy  in  the  West  Indies  in
1823-'4,  in  1827  was  in  the  "Grampus"  on  the
West  India  station,  and  was  commissioned  lieuten-
ant, 13  Jan.,  1825.  In  1830  he  was  on  surveying
duty.  He  cruised  in  the  frigate  "Java,"  on  the
Mediterranean  station,  in  183(f-'l,  and  commanded
the  schooner  "  Grampus  "  in  a  cruise  in  the  West
Indies  in  18J}3-'5,  He  was  commissioned  com-
mander, 8  Sept.,  1841,  assigned  to  the  frigate  "Co-
lumbia," on  the  Brazil  station,  in  1845,  and  attached
to  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard  in  1848-'51.  On  13
Sept.,  1855,  he  was  placed  on  the  resen'ed  list,  but
he  was  restored  to  the  active  list  and  commissioned
captain,  14  Sept.,  1855.  He  was  on  leave  until
August,  1859,  when  he  took  command  of  the
steamer  "  Saranac,"  in  the  Pacific  squatlron,  until
March,  1862.  He  was  retired  21  Dec,  1861,  and
after  his  return  from  the  last  cruise  in  the  Pacific
resided  at  Philadelphia.  He  was  promoted  to  com-
modore on  the  retired  list,  4  April.  1867.

RITCHIE,  Thomas,  journalist,  b.  in  Essex  coun-
ty, Va.,  5  Nov.,  1778;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  12  July,
1854.  His  father,  a  native  of  Scotland,  died  when
the  son  was  six  years  old.  The  latter  received  an
academic  education  and  studied  medicine,  but
abandoned  it  to  become  a  teacher  in  Fredericks-
burg, Va.,  where  he  remained  till  he  removed  to
Richmond  in  1804.  He  became  editor  in  that  city
of  the  "  Examiner  "  the  same  year,  whose  name  he
changed  to  the  "  Enquirer,"  and  he  continued  to
edit  and  publish  it  for  forty  years,  exercising  an
influence  that  was  not  surpassed  by  any  other  jour-
nal in  the  Union.  At  the  request  of  President
Polk  he  resigned  the  "  Enquirer  "  to  his  two  sons
in  1845,  and,  removing  to  Washington,  assumed
the  editorial  control  of  the  "  Union,'  the  organ  of
the  adminstration,  but  retired  in  1849.  Mr.  Ritchie
was  a  Democrat  of  the  extreme  state-rights  faction,
and  believed  that  nothing  so  became  an  editor  as
to  be  at  war  with  all  his  rival  contemporaries.  He
was  a  well-known  figure  in  social  and  diplomatic
circles,  in  which  he  was  welcome  for  his  simple  and
generous  though  irascible  nature  and  his  Virginian
peculiarities  of  speech  and  dress.

RITNER,  Joseph,  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  b.
in  Berks  countv,  Pa.,  25  March,  1780:  d.  in  Car-
lisle, Pa.,  16  Oct.,  1869,  His  father  came  to  this
country  from  Alsace.  The  son  attended  school
during  only  six  months,  but  while  working  on  a
farm  he  had  access  to  a  good  library  of  German
books,  by  which  he  profited  so  much  as  to  supply


largely  the  deficiencies  of  his  early  education.  Id
1820  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  he  served
there  till  1827.  He  was  the  unsuccessful  candidate
of  the  anti-Masons  for  governor  of  Pennsylvania  in
1829,  but  was  elected  to  that  office  in  1835,  and  served
four  years.  He  was  nominated  again  for  governor
by  the  anti-Masons  in  1838,  but  was  defeated.  Gov.
liitner  was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  school
system  of  Pennsylvania,  ana  was  an  earnest  oppo-
nent of  slavery  and  in  tern  {)e  ranee.  In  1849  hewaa
for  a  short  time  director  of  the  mint  at  Philadelphia,
and  he  was  a  delegate  from  Pennsylvania  to  the
National  Republican  convention  that  nominated
John  ('.  Fremont  for  president.

RITTENHOUSE,  William,  paper-maker,  b,  in
the  principality  of  Broich,  Holland,  in  1644 ;  d.  in
RoxDorough,  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  in  1708.  He  wa»
a  Mennonite  preacher,  and  with  his  sons,  Claus
and  Gerhard,  and  his  daughter,  Elizalwth,  came
to  this  country  from  Amsterdam,  Holland,  and
settled  at  Germantown,  Pa.,  in  1687-8.  His  an-
cestors for  many  generations  had  been  paper-maker*
in  Arnheim,  and  he  built  in  1690  the  first  paper-
mill  in  this  country,  on  Paner-mill  run,  a  branch
of  Wissahickon  creek,  in  Roxborough  township.
The  mill  was  owned  by  a  company,  among  whom
were,  besides  himself,  Robert  I'urner,  Thomas
Tresse,  Samuel  Carpenter,  and  William  Bradford,
the  first  printer  in  the  British  colonies  south  of
New  England.  In  1700-'l  this  mill  was  carried
away  by  a  freshet,  but,  with  the  aid  of  William
Penn,  was  rebuilt  of  stone  in  1702.  Rittenhouse
became  the  sole  owner  of  the  paner-mill  in  1704,
and  before  his  death  gave  it  to  nis  son,  Claus  or
Nicholas  (1666-1734).  The  business  increased,  and
soon  an  additional  mill  of  stone  was  added.  From
paper  that  was  made  at  this  place  William  Brad-
ford was  supplied,  and  Gabriel  Thomas  writes:
"Ail  sorts  of  very  good  paper  are  made  in  the
German  Town,"  The  busmess  was  carried  on  by
direct  descendants  of  William  at  the  same  place
until  well  into  the  19th  century.  William  con-
tinued his  preaching  in  this  country,  being  the
first  Mennonite  minister  in  Pennsylvania,  and  he
and  his  son  were  granted  naturalization  papers  by
Thomas  Lloyd,  the  deputy  governor,  on  7  May,  1691.
— Among  Claus's  children  was  Matthias  (1703-
1779),  who  became  a  farmer  and  settled  in  No  ni-
ton township,  Montgomery  co..  Pa.,  and  the  lat-
ter's  eldest  son  was  David,  astronomer,  b.  in  Rox-
borough, Pa.,  8  April,  1732 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia^
26  June,  1796.  He
was  early  trained
to  work  on  a  farm,
but  an  uncle,  dying
when  the  boy  was
about  twelve  years
old,  left  him  a  chest
of  tools,  together
with  a  few  books
that  contained  the
elements  of  arith-
metic and  geome-
try, and  some
mathematical  cal-
culations. These
seem  to  have  de-
termined the  bent
of  his  life,  for  he  ^^
coveretl  the  handle  /C?^  D  ^-^ — j^
of  his  plough,  and  '^.^00/  ■  yU^a^A^/t4^t,
even the fences

around  the  fields,  with  mathematica]  calculations.
He  was  not  without  considerable  mechanical  abil-
ity, as he  had made  a  complete  water-mill  iii


RITTKN  HOUSE

niininturc  whpn  he  was  oijfht  years  old,  an<l  at
wvfnttH'ii  ho  made  a  wrHHieii  clock,  ati«i  later  one
in  metal.  In  I7A1  he  |M>n«un4led  his  father  to  ad-
vance money  with  whi<-h  he  purchiu«e4l  in  Phila-
delphia an  outfit  of  tiMtls,  and  then  estaliliMlml
hini.M-lf  in  Norriton  as  a  chtck-  and  mathematical-
tn!«trument-maker.  His  days  were  »|»cnt  in  fol-
lowing his  trnile.  and  his  nif^hts  were  jfiven  to
study.  He  solvwl  abstruse  nuithematical  and  as-
tronomical jiriililems.  dis«'<>verinfj  for  himself  the
methtnl  of  nuxions,  and  for  a  long  time  hvlievinc
that  he  was  itsorigitmtor.  He  ma-sten**!  an  Knglish
translation  of  Newton's  "  Principia,"  also  devoting
hims«>lf  to  the  study  of  ontics.  In  1751  hobe(fame
a4.H]uainte<l  with  Thomas  Imrton  (q.  v.),  who  supplied
him  with  books,  from  which  he  gained  a  knowledge
of  Ijatin  and  (ireek.  His  clocks  iMH-ame celebrated
for  their  accunury  :  he  obtained  a  local  reiMitation
for  astronomical  knowlwlgi',  and  through  Mr.  Bar-
ton, who  became  his  brother-in-law,  he  was  intro-
duce<l  to  men  of  learning;.  In  1703  he  whs  calle<l
on  to  determine  the  initial  and  most  difTicult  |)art
of  the  lM)undary-line  lx>tween  Pennsylvania  and
Maryland,  and  this  task  was  so  well  accomplishe<l
that  he  was  offered  extra  compensation  on  its  com-
pletion. Although  the  instruments  were  of  his
own  manufacture,  when  the  ofTicial  a.st ronomers,
Charles  Mason  and  Jonathan  Dixon,  arrived  in  17G;},
they  accepted  his  observations  without  change.  He
was  aitpomted  in  1769,  at  the  request  of  a  commis-
sion tnat  was  selected  by  New  \  ork  and  New  Jer-
sey, to  st'ttle  the  boundar)'-linas  between  these  colo-
nies. Meanwhile  he  continued  his  scientific  re-
searches, studied  the  variations  in  the  oscillations
of  the  iK'udulum  that  are  causcnl  by  the  expansion
and  contraction  of  the  material  fnmi  which  it  was
made,  and  devise<l  a  satisfactory  plan  of  compen-
sation ;  also  about  this  time  he  ma»le  a  thermome-
ter on  the  principle  of  the  expansion  and  contrac-
tion of  metals.  Ijater  he  constructed  an  orrery  on
a  new  and  more  perfect  plan  than  had  ever  before
been  attemptetl,  which,  when  it  was  finished  in  1770.
was  regarded  bv  John  Atlams  as  "a  most  beautiful
machine.  ...  It  exhibits  almost  every  motion  in
the  tistronomieal  world."  Princeton  purchased  it
for  £300,  and  later  Kittenhouse  maile  a  larger  in-
strument from  the  same  mmlel  for  the  University
of  Pennsylvania,  for  which  he  received  £400.  In
January,  17C8,  he  was  electeil  a  meml>er  of  the
American  philosophical  society,  and  in  June  of  that
year  he  addresseil  the  society  on  the  transit  of  Ve-
nus that  <K-curred  on  3  June,  176J>.  in  consequence
of  which  three  committees  were  ap[M)inti><l  by  that
\xk\\  to  make  observations.  One  of  these,  under
Kittenhouse,  wjis  stationed  at  his  observatory  in
Norriton.  and  all  of  the  preliminary  arrangements
were  left  to  him.  He  set  to  work  with  great  zeal ;
Thomas  Penn  sent  a  reflector  from  Europe,  and
other  apparatus  was  secured,  all  of  which  Kitten-
house mounted.  The  observations,  acconling  to
the  testimony  of  the  astnmomer  royal  of  Kngland.
were  excellent,  and,  according  to  another  authority,
"  the  first  approximately  accurate  results  in  the
measurement  »)f  the  spheres  were  given  to  the  worKl,
not  by  the  s«.'hfKjled  and  salarieil  astronomers  who
watche<l  fn)m  the  magnificent  royal  observatories
of  EurojH?,  but  by  un|taid  amateurs  and  devotees
to  sc-ience  in  the  youthful  province  of  Pennsylva-
nia." In  17<»9  he  observe*!  the  transit  of  Mercury,
and  a  year  later  he  calculattnl  the  elements  of  the
motion  and  the  or\ni  of  a  comet.  In  1770  he  n*-
movt"!  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  continued  to  en-
SBffe  in  me<-hanical  pursuits,  and  also  for  some  years
bad  charge  of  the  state-house  clock.  He  continued
his  experiments,  and  in  1771  investigated  the  elec-


RITTEK HOUSE


263


trical  properties  of  the  gymnotus,  or  electric  eel.
In  1772  he  was  engagi>d  to  survey  and  ascertain  the
levels  of  the  lanils  iM-tween  the  SuMiuchanna  and
Delaware  rivers,  and  in  1773  he  was  chief  of  a  com-
misison  to  make  the  .Schuvlkill  river  navigable.
He  was  commissioner  fn)m  I^ennsylvania  in  1774  to
determine  the  northwestern  extn'mity  of  the  IxMin-
tlary  lietwt-t'n  New  York  and  Pennsvlvania.  In
March.  177."),  the  American  philosophical  society
presente<l  for  the  conr<id«ration  of  the  Penn>>ylvania
assembly  a  plan  for  the  ertn-tion  of  an  okis4'rvatory
under  state  control,  with  a  view  of  tendering  the
ap[M>intnu*nt  of  director  to  Mr.  Kittenhouse.  The
Kevolutionary  war  prevente<l  the  carrying  out  of
this  project,  and  he  was  ordere<I  "  to  pn'|iare  moulds
for  the  casting  of  clock-weight*,  and  M-nd  them  to
some  iron-furnace,  and  order  a  sunicient  num-
ber to  l)e  immediately  made  for  the  puri)ose  of  ex-
changing them  with  the  iidiabitants  of  tliis  citv  for
their  leaden  clock-weights."  In  ()ctol»er.  177.^.  he
was  appointed  engineer  to  the  committee  of  safety,
and  in  that  caftacity  he  was  called  u[)on  to  arrange
for  casting  cannon  of  iron  and  brass,  to  view  a  site
for  the  erection  of  a  Continental  {K)wder-mill,  to
conduct  experiments  for  rifling  cannon  and  musket-
balls,  to  fix  upon  a  method  of  fastening  the  chain
for  the  protection  of  the  river,  to  su|ii'rintend  the
manufacture  of  saltj»etre.  and  to  locate  a  magazine
for  military  stores  on  VVissahickon  creek.  He  was
appointed  one  of  the  committee  of  safetv  in  April,
\ii6,  its  vice-president  in  August,  and  In  Novem-
ber the  proclamations  that  were  issuwl  bore  his
name  as  presiding  ofBcer.  In  March.  1776,  he  was
electeil  a  member  of  the  assembly  from  Phila-
delphia, and  later  he  became  a  meml)er  of  the  con-
vention that  met  on  15  July,  1776,  and  drafted  the
first  constitution  for  the.>*tateof  Pennsylvania.  He
was  one  of  the  lx)ard  of  war  for  the  state  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  later  one  of  the  council  of  safetv,
to  whom  the  most  absolute  fMJwers  were  temix)rarily
granted.  In  January.  1777.  he  was  electwl  first
state  treasurer  under  the  new  constitution,  and  he
was  unanimously  electe<l  to  the  same  oflice  for
twelve  years,  until  finally,  in  17H9.  he  declined  to
serve  any  longer.  On  several  occasions  he  was  ap-
pointee! to  act  on  various  boundary  commissions,
and  in  1792  he  was  apj>ointe<!  first  direi-tor  of  the
mint,  which  place  he  filled  for  three  years.  From
1779  till  1782  he  was  professor  of  astronomy  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  also  a  trustee
and  vice-provost  of  the  same  institution.  In  1772
he  received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  from
Princeton,  and  in  1789  the  same  college  conferred
on  him  the  degn»e  of  LL.  I).  He  was  eUfted  a  fellow
of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sc-iences  in
1782,  and  in  1795  he  was  chosen  an  honorarj*  fellow
of  the  Koyal  society  of  I^ondon.  In  1771  he  was
elected  one  of  the  secretaries  of  the  American
philosophical  society, of  which he  lie^ame  vice-

I (resident  in  1786.  and.  on  the  death  of  lienjamin
■^ranklin  in  1790.  he  was  chosen  its  pn-sident.  which
oflice  he  then  held  until  his  death.  The  early  vol-
umes of  the  transactions  of  that  s*)ciety  were  en-
riched by  his  scientific  contributions,  aUmt  twenty
in  number;  his  most  elal)orate  j>a|>er,  ".An  Ora-
tion on  Astronomy  "  (Phila«lelphia.  1775),  was  de-
livered on  24  Feb.,  1775.  Thomas  Jeffers«in,  who
succeede<!  him  as  president  of  the  Philosojihical  so-
ciety, wrote:  "We  have  sup|>osc<l  Mr.  Kitteidiouse
sei-oiid  to  no  a'<tnmomer  living;  that  in  genius  he
must  Ih>  first.  Ijccause  he  is  self-taught."  .See  "  Life
of  David  Kittenhouse."  by  Jami's  Kenwick.  in
S{>arks's  "American  Hiograiihy  "  (Itoston.  18341
and  "  Memoirs  of  the  Life  of  David  Kittenhouse,
by  William  Barton  (Philadelphia,  181S).


264


RITTER


RIVA AGOERO


RITTER,  Abraham,  author,  b.in  Philadelphia
in  Si'|>tt>inl)er,  1792;  d.  there,  8  Oct.,  18«>U.  His
father,  Jacob,  was  a  soldier  in  the  Revolutionary
war,  and  the  son  became  a  merchant  in  his  native
city.  He  wjus  for  fifty  years  a  member  of  the  Iward
of  elders  of  the  Moravian  church.  He  published  a
"  History  of  the  Moravian  Church  in  Philadelphia,
1742-'57"  (Philadelphia,  1857),  and  "Philadelphia
and  her  Merchants  ^  (1860).

RITTER,  Fr§d6rlc  Louis,  musician,  b.  in
Strassburg,  Alsace,  in  1834.  His  father  came
from  a  Spanish  family,  and  the  name  was  origi-
nally Caballero.  He  began  the  study  of  music  at
an  early  age  under  Hauser  and  Hans  M.  Schlet-
terer.  When  sixteen  years  old  he  received  some
instruction  from  Georges  Kastner  in  Paris,  whence
he  went  to  Germany  to  continue  his  studies  there.
In  1852  he  received  the  appointment  of  professor
of  music  in  the  Protestant  seminary  of  Fene-
strange,  Lorraine.  Later  he  was  also  culled  to
Bordeaux  to  conduct  a  series  of  concerts.  About
1856  he  came  to  the  United  States.  For  several
years  after  his  arrival  he  resided  in  Cincinnati,
doing  much  to  advance  the  cause  of  music  dur-
ing his  stay  in  that  city.  He  organized  the  Ce-
cilia and  the  Philharmonic  societies,  and  under
his  leadership  many  works  were  produced  for  the
first  time  in  this  country.  In  1861  he  went  to
New  York  and  became  conductor  of  the  Sacred
harmonic  society  and  of  the  Arion,  a  choral  society.
In  1807  he  organized  and  conducted  at  Steinway
hall  the  first  musical  festival  that  was  held  in  the
city.  He  was  appointed  professor  of  music  at  Vas-
sar  college  the  same  year,  and  since  1874  he  has
resided  in  Poughkeepsie.  The  University  of  New
York  conferred  the  degree  of  doctor  of  music  upon
him  in  1878.  As  a  writer  on  musical  topics  he  is
well  known  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Besides
numerous  articles  in  English,  German,  and  French
periodicals,  he  has  written  '*  A  History  of  Music  in
the  Form  of  Lectures "  (Boston,  1870-'4 ;  2d  ed.,
London,  1876);  "'Music  in  England  "(New  York,
1883);  "Music  in  America"  (1883);  "Manual  of
Musical  History,  from  the  Epoch  of  Ancient  Greece
to  our  Present  Time"  (New  York,  1886);  and
"  Musical  Dictation  "  (London,  1888).  He  edited
the  English  edition  of  "  Das  Reich  der  Tone  " —
"The  Realm  of  Tones"— (New  York,  1883),  for
which  he  wrote  the  appendix,  containing  sketches
of  American  musicians.  He  is  also  well  known  as
a  composer.  His  instrumental  works  include  sev-
eral symphonies  and  overtures  for  full  orchestra,  a
septet  for  flute,  horn,  and  string  quintet,  string
quartets,  and  compositions  for  the  piano  and  organ.
Many  of  these  have  been  rendered  by  the  principal
orchestral  organizations  and  clubs  for  chamber
music  in  New  York,  Brooklyn,  and  Boston.  His
sacred  music  includes  the  23d  and  the  95th  Psalm,
both  for  female  voices,  the  4th  Psalm,  "  O  Salu-
taris,"  and  an  "Ave  Maria."  His  compositions
for  the  voice  include  more  than  one  hundred  Ger-
man songs,  and  he  has  published  also  a  "  Practical
Method  for  the  Instruction  of  Chorus  Classes,"
and  compiled,  with  the  Rev.  J.  Ryland  Kendrick,
D.  D.,  "  The  Woman's  College  Hymnal,"  contain-
ing tunes  arranged  for  female  voices  only  (Boston,
1887). — His  wife,  Fanny  Raymond,  is  also  well
known  as  a  writer  on  musical  tonics.  She  has
published  translations  of  Louis  Ehlert's  "  Letters
on  Music  to  a  Lady  "  (London,  1877)  and  Robert
Schumann's  "  Music  and  Musicians"  (1877).  Her
other  writings  include  the  pamphlet,s  "  Woman  as
a  Musician  (New  York,  1877);  "Some  Famous
Songs"  (Lond(m,  1878);  "Troubadours  and  Min-
nesingers " ;  "  Hayiln's  '  Seasons '  "  (Poughkeepsie,


1881) ;  "  Matlrigals  "  (1882) ;  and  a  volume  of  poems,
"Songs  and  Ballads"  (New  York,  1888).  She  is
also  known  as  the  possessor  of  an  excellent  mezzo-
soprano  voice,  and  in  the  winter  of  1869-'70  began
a  series  of  "  historical  recitals."

RITTER,  Henry,  Canadian  artist,  b.  in  Mon-
treal, Canada,  in  1816;  d.  21  Dec,  1853.  He  was
designed  by  his  father  for  a  commercial  career,  but,
his  love  for  art  early  asserting  itself,  he  obtained
permission  to  visit  Europe  and  pursue  professional
studies.  He  first  went  to  Hamburg,  but  finally
settled  in  Dlisseldorf,  where  he  obtained  the  high-
est prizes  in  the  local  academies.  His  favorite  sub-
jects were  connected  with  the  sea.  Mr.  Ritter
possessed  a  certain  originality  of  invention,  his
coloring  was  good,  and  his  execution  showed  great
care.  Among  his  principal  works  are  "Smugglers
struggling  with  English  Soldiers"  (1839);  "  Le
Fanfaron  " ;  and  "  A  Marriage  Proposal  in  Nor-
mandy" (1842).  One  of  his  best  works  is  his
"  Young  Pilot  Drowned,"  which  was  purchased  by
the  Art  society  of  Prussia.  His  health  having
failed,  he  was  not  able  to  complete  his  largest  can-
vas, "  The  Poacher,"  till  1847.  His  "  Indians  fly-
ing before  a  Burning  Prairie"  contains  some  of  his
most  conscientious  drawing.  At  his  death  Ritter
left  unfinished  a  large  number  of  small  pictures.
He  also  made  many  sketches  for  purposes  of  illus-
tration, among  them  a  series  for  an  edition  of  the
works  of  Washington  Irving  that  was  not  pub-
lished until  after  his  death.

RITZEM A,  Johannes,  clergyman, b. in  Holland
in  1710 ;  d.  in  Kinderhook,  N.  Y',  1795.  He  arrived
in  New  York  pending  the  negotiations  for  a  coetus
in  connection  with  the  Reformed  Dutch  church  of
New  York,  and  was  a  prominent  member  in  all  the
meetings  of  that  body.  He  was  senior  minister  of
the  Reformed  Dutch  church  of  New  York  city,
held  pastoral  relations  there  from  1744  till  1784,
and  frequently  preached  at  Harlem,  Philipsburg,
Fordham,  and  Cortlandt.  He  was  one  of  the  origi-
nal trustees  of  King's  (now  Columbia)  college,  and
a  disagreement  between  him  and  other  members
of  the  coetus  regarding  a  professorship  there  and
other  matters  led  to  his  withdrawal  from  that
body.  He  published  "Ware  Vryheyt  tot  Vrede"
(New  York,  1761);  "Aan  den  Eerwarden  Do.  Jo-
hannes Leydt "  (Philadelphia,  1763) ;  and  "  Met  een
nodige  voor  Afspraak  aan  de  nederduitse  Gemeen-
tens  in  de  provincien  van  Niew-York  en  Niew-
Jersey,  door  Johannes  Ritzema"  (New  York,  1765).
— His  son,  Rudolph,  was  graduated  at  King's  col-
lege in  1758,  and  became  a  lieutenant-colonel  in
the  British  array.

RIVA  AGtlERO,  Jos«  (re'-vah-ah-goo-ay'-ro),
president  of  Peru,  b.  in  Lima,  3  May,  1783;  d.
there,  21  May,  1858.  He  lielonged  to  an  illustrious
family,  received  an  excellent  education  and  went
to  Spain,  where  he  entered  the  militaiy  service.
In  1808  he  went  to  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  be-
came attached  to  the  cause  of  South  American  in-
dependence. He  returned  to  Lima  in  1809,  and
was  appointed  comptroller  of  the  court  of  accounts,
but  resigned  in  1813  to  join  the  Indeiiendents.  He
maintained  a  correspondence  with  tne  patriots  of
Buenos  Ayres  and  Cnili,  and  in  1820  was  appoint-
ed colonel.  After  the  landing  of  Gen.  San  Martin
he  was  elected.  4  Aug.,  1821,  first  prefect  of  Lima.
For  his  military  services  he  was  rewarded  by  the
unanimous  vote  of  the  army  with  an  election  as

President  of  the  republic,  28  Feb.,  1823,  and  on  4
[arch  congress  raised  him  to  the  rank  of  grand
marshal.  Soon  afterward  Gen.  Canterac,  at  the
head  of  a  strong  Spanish  army,  mirched  upon
Lima,  and  the  government  retireti  to  Callao. Riva


RIVADAVIA


RIVKUA


285


AfrQcm  rp-<»nforrHMl  his  armjr  and  organizwl  a  narr,
but  tiio  ili-nK'n-fint'iita  Uawwn  the  ihiofs  eauwHl
jfiMionil  (liscniitctit.  ilo  iM'^oiii  n<x()tiHtioii!«  with
the  S|iiiriish  Huthorities,  ami  on  lU  Autf.  wan  i|«*-
{KJSiHl  hy  I'oinjn-ss,  Hy  «ml«'r  of  Ik>livur  Jie  whs  ar-
roMinl  on  '.'.')  Nov.,  sent  lo  GuayH(|uil  ami  »'xil«'<l  to
Kur(>|K<,  wht'm-o ho  began to  write  hostile  |«n»-

(ihlets  Hjfainst  Bolivar.  In  1831  conKres-s  revoke*!
lis  wntencw  of  exile,  anil  he  ri'turnetl  in  IKW,  was
oleeltHl  in  ISM  deputy  to  i-onjjress  for  Lima,  ami
rein!«tHtod  in  his  military  runk,  but  did  nut  apiH:ar
again  in  iMilitics.

RI V  A  I»A  VI  A.  Bernardino  (ro-vah-dah-ve-ah),
pre^xideiit  of  the  Arfjentine  Uepuhlic,  b.  in  Biiomw
Avres  in  ITXO;  d.  in  Cadiz,  Si>ain,  2  S'pt.,  1843.
Aher  acfpiirin);  his  primary  education  he  entertnl
the  College  of  San  Carlos,  and  during  his  studies
the  first  Knglish  invasion  U>ok  place.  After  the
reoomjuest  of  Buenos  Ayres  he  tiM)k  part  as  a  lieu-
tenant in  the  defence  of  the  city  during  the  mh;-
ond  Knglish  invasion  under  Whitelock.  !n  1811
he  was  a|)|M)inti>d  set-retary  of  war  and  the  treas-
ury, in  which  place  he  subdued  two  n*volts  against
the  government.  In  1812  the  goveniinent  to  which
he  Iwlonged  was  denoseil,  and  he  retired  to  private
life  till  1814,  when  he  was  ai>pointed  envoy  to  sev-
eral Eurojioan  court.s.  and  commissioned  to  solicit
a  protectorate  from  England,  France,  Austria,  the
United  States,  or  in  case  of  need  from  a  [trince  of
the  house  of  Bourbon,  in  order  to  found  a  South
American  monarchy,  as  the  conservative  element
did  not  believe  that  the  country  was  ready  for  a
re|)ublic.  After  his  negotiations  for  a  protectorate
had  faile<l  he  retunHHl  in  1820  to  Buenos  Ayres.
In  1821  Gov.  R<Hlriguez  apiK)inted  him  secretary
of  the  interior,  in  which  place  he  accomplished
many  reforms  and  established  the  university.
Rodriguez's  successor,  1ms  Ileras,  offered  him  the
same  place,  but  he  refuse<l  and  went  as  minister  to
Great  Britain.  On  IH  Feb.,  1826.  he  was  elecU'd
president  of  the  Argentine  liei)ublic.  in  which  place
ne  greatly  aided  the  material  progress  of  the  re-
public and  sustained  the  war  against  the  Brazilian
inviuler  of  Uruguay,  contributing  to  the  iiidei)end-
ence  of  that  republic.  When  the  Fwleral  party
began  to  oppose  nim.  and  several  nn)viiic«>s  rose  in
arms,  Rivadavia  resigne<l  on  2U  .lune,  1827,  retir-
ing into  private  life.  After  the  fall  of  I)orrego  and
Ijavalle,  tie  went  to  Eurojw  in  1829,  but  returneil
in  1834.  to  answer  his  im[>eachment,  was  exiled  to
Montevi<leo,  and  went  in  1842  to  Euro|)e.

BIVA  PALACIO,  Mariano  (re-vah-pah-lah-
the-o),  Mexican  statesman,  b.  in  the  citv  of  Mexi-
co, 4  Kov.,  18(«;
d.  there,  20  Feb.,
1880.  He  studied
in  the  s<»minary
of  his  native  (;ity,
and,  although  he
was  graduated
with  honors, never
sought  admission
to  the  bar,  but
entered  politic-s.
Pie  was  chosen
deputy  to  con-
gress for  the  term
of  18;«-'4,  and
from  that  time
was  almost  con-
tinually either
deputy  or  senator.
In  184»  he  was
elected  governor  of  the  state  of  Mexico,  where
be  introduced  many  important  reforms,  includ-


»^.  ^it^^  <ySi^o^M^l^


ing  a  new  system  of  direct  taxation,  which  soon
put  the  state  tn>asury  in  a  flourishing  condition,
and  re<le<-tne<l  the  cn-dit  of  the  xlate,  by  |Miying
all  its  accumiilatiHl  debts.  Ik-  built  the  public
market  of  Toluca.  the  prison,  the  court-house,
and  the  city  sewers.  eslanlishe«l  a  savingH-liank,
and  licgan  ihe  itenitentiary  in  Real  del  Monte.
He  was  re-elwte<i,  and  with  the  gn-atest  difDcultJ
obtaini>d  |H>rmis8i<m  from  the  legislature  to  re-
sign, when,  in  August,  1851,  he  was  called  br
Gen.  Arista  to  form  a  ministry,  in  which  he  t<x»lt
the  [Kirtfolio  of  the  treasury.  After  the  fall  of
Santa-Anna's  a<lmiiiistration  Gen.  Martin  Car-
rera  called  Riva  I'alacio  to  form  a  ministry  on
16  Aug.,  1855;  but  the  latter  dei-line<l  and  frankly
told  Carrera  that  as  pn>visional  pn>sident  he  ought
not  to  ap|M)int  ministers.  In  I)cHt'ml)er  of  that
year,  together  with  Luis  <le  la  Rosa,  he  accepted
?rt)in  (ien.  Alvarez  a  commission  to  form  a  cabinet,
but  would  not  take  the  portfolir»,  and  retirtnl  to
private  life.  In  IK*)?  he  was  ugnin  electe<l  govern-
or of  the  state  of  Mexico,  establishe<l  a  mounted
fx»lico  to  suppress  the  increasing  brigandage,  be-
gan to  drain  the  lagoon  of  Ij«>rma,  and  projected  a
railroad  to  connect  Toluca  with  the  city  of  Mexico.
Afterwartl  he  was  president  of  the  munici|)al  coun-
cil of  Mexico,  where  he  intnnluced  gas-lights,  con-
structed new  public  markets,  and  establishe<l  many
other  reforms.  When  the  Kej)ublicHn  goveniinent
abandoncnl  the  capital,  31  >iay.  18(U1,  U'fore  the
F'rench  invasion.  Riva  Palacifi  was  prevented  by
sickness  from  following,  but  refusetl  to  fonn  part
of  the  "  junta  de  notables  "  that  was  formed  in  July
of  that  year.  In  July,  1864,  the  emi)eror  Maximil-
ian invited  him  by  a  s|H.»cial  commissioner  to  ac-
cept the  jH)rtfolio  of  the  interior;  but  he  declared
that  as  a  rtMuiblican  he  could  never  take  fwrt  in  a
monarchical  and  foreign  administration.  After  the
fall  of  (Jueretaro,  in  May.  1W57.  Maximilian  ap-
pointe<l  liiva  Palacio,  with  Martinez  de  la  Torre,  to
uefend  him  before  the  council  of  war.  Without  a
moment's  hesitation,  Hiva  Palacio  hurrietl  tot^uere-
taro,  and,  after  consultation  with  the  prisoner,  went
to  San  Luis  Potosi  to  see  Juarez ;  but,  notwithstand-
ing his  brilliant  defence,  he  could  not  save  his  un-
fortunate client.  Later  he  received  from  the  im-
perial family  a  silver  table-service.  After  the  re-
turn of  the  national  government  to  Mexico,  Kiva
Palacio  was  ele<"ted  president  o^  the  municipal
council,  and  in  1868  he  became  deputy  to  congress,
being  permitted  by  a  special  law  to  retain  his  place
in  the  munici(»ality.  In  August,  1869,  he  was  elect-
ed president  of  congres.s  and  in  October  of  that  year
he  was  made  governor  of  the  state  of  Mexico,  but
returned,  in  December,  1871.  to  his  seat  in  i-on-
gress.  In  1876,  after  the  triumph  of  the  revolution
of  Tuxtefiec,  he  was  apiKHinted  director  of  the  na-
tional Monte  de  Pie<la(i.  He  was  one  of  the  few
public  men  of  Mexico  that  had  no  enemy  in  either
of  the  political  (>arties.

RIVERA,  Antonio  de  (re-vay'-rah).  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Soria  alxMit  the  end  of  the  15th  cen-
tury;  d.  in  Ijos  Angel»>s,  Peni.  alK)ul  1560.  He
took  part  in  the  con<piest  of  ("artagena  in  1532
with  Pedro  de  Heretlia  (y.  v.\  and  in  the  wneral  ex-
peditions to  the  interior  achievetl  great  renown.
In  1538  he  went  to  Peru  with  the  exjiedition  that
wasc*ommanded  by  the  magistrate  Juaii  de  Ba4}illo,
and  in  1540  he  acconipanieil  (ionzalo  Pizarro  as  his
lieutenant  in  the  ex|KMlitioii  to  tliscover  the  country
of  the  cinnaiiKm-trt'e.  Rivera  was  a  partisan  of
(tonzalo  Pizarro  against  the  vicemy  NuAez  Vela,
but,  when  Pe<lro  de  la  tiast-a  arrived  in  1547,  he
s<>rve<l  under  the  lalter's  orders  in  the  battle  of
Xaquixaguana,  and  till  the  country  was  pacifli>d.


266


RIVERA


RIVERS


and was  rewardetl  with  the  pfoverninent  of  Los
Angeles,  where  he  died  shortly  afterward.

UlYERA,  Jo»6  Frnctnoso  (re-vay-rah).  presi-
dent of  Uruguay,  b.  in  Paysandu  in  171)0;  d.  in
Montevideo,  13  ^an.,  1854.  lie  was  a  "gaucho,"
began  to  serve  under  Artigas  against  the  Spaniards
in  1811,  and  when,  in  1814,  hostilities  between  that
chief  and  the  Argentine  general,  Alvear,  began,
Rivera,  in  command  of  a  division,  defeated  Dorre-
go,  10  Jan.,  1815,  at  Guayabos,  and  entered  Monte-
video, of  which  he  was  appointed  commander  by
Artigas.  During  the  Portuguese  invasHon  Rivera
was  his  lieutenant,  but  in  1820  he  capitulated  on
condition  that  his  rank  of  colonel  should  he  rec-
ognized, and  that  he  should  be  kept  in  command  of
a  regiment  of  gaucho  cavalry.  On  the  invasion  of
the  province  by  Jose  Antonio  Lavalleja  {q.  v.),  he
was  surprised  by  that  chief,  on  29  May,  1825,  but
immetliately  went  over  to  him  with  all  the  forces
at  his  command,  and  took  a  brilliant  part  in  the
battle  of  Sarandi  on  12  Oct.,  for  which  ne  was  re-
warded by  the  Argentine  congress  with  a  pension.
In  August.  182G,  when  Rivadavia  appointed  Gen.
Alvear  chief  of  the  Argentine  auxiliaries,  there
were  disagreements,  and  Rivera,  refusing  his  aid,
was  outlawed  and  fled  to  Corrientes.  But  on  21
April,  1827,  he  returned  with  100  adventurers  from
Santa  Fe,  invatled  the  Brazilian  missions,  and,  gath-
ering and  disciplining  a  force  of  1,800  Indians,  kept
the  Brazilian  army  in  check.  For  this  he  was  par-
doned, and  when,  after  the  independence,  Laval-
leja assumed  the  provisional  presidency,  25  April,
1829,  he  appointed  Rivera  commander-in-chief.
After  the  procslamation  of  the  constitution,  con-
gress elected  Rivera  president,  24  Oct.,  1829 ;  but
Lavalleja  plotted  against  him,  and  began  an  armed
rebellion  in  1832,  but  was  defeated,  20  Sept.,  and
forced  to  take  refuge  in  Brazil.  As  president,  Ri-
vera paid  little  attention  to  the  constitution,  in-
troducing a  purely  personal  and  arbitrary  govern-
ment. Although  he  was  not  dishonest  for  his  own
gain,  he  allowed  his  friends  and  former  officers
to  pilfer  the  treasury,  yet  the  commercial  pros-
perity of  the  country  increased  greatly.  Lavalleja
tried  the  fortunes  of  war  once  more  in  1834,  but
was  defeated  and  again  took  refuge  in  Brazil.  In
the  elections  of  that  year  the  opposition  or  Federal
party  obtained  the  victory,  and  on  1  March,  1835,
Gen.  Oribe  was  installed  president;  but  he  appoint-
ed Rivera  commander-in-chief.  By  instigation
of  the  dictator  Rosas  {q.  v.),  Oribe  persecuted  the
unionist  chiefs,  and  finally,  being  authorized  by
congress,  called  Rivera  before  a  court  of  inquiry
for  some  arbitrary  measures.  The  latter  rose  in
rebellion,  16  July,  1836,  declared  the  president  a
traitor  to  the  nation  for  his  connivance  with  Rosas,
and,  aided  by  the  gauchos,  the  unionists,  and  the
foreign  colony,  began  a  struggle  against  the  gov-
ernment. After  a  long  civil  war,  Oribe  resigned,
20  Oct.,  1838,  and  Rivera  was  elected  president.
The  former  took  refuge  with  Rosas,  who  gave  him
the  command  of  an  army  to  subdue  the  revolution
of  Laval le  and  La  Madrid  (q.r.),  and  declare<l  war
against  Uruguay  in  1842.  Rivera  invaded  the
province  of  t'orrientes,  but  was  defeated  by  Oribe
at  Arroyo  Grande  on  6  Nov.  The  victorious  army
in  its  turn  invaded  Uruguay,  and  in  February.  1843,
the  famous  siege  of  Montevideo  began.  Rivera,
leaving  Gen.  Paz  in  charge,  left  with  the  cavalry  to
open  a  campaign  in  the  interior,  and  held  part  of
Rosas's  army  in  check  for  two  years,  till  it  was  re-
enforced  by  Gen.  Urquiza  with  40,000  men,  and
Rivera  was  defeated  at  India  Muerta,  28  March,
1845.  But  finally  Brazil  signed  a  treaty  with  Uru-
guay, 29  May,  1851,  Oribe  was  killed  in  battle  on


8  Jan.,  1852,  and  Rosas  was  defeated  at  Monte
Caseros  on  3  Feb.  Juan  Francisco  Giro  was  elect-
ed president,  1  March,  1852,  and  Rivera  aided  Gen.
Venancio  Flores  in  an  insurrection.  President
Giro  fled  to  a  neutral  man-of-war,  and  Flores,  de-
claring the  executive  chair  vacant,  instituted  a  tri-
umvirate composed  of  himself,  Ijavalleja,  and  Ri-
vera ;  but  the  two  latter  soon  died.  The  two  chief
towns  of  the  department  of  Tacuaremlx)  have  been
named  after  him,  Rivera  and  Fructuoso.

RIVERO,  Mariano  Ednardo  de  (re-vay'-ro),
Peruvian  scientist,  b.  in  Arequipa  in  1799;  d.  in
Paris,  France,  6  Nov.,  1857,  At  the  age  of  twelve
he  was  sent  to  Europe  and  entered  the  college  at
Highgate,  near  London,  studying  chemistry  under
Sir  Humphrey  Davy.  In  1816  he  went  to  Par-
is, where,  after  many  difficulties,  he  was  admitted
in  1818  to  the  Royal  college  of  mines.  In  1820  he
went  to  Germany  to  study  the  metallurgical  dis-
trict of  Freiberg,  and  discovered  a  new  substance,
which  he  called  Humboltina.  He  made  known  in
Europe  the  sodium  nitrate  of  Tarapaca,  which  soon
became  one  of  the  principal  exports  of  Peru.  Af-
terward he  made  a  scientific  trip  to  Spain,  visiting
the  mines,  especially  those  of  mercurv  at  Almadea.
He  returned  to  Paris  in  1822,  and  there  met  Zea,
the  Colombian  minister,  by  whom  he  was  commis-
sioned to  go  to  Bogota  to  establish  a  mining-schooL
He  selected  some  of  his  college  companions  to  aid
him ;  and  on  their  arrival  in  Venezuela,  where  they
were  well  received  by  Gen.  Bolivar,  they  began
work,  obtaining  good  results  and  making  many
discoveries.  After  three  years  he  was  called  by  his
family  to  Peru,  and  resigned  the  charge  of  director
of  the  school.  Gen.  Bolivar  appointing  him  instead

feneral  director  of  mines  and  public  instruction  of
'eru,  which  appointment  was  confirmed  by  Gen.
La  Mar,  president  of  that  republic.  After  his  ar-
rival in  1825  he  devoted  his  time  to  science,  and,
together  with  Nicolas  de  Pierola  (o.  v.),  published,
from  1826  till  1828,  the  "  Memorial  de  Ciencias  Nat-
urales."  In  1829,  during  the  civil  war,  he  was  de-
posed and  obliged  to  retire  to  Chili,  where  he  made
extensive  geological  studies.  On  his  return  to  Peru
the  government  appointed  him  director  of  the  Mu-
seum of  natural  history  and  antiquities  of  Lima.
In  1832  he  was  a  member  of  the  national  congress,
as  deputy  for  the  province  of  Cailloma;  but  in
1834,  on  account  of  his  health,  he  retired  to  Are-
quipa. In  1840  Gen.  Gamarra  reinstated  him  in
the  direction  of  the  museum  and  public  works.  In
1851  he  accepted  the  charge  of  consul-general.in
Belgium,  but  he  returned  to  Peru  in  1852.  In  l^i4
he  again  occupied  his  place  in  Belgium.  Rivero
was  a  member  of  many  foreign  scientific  societies.
He  wrote  "  Memoria  sobre  las  aguas  minerales  de
Yuro  y  otros  puntos  cercanos  a  Arequipa  "  (Lima,
1827) ;  "  Antigiiedades  Peruanas,''  witn  Dr.  von
Tschudi  (Vienna,  1851) ;  "  Apuntes  estadisticos  del
Departamento  de  Junin"  (Brussels,  1855);  and
"  Coleccion  de  memorias  cientificas,  agricolas  e  in-
dustriales"  (2  vols.,  1856-'7).

RIVERS,  Richard  Henderson,  clergyman,  b.
in  Montgomery  county,  Tenn.,  11  Sept.,  1814.  He
was  graduated  at  La  Grange  college.  Ala.,  in  1835,
the  same  year  was  chosen  assistant  professor  of  lan-
guages in  that  institution,  and  in  1836-'41  was  full
professor.  In  184iJ  he  was  elected  president  of  the
Athens  female  seminary,  and  in  1848  became  pro-
fessor of  moral  science  in  Centenary  college.  Jack-
son, La.,  and  in  1849  was  elected  its  president,  which
office  he  held  till  1854.  In  that  vear  he  became
president  of  La  Grange  college,  of  wliich  he  retained
charge  till  the  civil  war,  and  he  siit)se<iuently  as-
sumed the  presidency  of  Centenary  college.  Sum-


RIVKItS


RIVINQTON


267


merflold.  Aln.,  whom  he  remained  durinfr  the  war.
In  IKtVi  he  uncl<>rt<><>k  the  mnnngpint'nt  of  a  umall
M*h(M>l  fur  youiijf  lM<li«'s  nt  SniHTvilU*,  'IVnn..  ninl
aftiTwanl  of  oIIht  whooU  in  tht>  southwosl.  Sine*-
hit*  twi'titifth  yi'iir  Mr.  ItivprH  ha»  pn-iK-ht**!  rm  well
aM  taiij^ht,  Hhm  Uhmi  |tay|iir  nf  vnrioiix  .MnhiMliHl
Kpi!«co|ial  c'hurfht*!*,  ami  U  now  (INHN)  jia-stor  of  tht*
Sni'lhv  Mtn-*'!  (lyouiMvillp,  Ky.)  MethiMJiHt  K|iiM-o|tal
fhuffh.  In  IKV)  I>H(friUif^<  pivi>  him  the  (irjfnHj
of  I).  |).  n«»  hii.scontril>iitc<l  hirifoly  to  iMTitMiicalx,
and  jiuhlisht-d  tcxt-lHKtkson  "  .MfntHi  IMiiIoin)|)hv"
(Na-xli villi..  !«<«));  "  .MomI  IMiiU.!«.i)hv "  (IWMJ);
"Our  Younfj  I'tMpio"  (1HH(>):  "  I.ifu 'of  Bishop
Kolx>rt  Paine"  (1H84);  and  edited  a  volume  uf
sennons  (lM?i),

RIVERS,  William  James,  oilucator.  h.  in
Chnrloton.  .S.  ('..  IK  .luly.  1822.  Aftfr  fjra«luation
at  th«'  ('ollf>;o  of  .South  Carolina  in  1K4I,  he  t-on-
ducttHl  A  !ar>,'«>  private  schtxil  for  sevoral  y«'ars.  In
18.>(l  ho  w»us  eUvtod  pn>fessor  of  (Jruok  litt-rature  in
the  C'olh'jje  of  South  Carolina,  and,  u|)on  th«  n'or-
ipinization  of  that  institution  in  \Hi\ii,  he  liocame

fiHjfessor  of  ancient  lanpiaires  and  liternture,  and  in
873  iKH-nine  president  of  Washinpton  t-olleffe,  .Md.
He  has  hn-al  reputatii^n  as  a  jMX't.  contrihuttHl  to  the
IK«rio<lical  pri'ss  of  S>uth  Carolina,  and  imhlished
"A  Caftvhism  of  the  History  of  South  Carolina"
(Charleston.  \K'A)),  and  "A  Sketch  of  the  History
of  South  Carolina  to  the  Close  of  the  Proprietary
Goveriunent  hv  the  Revolution  of  1719"  (1856).

RIVES,  Jolin  Cook  (reevt^s).  journalist,  b.  in
Franklin  county.  Va.,  24  Mav,  1795;  d.  in  Prince
Georj^  county,' Md.,  10  April,  18(V4.  He  ren>ove<l
to  Kentucky  at  eleven  years  of  ajje,  was  broupht
un  by  his  uncle,  Samuel  Casey,  ac(Miired  a  fjixnl
e<!ucation,  and  in  1824  removal  from  Edwardsville.
111.  (in  which  city  ho  had  lK*en  c(mne<'ted  with  a
bank),  to  Washington,  I).  C.,  where  he  Ix^came  a
clerk  in  the  fourth  au<lit«>r's  ofllce.  During  the
early  part  of  Presidojit  Jackson's  administration,
with  Francis  lUair,  senior,  he  foundwl  the  "Con-
gressional (JIoIh',"  of  which  he  was  solo  proprietor
till  18(>4.  He  [(ossossod  much  humor,  ana  was  pcn-
enuis  in  the  extreme  in  his  public  and  private  U'ne-
factions.  Altogether  he  pive  alxiut  J|;;{0,(KK»  to  the
wives  of  soldiers  who  had  eiilisted  in  the  National
army  from  the  District  of  Columbia,  besiiles  innu-
menible  snuiller  amounts  to  private  individuals,  and
he  subse<iuently  gave  $12.(MH)  towanl  the  wiuipment
of  two  rcpiments  in  the  District  of  Coiumltia.

RIVES,  William  Cabell,  s(>nator.  b.  in  Nelson
county.  Va.,  4  Mav,  179;{;  d.  at  his  countrv-seat,
called  Castle Hill, near  Charlottesville,  Va., 25

April.  18(J8.  He  was
e<lucated  at  HamiH
den  Sidnev  and  Will-
iam  atid  ^lary.  and
studied  law  and  |xili-
tics  under  Thomas
Jefferstm.  He  served
in  1814-'15  with  a
UnIv  of  militia  that
was  called  out  for
the  defence  of  Vir-
ginia during  the  sec-
ond war  with  Great
Britain,  an<l  was  a
memlx-r  of  the  State
constitutiimal  con-
vention in  181fi  and
of  the  legislature  in
1817-'19.  He  was
eleotwl  to  congress  in
1882  a0  a  Democrat,  served  three  suwM^ssive  terms,
and  in  1829  was  ap[>ointed  by  President  Jackson


,^^^^


miniver  to  France,  where  he  negotiated  the  in-
demnity treatv  of  4  July.  IKH.  On  his  return  in
I8i(2  he  was  cFiosi>n  V.  S.  senator,  in  i»lace  of  Lit-
tleton Taz<'well.  as  a  Van  Itun-n  conservative,  but
he  n-signed  in  1HJJ4  in  constHpienceof  his  unwilling-
ni^ss  to  |Mtrticii)ate  in  the  s«'nate*s  vote  of  tvnsure
on  I'ri^sident  Jackson's  removal  of  the  V.  S.  Ijank
dejMwits,  of  which  he  ap{>ntv(.<l.  but  which  the
Virginia  legislature  reproljatetl.  The  |ioliti(al
chanwlerof  that  IkmIv  having  changtsl.  he  was  re-
turntsl  to  the  M>nate  in  18:^  in  place  of  John  Tyler,
who  had  n'sigMe«l.  and  held  oni«'e  till  184.').'  In
January,  18:17,  he  votinl  ffir  Thonias  H.  lienton's
"expunging  resolution,"  which  erastxl  from  the
journal  of  the  senate  the  resolution  of  censure  for
the  removal  of  the  tiank  de^Htsits.  He  was  again
minister  to  France  in  1849-'5Ji  In  18fll  he  waa
one  of  the  five  commissioners  to  the  "|M'«<'e"  con-
gress in  Washington.  After  the  stvession  of  Vir-
ginia, with  which  he  was  not  in  sympathy,  he
s«'ne<l  in  the  first  and  8ecf)nd  provisi«mal  Conftni-
erate  congresses.  Mr.  Kives  |K)Kst»^s«-d  extensive
culture,  and  a  pleasing  and  popular  address.  He
published  numerous  |iamphlets  and  aildri^sst^s,  and
"Life  and  Character  of  John  Hamfxien  "  (Uich-
m(»nd.  1845) ;  "  Ethics  of  Christianity  "  (1855):  and
"History  of  the  Life  and  Times  of  James  Mmlison  "
(4  vols.,  lioston.  18.'>9-'«9).  In  the  preparation  of
this  work  he  had  the  advantage  of  a  long  and  inti-
mate acijuaintance  with  its  subject,  and  the  us«'  of
all  his  manuscripts  and  papers. — His  wife.  Jndith
Page  Walker,  author,  b.  at  Castle  Hill,  Albe-
marle CO.,  Va.,  24  Manh,  1802;  d.  there  2:}  Jan.,
1882,  wjis  educated  in  Kichmond,  Va..  and  at  sev-
enteen years  of  age  marriinl  Mr.  Hivi^s.  She  ac-
com{)ani»><l  him  on  both  his  missi(ms  to  Fmnce,
and  on  her  return  endxKlied  her  recollections  of
Paris  in  "Smvenirs  of  a  Residence  in  Kuroiie"
(Philadelphia,  1842)  and  "  Hon>e  and  the  World"
(New  York,  1857).  Her  other  publications  in-
clude "  The  Canary-Bird  "  (Philwlelphia,  18:J5)  and
"  Kpitome  of  the  Holy  Bible"  (Charlottesville.  Va.,
184<)). — Their  stm,  Alfred  liandon,  engineer,  b.  in
Paris,  France.  25  March.  IKJO.  studied  at  Virginia
military  institute  and  at  the  rniversjty  of  Virginia,
and  in  18,')4  was  gra<luated  at  the  Ecole  des  |K>nts
et  chausstVs,  Paris.  He  was  an  assistant  engineer
in  completing  the  U.  S.  capitol  building,  Washing-
ton, I).  ('.,  and  in  building  the  atpuHluct  there,  m
charge  of  the  V.  S.  survey  in  impn>ving  Potomac
river,  and  designed  and'  constructwl  the  Cabin
John  bri<lge,  near  Washington,  which  at  the  time
of  its  completion  was  the  largest  single-arch  stone
bridge  in  the  world.  Since  the  civil  war  he  has
Uhmi  general  manager  of  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  rail-
road, and  a  vice-pn»sident  and  general  nmnager  of
the  Richmond  and  Danville  railnMwl.and  he  is  now
(1888)  sui»erintendent  of  the  Panama  railroail.—
His  daughter.  Am^lie,  author,  b.  in  Richmoml,
Va..  23  Aug..  18(W,  was  e<lucate<l  by  private  tutors
In  June.  1888.  she  married  John  Armstn)ng  Clian-
ler,  of  New  York  citv.  Her  first  work  was  a  story
in  the  "Atlantic  Monthly."  which  has  since  ai)-
peare<l  with  others  in  Ixtok-form  under  the  title
of  "A  Brother  to  Drag<ins,  and  Other  Old-Time
Tales"  (New  York,  1888).  Her  sul>s*M|Uent  work
includes  stories  and  |»oems,  and  a  novel  entitled
"The  (Juick  or  the  DemH"  (PhilmUlphia,  1888V

RIVIN(iTON,  JanteH,  jounialist.  b.  in  lion-
don.  England.  alK>ut  1724:  d.  in  New  York  citv
in  July.  1802.  I-^ariv  in  life  he  acquinnl  wealth
in  liondon  as  a  lKH»kseller.  which  he  lost  at  New-
market, and.  sailing  to  this  c<iuntrv  in  1760,  re-
sununl  his  occupation  in  I'hiladelphia,  and  in  the
next  year  in  New  York,  where  he  opened  a  shop  in


268


RIVINGTON


ROACH


c^rrxy


Wall  street.  In  1773  he  published  "at  his  ever
open  anil  uninfluenced  press"  the  first  number  of
a  newspajMjr  entitled  "The  New  York  (iazetteer;
or  the  Connecticut,  New  Jersey,  Hudson's  River,
and  Quebec  Weekly  Advertiser." He  advocated

the  measures  of
the  British  j^overn-
ment  with  great
zeal,  and  attacked
the  patriots  so  se-
verely that  in  1775
the  Whigs  of  New-
port resolved  to
nold  no  communi-
cation with  him.
In  consequence  of
his  repeated  at-
tacks upon  the
Sons  of  Libertv,
and  especially
C'apt.  Isaac  Sears,
that  officer  came
to  New  York  from
Connecticut  with
seventy-five  horse-
men, and,  enter-
ing Rivington's
office,  destroyed  his  press  and  converted  the  types
into  bullets.  Rivington's  conduct  was  examined  by
the  Provincial  congress,  which  referred  the  case  to
the  Continental  congress,  and  while  the  latter  was
considering  it  the  publisher  wrote  a  remonstrance,
declaring  "  that  however  wrong  and  mistaken  he
may  have  been  in  his  opinions,  he  has  always  meant
honestly  and  onenly  to  do  his  duty  as  a  servant  of
the  public."  He  then  made  his  peace  with  the
Whigs,  and  was  permitted  to  return  to  his  house,
but,  having  incurred  suspicion  he  afterward  went
to  England,  where  he  was  appointed  king's  printer
for  New  York.  In  1777,  after  the  British  occupa-
tion of  that  city,  he  returned  with  a  new  press,  and
resumed  the  publication  of  his  paper  under  the
title  of  "  Rivington's  New  York  Loyal  Gazette."
which  he  changed  on  13  Dec,  1777.  t6  "The  Royal
Gazette."  On  the  day  when  Maj.  John  Andre  was
taken  prisoner  his  "  Cow  Chase  "  was  published  by
Rivington.  About  1781,  when  the  success  of  the
British  was  becoming  doubtful,  Rivington  played
the  part  of  a  spy,  furnishing  Washington  with  im-
portant information.  His  communications  were
written  on  thin  paper,  bound  in  the  covers  of  books,
and  conveyed  to  the  American  camp  by  agents  that
were  ignorant  of  their  service.  When  New  York
was  evacuated,  Rivington  remained  in  the  city,
much  to  the  general  surprise,  removed  the  royal
arms  from  his  paper,  and  changed  its  title  to
"  Rivington's  New  York  Gazette  and  Universal
Advertiser."  But  his  business  rapidly  declined,  his
paper  ceased  to  exist  in  1783,  and  he  passed  the  re-
mainder of  his  life  in  comparative  poverty.  There
is  a  complete  set  of  his  journal  in  the  library  of
the  New  York  historical  society.  Rivington  of-
fended his  readere  by  the  false  statements  that  ap-
peared in  his  paper,  which  was  called  by  the  peo-
ple "  The  Lying  Gazette,"  and  which  was  even  cen-
sured by  the  royalists  for  its  utter  disregard  of
truth.  The  journal  was  well  supplied  with  news
from  abroad,  and  replenished  with  squibs  and
poems  against  the  leaders  of  the  Revolution  and
their  French  allies.  Gov.  William  Livingston  in
particular  was  attacked,  and  he  wrote  about  1780:
"  If  Rivington  is  taken,  I  must  have  one  of  his  ears ;
Governor  Clinton  is  entitled  to  the  other;  and  Gen-
eral Washington,  if  he  pleases,  may  take  his  head."
Rivington  provoked  many  clever  satires  from  Fran-


cis Hopkinson,  Philip  Freneau,  and  John  Wither-
spoon.  Freneau  wrote  several  epigrams  at  his  ex-
pense, the  best  of  which  was  "  Rivington's  Last
Will  and  Testament,"  including  the  stanza:
"  Provided,  however,  and  nevertheless.
That  whatever  estate  1  enjoy  and  possess
At  the  time  of  my  death  (if  it  be  not  then  sold)
Shall  remain  to  the  Tories,  to  have  and  to  hold."
Alexander  Gravdon,  in  his  "  Memoirs,"  says  of
Rivington:  "I'his  gentleman's  manners  anti  ap-
pearance were  sufficiently  dignified ;  and  he  kept
the  best  company.  He  was  an  everlasting  dabbler
in  theatrical  heroics.  Othello  was  the  character  in
which  he  liked  best  to  apj)ear."  Ashbel  Green
s[)eaks  of  Rivington  as  "the  greatest  sycophant
inuiginable ;  very  little  under  the  influence  of  any
principle  but  self-interest,  yet  of  the  most  courteous
manners  to  all  with  whom  he  had  intercourse."
The  accompanying  portrait  is  from  the  original
painting  by  Gilbert  Stuart,  in  the  possession  of
William  Ii.  Appleton,  of  New  York. — His  son,
John,  a  lieutenant  in  the  83d  regiment,  died  in
England  in  1809.

ROACH,  Isaac,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
24  Feb.,  1786;  d.  there,  29  Dec,  1848.  He  was
commissioned  2d  lieutenant  in  the  2d  artillery,  2
July,  1812,  and  served  in  the  detachment  under
Capt.  Towson  in  cutting  out  the  British  brigs
"Caledonia"  and  "  Detroit,"  lying  under  the  guns
of  Fort  Erie,  8  Oct.,  1812.  Lieut.  Roach  was
among  the  first  to  board  the  captured  brig,  the
"  Detroit,"  and,  in  the  words  of  Winfield  Scott,
"certainly  no  one  surpassed  him  in  intrepiditv  and
efficiency."  He  was  wounded  in  the  a.ssauit  on
Queenstown  heights,  13  Oct.,  1812,  promoted  cap-
tain, 13  April,  1813,  and  in  this  capacity  had  com-
mand of  a  piece  of  artillery,  and  formed  a  part  of
the  advance-guard  in  the  capture  of  Fort  George,
27  May,  1813,  when  he  was  again  wounded.  On  24
June  following,  at  the  Beaver  dam,  he  held  his
position  for  hours  against  a  greatly  superior  force,
which  he  repeatedly  drove  back,  but  toward  the
close  of  the  day,  through  the  misconduct  of  his
commanding  officer,  he  was  obliged  to  surrender.
He  was  held  prisoner  until  the  close  of  the  war,
when,  after  escaping  and  being  recaptured,  he  was
liberated.  On  tne  reduction  of  the  army  upon  the
peace  establishment,  he  was  transferred  with  his
full  rank  to  the  corps  of  artillery.  He  was  bre-
vetted  major  for  ten  years'  service,  13  April.  1823,
and  resigned,  1  April,  1824.  In  1838  he  was  elected
mayor  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  and  he  Mcas
treasurer  of  the  mint  in  that  city  in  1844-'7.

ROACH,  John,  ship-builder,  b.  in  Mitchells-
town.  County  Cork,  Ireland,  in  1815 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  10  Jan.,  1887.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  came

Jenniless  to  New  York,  and  obtained  work  from
ohn  Allaire,  in  the  Howell  iron-works.  New  Jer-
sey. In  1840  he  went  to  Illinois  to  buy  land,  but
he  returned  to  New  York,  and  worked  as  a  ma-
chinist for  several  years,  and  then  established  a
foundry  with  three  fellow- work  men.  The  explo-
sion of  a  boiler  nearly  ruined  him  financially,  but
he  rebuilt  his  works,  which  were  known  as  the  LEtna
iron-works.  Here  he  constructed  the  largest  en-
gines that  had  been  built  in  the  United  States  at
that  time,  and  also  the  first  compound  engines.
In  1868  he  bought  the  Morgan  iron-works  in  New
York  city,  and  also  the  Neptune,  Franklin  Forge,
and  Allaire  works,  and  in  1871  the  ship-yards  in
Chester.  Pa.,  that  were  owned  by  Rainer  and  Sons.
He  established  a  ship-building  plant  that  covered
120  acres,  and  wasvaluetl  at  $2,000,000.  under  the
name  of  the  Delaware  river  iron  shi|f-huilding  and
engine  works,  of  which  he  was  the  sole  owner,  and


ROANK


RORRINS


909


where  ho  built  j«ixt]r-three  veiweU  In  twelre  jeani,
chiefly  for  the  U.  S.  governim-nt  an<l  larir*>  corpom-
tiuns. Ainung  ttiese  were  six  inonilorHthnt  wereor>

dcnnl  tiuriiif;  flen.
Orant'H  lulininist  na-
tion. The  IfcHt  v<««-
seUthat  he  built  for
the  U.S.  navy  were
the  three  cfuiserH
"  Chifa^,"  "  At-
lanta," and  ■*•  Bos-
ton." mill  the  <le-
stkatch-Uiat "  Dol-

fihin."  On  the  re-
uml  of  the  govern-
ment to  at-cept  the
"Dolphin  "in  1885.

^  Mr. Koiwh tnatle

/y/j^  /l^  /  »n  a.ssijjninent,  and
^<L^</7lyi/  //C<^tnx>ru closwl his  works;

but  they  v^ere  re-
opene<l  when  the  vessel  was  at-c-opleil.  He  con-
struoted  altogether  about  114  iron  vessels,  and  also
built  the  seirtional  diK-k  at  I'ensai-ola,  Fla.,  and  the
inm  bridge  over  Harlem  river  at  Third  avenue,
New  York  city,  in  18«H).

ROANE,  John  Selden,  governor  of  Arkansas,
b.  in  Wilson  county.  Tcnn..  8  .Ian.,  1H17;  d.  in
Pine  Bluff,  Ark.,  7  April,  18()7,  He  was  graduate*!
at  Curulwrland  college,  Priiu-eton,  Ky.,  and  st-rvcd
in  the  legislature  of  Arkaiisa:»  as  s|>eaker  in  1844.
Participating  in  the  Mexican  war  as  lieutenant-
colonel  of  Col.  Archil»ald  Yell's  Arkansas  cavalry,
he  serveil  with  gallantry  at  Huena  N'ista,  and  com-
manded the  regiment  after  Col.  Yell  was  kille<l,
being  made  colonel  on  28  Feb..  1847.  From  1848
till  18.')2  he  WHS  governor  of  Arkansas.  (lov.  Roane
8erve<l  in  the  civil  war.  In-ing  ap|M>inted  brigadier-
ijeneral  in  the  pn»visioiial  Confeilerate  army  on  20
March.  18(>2,  commanding  the  district  of  Little
K<K'k,  Arkiinsiis.

ROANK,  Spencer,  jurist, b.  in  Essex,  Va.,  4  April,
1702 ;  d.  in  Sharon  Springs,  Va.,  4  Sept.,  1822.  He
studied  law  with  George  Wythe,  and  also  in  Phila-
delphia, after  which  he  was  a  mcmlx'r  suc^cossively
of  the  Virginia  assembly,  council,  and  senate.  He
was  apjx)inted  a  judge  in  1789  of  the  general  court,
and  m  1704  of  the  court  of  errors.  In  1819  he
was  one  of  the  commissi<mers  for  Iticating  the
University  of  Virginia.  His  wife  was  the  daiigh-
ter  of  Patrick  Henry.  Judge  Koane  was  a  .leftiir-
sonian  Itepublicun,  and  wrote  several  essays  under
the  name  of  "  Algernon  Sidney,"  asserting  the  su-
premacy of  the  st.ate  in  a  qiu'stion  of  conflicting
authority  lietween  Virginia  and  the  United  States,
which  were  publishe<l  in  the  "  Richmond  Knquirer."

ROANE,  William  Harrison,  senator,  b.  in
Virginia  in  1788;  d.  at  Tri-e  Hill,  near  Richmond,
Va.,  11  Mav,  1845.  After  receiving  an  acjwlemical
education  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  executive
council  and  the  house  of  representatives.  an<l  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  I)cm*)crat.  serving  from  4
Dec..  1815,  till  3  March,  1817.  He  was  aftcrwanl
chosen  U.  S.  senator  in  place  of  Richard  K.  Par-
Icer,  serving  fn.m  4  Sept.,  18:J7.  till  \\  March,  1841.

ROBB,  Janieti,  Imnker,  b.  in  Itrownville,  Fav-
ette  c«).,  Pii.,  2  A|)ril,  1814 ;  d.  near  Cincinnati.
Ohio, :»)  J  111  V,  1881.  His  father  die*l  in  1819.  and.
after  receiving  a  common-school  etlucation.  the
eon  left  his  hmne  at  the  age  of  thirteen  to  seek  his
fortune,  walking  in  the  snow  to  Morgantown.  Va..
where  he  was  emploved  in  a  liank  ami  liecame
its  cashier.  In  1837  lie  went  to  the  city  of  New
Orleans,  lia.,  where  he  remained  for  twent^--one
years,  during  which  time  he  made  six  visitji  to


Rumpe  and  fifteen  to  the  inland  of  Cuba.  He
■built  the  flntt  gas-works  in  the  city  of  llaTana  in
1K40  anil  was  president  of  the  Simnish  cnMlight
c<>m{iany.  sharing  the  capital  with  Maria Chridtiiia,
the  ipii>en-molher  of  Spain.  He  was  active  in  ea-
tablishing  eight  iMinking-houses  and  commercial
Arms  and  agi-ncies  in  New  Orleans,  Phila4lel(ihia.
New  York.  San  Francisco,  and  Iiivcri»ooI,  four  of
which  were  in  existenn?  in  1857.  lie  was  presi-
dent of  the  railroa«l  convention  that  met  in  New
Orleans  in  1851.  and  built  the  flrst  railroad  that
connectwl  New  Orleans  with  the  north.  Mr.  Hobb
was  a  memlK'r  of  the  I»uisiana  s<-nate.  In  18.59
he  removwl  to  Chicago,  where  he  was  interestiHl  in
railrotid  matters.  decline<l  the  military  governor-
ship of  Ijouisiana  which  was  offere<l  bv  Presi«lcnt
Lincoln,  and  the  |>ost  of  secn^tar^'  of  the  treasury,
to  which  Andrew  .lohns«^>n  wi^hi-il  to  np|Miint  him.
Afterwanl  he  established  in  New  Orleans  the  I/ou-
isiana  national  Ij^ink.  of  which  he  was  president  in
18(M>-'9.  His  residence,  standing  in  the  centre  of
a  block,  was  the  finest  in  that  city.  In  1871  he  re-
tired from  business,  and  from  1873  until  his  death
he  residcil  in  "  Ham|Hlen  Place."  near  Cincinnati,
Ohio.  He  was  a  regent  of  the  University  of  Louisi-
ana and  was  the  author  of  several  re|K)rts,  essays,
and  pamphlets  on  iH)litics  and  (Kiliticnl  economy,
— His  son.  James  Hampden,  Imiiker.  b.  in  Phila-
delphia Pa..  27  <.)ct..  184»J,  was  grwluate*!  at  Har-
vanl  in  18W5,  and  studied  also  in  Switzerland,  after
which  he  engaged  in  (ranking  and  in  the  cotton
business.  He  was  a  meinl>er  of  the  legislature  of
New  York  in  1882  and  state  senator  in  l884-'5,
where  he  was  active  in  securing  the  State  n-serva-
tion  at  Niagara  of  which  he  was  a  commissioner
from  188:i  till  1887.  He  was  also  ap|>ointwl  com-
missioner of  the  parks  of  New  York  city,  and  is
now  (1888)  president  of  the  lx>anl.

ROBB,  James  Burch,  lawyer,  b.  in  Raltimore,
Md.,  14  April.  1817;  d.  in  lk>ston.  Mass..  3  Nov.,
1876.  In  his  early  years  he  reinove<l  to  Washing-
ton, D.  C.  was  gniduated  at  (Jeorgetown  college  m
1831.  and  then  entere<l  the  U.  S.  military  a<'ademy,
but  left,  owing  to  impaired  health.  He  was  clerk
of  the  U.  S.  circuit  court  in  Ik)ston.  Mass..  from
1845  till  1849,  when  he  resigned  and  liecame  a  |>at-
ent  lawyer,  in  which  jirofcssion  he  was  successful,
practising  in  Springfield.  Mass..  where  his  father
was  superintendent  of  the  National  armory  for
several  years.  Mr.  Robb  prei»are<l  and  published
a  valuable  compilation  of  "Patent  la-^s  in  Su-
preme and  Countv  Courts  of  the  United  States  to
1850  "  (2  vols..  liostim,  1854).

ROBBINS,  Ashur.  senator,  b.  in  Wethersfield,
Conn..  20  Oct..  1757;  d.  in  New|x>rt,  R.  1..  25
Feb.,  1845.  After  his  graduation  at  Yale  in  1782,
he  was  tutor  at  the  College  of  Rhinle  Island  (now
Brown  university)  from  1783  till  1788.  studied
law,  was  admitte<l  to  the  bar,  an«l  Wgan  to  prac-
tise in  Providence.  He  removed  to  Newport  in
1795,  was  apfKiinte<l  U.  S.  district  attorney,  and
was  a  memlier  of  the  legislature  from  1818  till
1825.  He  was  elecU-d  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a
Whig  in  place  of  James  D'Wolf,  serving  from  5
l)e(\,  1825,  till  3  March,  18:19.  after  which  he  served
again  in  the  Rhode  Islan<l  legislature.  Brown
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  IKW.  He  was  an
accomplishe<l  classical  scholar  and  orator,  and
publisheil  several  addresses  and  orations.— His
nephew.  Royal,  clergvnmn,  b.  in  Wethersfield.
Conn..  21  Oct..  1788;'  d.  in  lierlin.  Conn..  26
March.  1801.  was  graduattnl  at  Yale  in  1800.  stud-
ie<l  theology,  and  was  onlained  |»astor  of  the  Con-
gregational* church  at  Kensingtoi»  ttarlsh,  Berlin,
Conn.,  in  1816,  serving  until  1859. He  contributed


270


ROBBINS


ROBBINS


to  the  "  Christian  Si)ectator  "  and  other  journals, '
to  several  works  compiled  by  Samuel  G.  Goodrich,'
and  was  the  author  of  brief  biographies  of  the  \
poi'ts  James  G.  Pereival  and  John  G.  C.  Brainard,
prefixed  to  editions  of  their  writings ;  many  pub-
lished sermons ;  a  text-book  entitled  "Outlines  of
Ancient  and  Modern  History"  (Hartford,  IbJW);
and  a  "  History  of  American  Literature,"  intended
as  a  supplement  to  Itoljert  Chambers's  "History of
En<,'iisfi  Literature"  (Hartford,  liHi't).

KOUUINS,  Chandler,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bran-
ford,  Conn.,  24  Aug.,  llliS;  d.  in  Plymouth.  Mass.,
30  June,  1799.  He  was  the  s<5n  of  liev,  Philemon
Robbins.  pastor  of  a  church  in  Branford,  Conn.,
from  1782  till  1781,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
175G,  taught  in  an  Iiulian  scrhool  in  Lebanon,  stud-
ied the<ilogy,  and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Con-
gregational church  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  remaining
there  until  his  death.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Dartmouth  in  171*2,  and  by
the  I' niversity  of  Kdin burgh  in  1793.  He  published
"A  Reply  to  John  Cotton's  Essays  on  Baptism"
(1778);  "An  Address  at  Plymouth  to  the  inhabi-
tants assembled  to  celebrate  the  Victories  of  the
French  Republic  over  their  Invaders  "  (1793) ;  "  An
Anniversjiry  Sermon  on  the  Landing  at  Plymouth  "
(1793);  and  other  discourses. — His  brother,  Ammi
Rnhainali,  clergyman,  b.  in  Branford,  Conn.,  25
Aug.,  1740;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Conn.,  30  Oct.,  1813,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1760,  on  28  Oct.,  1761,
was  ordained  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in
Norfolk.  Conn.,  and  remained  there  until  his  death.
In  March.  177G,  he  joined  Gen.  Philip  Schuvler's
brigade  at  Albany  as  chaplain.  He  published  sev-
eral sermons,  including  a  "  Half-Century  Sermon  "
(1811). — Ammi  Ruhamah's  son,  Thomas  clergy-
man, b.  in  Norfolk,  Conn.,  11  Aug.,  1777;  d.  m
Colel)rook,  Conn.,  13  Sept.,  1856,  was  graduated  at
Williams  in  1796,  had  charge  of  the  academy  in

Danville.  Conn.,
from  1799  till  1802,
and  labored  as  a
missionary  inOhio
in  1803--6.  He
was  then  pastor
of  Congregational
churches  in  East
Windsor,  Conn.,  in
1809-'27,  in  Strat-
ford, Conn.,  in
1830-'l,  in  Matta-
poisett  in  1831,
and  in  Rochester,
Mass.,  from  1832
till  1842.  Subse-
quently he  resided
in  Hart  ford.  Conn.
/~7/  jh yy  • . Harvard  gave  him

/^.c-w^-c*^ ^<xU-(m^^ the  degree  of  D.D.

in  1838.  He  was
a  founder  of  the  Connecticut  historical  society,  of
which  he  was  librarian  in  1844,  and  to  which  he
gave  his  private  library.  This  was  deposited  in
the  Wadsworth  athentt>um  at  Hartford,  and  was
valued  at  ^10.000.  It  contains  a  pine  chest  that
was  brought  over  in  the  "  Mayflower,"  on  the  lid  of
which  the  passengers  signed  their  compact.  His
diary  has  been  edited  by  Increase  N.  Tarbox  (2  vols.,
Boston.  188(>-'7).  He  delivered  an  oration  on  the
"  Death  of  Gen.  Washington  "  at  Danbury  on  2  Jan.,
1800.  In  addition  to  many  sermons  he  was  the  au-
thor of  a  "Historical  View  of  the  First  Planters
of  New  England,"  written  for  the  "Connecticut
Evangelical  Magazine"  (Hartford,  1815);  revised
and  continued  James  Tytler's  "  Elements  of  Gen-


eral History"  (1815) ;  and  edited  the  first  and  sec-
ond American  editions  of  Cotton  Mather's  "Mae-
nalia  Christi  Americana  "  (1820  and  185:1).  He
also  issued  anonymously  a  work  on  "  All  Religions
and  Religious  Ceremonies"  (1823).  —  Chandler's
grandson.  Chandler,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lvnn,  Mass.,
14  Feb.,  1810;  d.  in  Weston.  Mass.,  11  ^pt,  1882,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1829.  and  at  the  di-
vinity-school in  1833,  when  he  was  ordained  pas-
tor of  the  Second  church  in  Boston,  of  which  Ralph
Waldo  Emerson  had  been  in  charge.  He  remainetl
there  until  his  resignation  in  1874,  when  he  was
the  oldest  settled  pastor  in  Boston,  and  during  his
pastorate  a  new  church  edifice  was  erected  in  Boyl-
ston  street.  He  was  cha{)lain  of  the  Mjissachusetts
senate  in  1834  and  of  the  state  house  of  representa-
tives in  1845,  and  was  largely  interestea  in  phi-
lanthropy, and  was  a  founder  of  the  Children's  tios-
Siital  in  1869.  Harvard  ^ve  him  the  degree  of
).  D.  in  1855.  Dr.  Robbms  was  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  historical  society,  an  editor  of  its
proceedings,  a  frequent  contributor  to  periodicals,
and  the  author  of  "  A  History  of  the  Second  or
Old  North  Church  in  Boston  "  (Boston,  1852) ;  "  Lit-
urgy for  the  Use  of  a  Christian  Church "  (1854) ;
"  Hymn  -  Book "  (1854) ;  "  Memoir  of  Maria  E.
Clapp "  (1858) ;  "  Memoir  of  William  Appleton "
(1863) ;  •'  Memoir  of  the  Hon.  Benjamin  R.  Curtis,
LL.  D."  (1878) ;  and  sermons  and  addresses.

ROBBINS,  Francis  Le  Baron,  clergyman,  b,
in  Camillus,  Onondaga  co,,  N.  Y.,  2  May,  1830.  He
was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1854,  studied  theol-
ogy at  Auburn  seminary,  and  in  1860  was  ordained
to  the  ministry  and  installed  as  pastor  of  a  Pres-
byterian church  in  Philadelphia.  He  founded  the
Oxford  Presbyterian  church  in  that  city,  which
was  dedicated  in  1869,  and  became  the  pastor,  re-
signing the  office  in  1883.  During  his  pastorate
the  church  edifice,  one  of  the  handsomest  in  the
city,  and  which  had  been  constructed  through  his
efforts,  was  destroyed  by  fire.  Through  Dr.  Rob-
bins's  efforts  a  new  building  was  erected.  After
resigning  he  travelled  extensively  in  Europe,  and
on  his  return  took  up  the  work  of  founding  a
church  in  Kensington,  the  centre  of  the  manufac-
turing district  of  Philadelphia.  In  this  he  succeed-
ed, and  in  1886  the  Beacon  Presbyterian  church
was  dedicated.  Connected  with  it  is  a  reading-
room,  and  a  hall  where  lectures  on  travel,  art,  sani-
tation, and  other  popular  and  timely  themes  are
delivered,  and  class-rooms  for  instruction  in  me-
chanical arts,  music,  drawing,  oratory,  and  a  dis-
r>ensary,  in  which  more  than  3.000  patients  received
free  medical  attention  in  1887.  lie  has  received
from  Union  college  the  degree  of  D.  D.

ROBBINS,  Horace  Wolcott,  artist,  b.  in  Mo-
bile, Ala..  21  Oct.,  1842.  He  went  to  Baltimore
with  his  family  at  the  age  of  six,  and  eleven  years
later  came  to  "New  York,  where  he  studied  paint-
ing under  James  M.  Hart.  In  1865  he  made  a  visit
with  Frederick  E.  Church  to  the  West  Indies,  and
thence  went  to  Europe.  Here  he  studied  for  three
years,  after  which  he  returned  to  New  York.  He
was  elected  an  associate  of  the  Academy  of  design
in  1864,  and  an  academician  in  1878,  and  in  11^2
he  became  recording  secretary.  He  is  also  a  mem-
ber of  the  Water-color  society  and  the  New  York
etching  club,  and  was  president  of  the  Artists'
fund  society  during  1885-'7.  Many  of  his  works
are  pictures  of  mountain  and  lake  scenery,  in  the
delineation  of  which  he  has,  perhaps,  been  most
successful.  His  oil-paintings  include  "Blue  Hills
of  Jamaica"  (1874);  "Passing  Shower,  Jamaica"
(1875);  "Roadside  Elms"  and  "Hjft'l)or  Islands,
Lake  George"  (1878);  "Lake  Kattthdin,  Maine"


ROBBINS


ROBKRT


271


(1883):  "  Karly  Autumn,  Atlimndncks  "  (1888) ;
"Sunst't  on  the  TuuxLh"  ami  "  Dnrkcninif  in  the
Kv»«nin);  (ilory  "  (IHM.'>);  and  "The  liHUe."  Among
his  wHter-coloFH  are  "  After  the  liain,"  "  New  Kng-
lantl  Khns,"  ami  •' New  Kngliind  IloniaHtc«4l,"aview
at  Simshury,  Conn.,  which  last  was  Ixiught  by  the
French  >j<>vernment  at  the  cxhihition  of  1H7H.

KOHBINS,  KonMM>lapr  David  Chaiiroford,
iin);uisi,  h.  in  \VHn!slK)rouj?h.  V't.,  Hii  De*.-.,  IHII  ;
a.  in  Newton  lliK'liI«n<ls.  Mass.,  H  Nov.,  18H2.
lie  waj*  jfniiluHtiMl  at  Midtllehury  eoliep>,  Vt..  in
1835.  ami  at  Amlover  theolo^jieal  .leminary  in  1H4I,
serving;  there  as  lihrarian  until  184H,  after  which
he  was  |>n>fi*s.s4)r  of  latif^ua^^^  at  Mi<l<llelmry  until
1872,  ami  receivwl  from  this  collejf*'  the  dejfree  of
I).  I),  in  1K82.  Dr.  l{4»bl)ins  contributetl  to  the
"  Bililioth<M'a  Sacra,"  translatwl  "  Kfjynt  ami  the
Books  of  Mos«*s"  from  the  German  of  K.  W.  Ilenj;-
8tenU'rj»  (Amlover,  IWJ  ;  2«1  wl..  with  nott's  by
W.  ('»K)ke  Taylor,  FAlinburgh,  1845),  and  Xeno-
phon's  "  Memoral)ilia  of  Six-rates,"  with  notes
(New  York,  ISXi),  and  e<lite<l  the  8tl  and  4th  eili-
tions  of  I*n)f.  Moses  Stuart's  "  Commentaries  on
the  Kpistles  to  the  Komans,  Hebrews,  ami  Eccle-
sinste'^"  (AndovtT.  1X54).

KOKKKHKAr,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  the  island
of  St.  Christopher.  \V.  1..  in  1727;  d.  in  Winches-
ter. Va.,  5  Jan.,  17i»5.  He  was  the  son  of  Ishjw;
Rnberdeau,  a  French  Huguenot,  and  MaryCunyn^-
ham,  a  descendant  of  the  I'^rl  of  (tlencairn,  ni
Scotland.  He  came  to  Philatlelphia  with  his
mother's  family  in  his  youth,  became  a  merchant,
and  wtts  a  manager  of  the  Pennsylvania  hospital  in
1756-'8  and  170ft-'7fl.  He  was  an  early  Mason  in
I*hiltulelphia.  associated  in  1752-'4  with  Franklin,
Alexander  Hamilton,  and  others.  Kolx'rdeau  wa.s
electe»l  to  the  Pennsylvania  ass«'mbly  in  175<j  and
serve<l  till  17<iO.  when  he  declined  further  election.
He  was  an  elder  in  the  Presbyterian  church  in  lUiH,
and  a  friend  of  George  Wfiitefteld,  who  baptized
his  ehlest  son.  When  the  Revolution  approached
he  jointnl  the  Peimsylvania  ass«K'iators,  wius  elected
colonel  of  the  2«1  liattalion  in  1775,  and  made  presi-
dent of  the  iMMtrd  of  officers  that  governe<l  the  as-
sociators.  He  pn>sided  at  a  public  meeting  at  the
State-house  on  20  Mav,  1776,  which  ha<l  great  in-
fluence in  favor  of  the  Declaration  of  Indef>cnd-
ence.  While  in  command  of  his  iMttalion  he  fitteil
out.  in  |)artnership  with  his  friend.  Col.  .lohn
Bayani,  two  ships  as  privateers,  one  of  which
captured  a  valuable  prize,  with  $22,000  in  silver,
which  he  placed  at  the  disposal  of  congress.  He
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  council  of  safety,  and
on  4  July,  177<J,  was  elected  1st  brigmlier-general
of  the  I'ennsylvania  troops,  James  Kwiiig  U'ing
made  2d  brigadier-general.  All  the  asstH'iators
were  now  called  out  to  the  aid  of  Washington,  who
was  in  a  critical  position  in  New  Jersey.  In  Fel)-
riiary,  1777,  Gen.  Rol)enleau  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  Continental  c-ongress.  He  was  active  in
supporting  the  Articles  of  Confe<leration  and  af-
fixetl  his  name  to  that  document  on  the  jmrt  of
Pennsylvaniii. He  was  three  times  electe<l  to  con-

KBSs,  and  starved  till  1779.  In  April,  1778,  there
ing  a  strarcity  of  lead  in  the  army.  Gen.  RoU-r-
deau  receive<l  leave  of  absence  from  congress  in
order  to  work  a  lead  -  mine  in  Be<lfonl  county,
where  he  was  obliged  to  erect  a  stockade  fort  as  a
protection  against  the  Indians.  Most  if  not  all
of  the  ex{)ens«>  of  this  fort  he  fwid  out  of  his  pri-
vate purse.  Samuel  Hazard's  "  Register  of  Penn-
sylvania "and  Peter  Force's  "American  Archives"
contain  much  information  about  this  fort  and  lead-
mine  ;  the  former  was  stylwi  Ff>rt  lioU^nleau.  On
34  and  25  May,  1770,  Uen.  Roberdeau  presided  at  a


public  meeting  in  Philwleliihia  that  haA  referenoe
to  monoimlizers  and  the  (lepni'ialion  of  the  cur-
rency. In  178:t-'4  he  HiM-nt  a  yenr  in  England.
It  is  related  of  RolM-rdeau  that,  while  travelling
in  his  carriagi?  across  lilackluvith,  near  Ijondon.  ha
was  attwked  by  highwaymen,  who  summnde<l  the
carriage.  He  seiz4*<l  the  h'ailer,  thri'w  him  down  in
the  Ixtttom  of  the  carriage,  and  calle«l  t**  thecoa<'h-
man  to  drive  on  and  Are  right  and  left.  He  drove
into  I^ndon  in  this  manner  with  the  roblier's  feet
hanging  out  of  the  carriage,  and  <lelivere<l  him  up
to  justice.  After  the  war  (ten.  i^)lM•rd«4lU  n-movcd
from  Philadelphia  to  Alexaiulria,  \'a.,  where  he
often  entertaimni  (Jen.  Washington.  A  short  time
before  his  death  he  removal  to  Winchester,  Va.
— His  eldest  8<in,  Isaac,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa..  1 1  Sept..  17<W  :  d.  in  (je<»rgetown,  D.  ('..  15  Jan.,
1829.  was  e«lucated  in  this  country  an<l  in  Kngland.
His  first  public  services  were  at  the  instance  of  Gen.
Wa.shington  as  as-
sistant engineer
in  laying  out  the
city  of  Washing-
ton in  1791.  In
1792  he  was  en-
gageil  as  engineer
in  uuilding  canals
in  Pennsylvania,
He  resided  for
some  time  in  New
Jersey,  and,  as
major  of  brigade,
dehverwl  an  ora-
tion on  the  death
of  Gen.  Washing-
t<m.  22  Feb.,  1800.
Onlv  a  few  co|iies
of  this  are  known
to  exist;  one  of
them  is  in  the  li-
brary of  congress.
On  29  April,  1813,  he  was  appointed  major  and  topo-
graphical engineer  in  the  regular  arujy.  this  corps
b<'ing  then  just  constitute<l  by  the  ap|K)intment  of
four  majors  and  four  captains.  At  the  close  of  the
war  with  (ireat  Britain  he  wasonlere<l  to  survey  the
boundary  l)etween  the  L'nite<l  States  and  Canada,
under  the  treat v  of  (ihent.  The  treaty  of  178!^  had
fixed  the  iMumlary  in  the  middle  of  the  lakes  and
rivers,  and  the  treaty  of  Ghent  provide«l  for  a  sur-
vey to  determine  the  location  of  that  line.  Col.
Rolx'rdeau  was  the  engineer  in  charge  of  the  survey,
which  was  nearly  SMK)  miles  in  length,  through  St.
I>»»wrence  river  and  the  great  lakes.  In  1818  Col.
Rf)|jenleau  was  onlen*<l  to  organize  the  bureau  of
to|>ographical  engineers  in  the  war  dejwrtment,
anil  was  made  its  chief,  which  |)ost  he  held  until
his  death.  He  was  a  friend  of  President  John
(^uincy  Adams,  and  of  John  C.  Calhoun,  then  sifre-
tary  of  war.  and  usually  travelle<l  with  him  on  hie
official  visits  to  military  |)osts.  He  entertained
Ijafayette  during  the  latter's  visit  to  this  countrv  in
1825."  .See  "(ieneal«)gy  of  the  I^)lH'rdeau  Family,"
bv  UolH'rdeau  Buchanan  (Washington.  187G).

ROBERT,  Cliristopher  Rhinrlander,  philan-
thropist, b.  in  Brookhaven,  I^ong  Island,  N.  Y..  28
March.  1802;  d.  in  Paris,  France.  28  Oct.,  1878.
His  father,  Daniel,  a  physician.  pnu'tise<I  for  sev-
eral years  in  the  islan<l  of  Sjinto  Domingo.  The
son  be<'an>e  a  merchant's  clerk  in  New  York  city,
and  after  five  years  ententl  business  for  himself,
carrying  it  on  chiefly  in  New  Orleans.  I^a.  In  1830
he  t>ecame  ht>ad  «>f  the  firm  of  RoU-rt  and  Williams
in  New  York,  ami  he  also  held  the  nri'sidency
of  a  large  coal  and  iron  com|)any. lie  retired


eA()XCiAAj


272


ROBERT


ROBERl'S


from  business  in  1862.  Mr.  Robert  pave  large
Slims  to  Hamilton  college  and  Auburn  theological
seminary,  but  his  chief  benefactions  were  to  the
American  college  in  Constantinople,  which  was
named  Robert  college  in  his  honor.  lie  gave  it
1290,000  ill  his  lifetime,  and  left  it  $125,000  in  his
will,  besides  real  estate  valued  at  f 40,000. — His
wife,  Ann  Maria,  b.  in  New  york  city,  1  Aug.,
1802;  d.  there.  9  April.  1888,  was  a  daughter  of
William  Shaw,  a  merchant  of  New  York  city.  She
married  Mr.  R^obert  in  1829,  accompanied  him  on
his  Eastern  travels,  and  aided  in  the  organization
and  support  of  numerous  orphan  asylums,  homes
for  agea  colored  women,  ana  other  religious  and
philanthropical  institutions.

ROBERT,  Joseph  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in
Beaufort  district,  S.  C,  28  Nov.,  1807;  d.  in  At-
lanta, Ga.,  5  March,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1828  and  at  South  Carolina  medical  col-
lege in  1832,  after  studying  two  years  at  Yale.  In
1834  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church
in  Robertsville,  S.  C,  but  he  soon  removed  to  Ken-
tucky. After  several  brief  pastorates  he  became  in
1864  professor  of  languages  in  Iowa  state  uni-
versity, and  in  1869  he  was  made  president  of
Burlington  university  in  the  same  state.  In  1871
he  took  charge  of  the  Augusta  institute  for  the
training  of  colored  ministers,  and  when  this  insti-
tute was  removed  in  1879  to  Atlanta,  and  incor-
porated with  the  Atlanta  Baptist  seminary,  he  was
made  its  president.  In  this  service  he  continued
until  his  death.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  given
him  by  Denison  university  in  1869.  —  His  son,
Henry  Martyn,  soldier,  b.  in  Beaufort  district,
S.  C,  2  May,  1837,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1857.  He  received  his  commis-
sion with  the  rank  of  lieutenant  in  the  corps  of
engineers,  and  has  ever  since  remained  in  that
service.  Soon  after  his  graduation  he  was  ap-
pointed assistant  professor  of  natural  philosophy
at  West  Point,  but  he  was  subsequently  trans-
ferred to  the  department  of  practical  engineer-
ing. In  1858  he  was  stationed  at  Fort  Vancouver,
and  during  the  northwest  boundary  difficulties  be-
tween this  country  and  Great  Britain  he  had  charge
of  the  construction  of  defences  on  San  Juan  island.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  though  of  south-
ern birth  and  with  all  his  relatives  in  the  south.  Col.
Robert  unhesitatingly  espoused  the  Union  cause.
He  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  MeClellan,  and  as-
sisted in  building  the  fortifications  around  Wash-
ington. He  was  subsequently  employed  in  similar
services  at  Philadelphia  and  New  Bedford,  JMass.
He  was  promoted  captain  in  1863,  and  at  the  close
of  the  war  he  was  placed  again  at  the  head  of  the
department  of  practical  engineering  at  West  Point,
where  he  remained  till  1867.  In  that  year  he  was
made  major,  and  in  1871,  with  headquarters  at
Portland,  he  had  charge  of  the  fortifications,  light-
houses, and  harbor  and  river  improvements  in
Oregon  and  Washington  territory.  He  was  trans-
ferred in  1873  to  Milwaukee,  and  assigned  to  a  like
duty  on  Lake  Michigan.  He  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  1883,  and  is  now  (1888)  superin-
tendent of  river  and  harbor  improvements  and  de-
fences in  the  district  of  Philatlel{)hia.  Col.  Robert
is  the  author  of  "  Robert's  Rules  of  Order  "  (Chi-
cago, 1876)  and  has  supervised  the  preparation  of
"An  Index  to  the  Reports  of  the  Chief  Engineers
of  the  U.  S.  A.  on  River  and  Harbor  Improve-
ments" (vol.  i.,  to  1879,  Wa<;hington,  1881;  vol.  iL,
to  1887,  in  preparation).

ROBERTS,  Benjamin  Stone,  soldier,  b.  in
Manchester,  Vt.,  in  1811 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
29  Jan.,  1875. He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.


military  academy  in  1835.  and  assigned  to  the  Ist
dragoons,  but  after  several  years  of  frontier  service
he  resigned  on  28  Jan.,  1839,  and  as  principal  en-
gineer built  the  Champlain  and  Ogdensburg  rail-
road. He  was  assistant  geologist  of  New  York  in
1841.  and  in  1842  aided  Lieut.  George  W.  Whistler
in  constructing  the  Russian  system  of  railways.
He  then  returned  to  the  United  .States,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  in  1843  began  to  practise  in
Iowa.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  .state  mi-
litia in  1844,  and  on  27  May.  1846,  was  reappointed
in  the  U.  S.  army  as  a  1st  lieutenant  of  mounted
rifles,  becoming  captain,  16  Feb.,  1847.  During
the  war  with  Mexico  he  served  at  Vera  Cruz,  Cerro
Gordo,  Contreras,  Churubusco,  where  he  led  an
advance  party  of  stormers  and  for  which  he  was
brevetted  major,  and  the  capture  of  the  city  of
Mexico.  He  then  took  part  in  the  actions  at  Aiata-
moras  and  the  Galajara  pass  against  guerillas,  and
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel.  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  received,  15  Jan.,  1849.  a  sword  of  honor
from  the  legislature  of  Iowa.  From  this  time  till
the  civil  war  he  served  on  the  southwestern  fron-
tier and  on  bureau  duty  at  Washington,  with  fre-
quent leaves  of  absence  on  account  of  feeble  health.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  in  New
Mexico,  and  after  his  promotion  to  major,  on  13
May,  1861,  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  first
of  the  northern  and  then  of  the  southern  district  of
that  territory,  being  engaged  in  the  defence  of
Fort  Craig  against  the  Texan  forces  under  Gen.
Henry  H.  Sibley  in  1862,  the  action  at  Valverde  in
the  same  year,  where  he  was  brevetted  colonel  for

fallantry,  and  the  combats  at  Albuquerque  and
'eralta.  On  1  June,  1861,  he  was  ordered  to  Wash-
ington, and  on  16  July  he  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  and  assigned  as  chief
of  cavalry  to  Gen.  John  Pope,  with  whose  Army
of  Virginia  he  served  during  its  campaign  in  1862,
acting  also  as  inspector -general.  In  the  latter
part  of  the  year  he  was  at;ting  inspector-general  of
the  northwestern  department,  ana  led  an  expedi-
tion against  the  Chippewa  Indians,  and  in  1863  he
was  in  command  first  of  the  upper  defences  of
Washington  and  then  of  an  independent  brigade
in  West  Virginia  and  Iowa  In  1864,  after  leading
a  division  of  the  19th  corps  in  Louisiana,  he  was
chief  of  cavalry  of  the  Gulf  department,  till  he  was
ordered,  early  in  1865.  to  the  charge  of  a  cavalry
division  in  western  Tennessee.  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in  the
regular  army  for  services  at  Cedar  Mountain,  and
major-general  of  volunteers  for  that  action  and
the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run.  He  became  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  3d  cavalry  on  28  July,  1866,
served  on  frontier  and  recruiting  service  till  1868,
and  then  as  professor  of  military  science  at  Yale
till  his  retirement  from  active  service  on  15  Dec.,
1870.  He  was  the  inventor  of  the  Roberts  breech-
loading  rifle,  to  the  perfection  and  introduction  of
which  he  devoted  many  years  of  his  life.  In  1870
he  formed  a  company  for  its  manufacture,  which
finally  failed,  though  Gen.  Roberts  had  secured  a
contract  in  Europe.

ROBERTS,  Charles  George  Donglas,  Cana-
dian poet,  b.  in  Douglas,  York  co..  New  Brunswick,
10  Jan.,  1860.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  New  Brunswick,  Fredericton,  in  1879,  became
principal  of  the  Chatham  grammar-school  in  1879,
and  of  the  York  street  school  in  1882.  He  as-
sumed the  editorship  of  the  Toronto  "  Week  "  in
Decemlier,  1883,  and  was  appointed  professor  of
English  and  French  literature  and  political  econo-
my in  the  University  of  King's  colTege,  Windsor,
Nova  Scotia,  in  October,  1885. Those  of  his  poeti-


ROBERTS


ROBKRTS


273


oal  oompositioM  that  are  dixtinctively  Canadian
are  r«mrdo<l  f^  Itcititr  t<|M'<>iHlly  i'X(vll(Mit.  lie  Ham
publUned  "Orion,  uiul  otlu-r  I'ih-iijs"  (I'hilailel-
phia,  1880):  "  In  Divi'rs  Tonos"  (lioston  hmiI  Mon-
treal, 1887):  ami  wlittnl  "  I'ooms  of  Wildlife"  in
the  aeries  of  ('Huterlmry  i)«>cts  (IMHJS).  Mr,  Itoberts
has  also  contributed  to  i>eri<Kli(.>Al  liternture,  and  i.n
an  eanu>:<t  twlvoc-ate  of  C  anttdian  niitionuli-sin.

ROBERTS,  Ediuiiiid,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, N.  II.,  2ii  .luuf,  17H4:  d.  in  Mwao.  China,
12  Jiiiie,  IMO.  Waiviiij?  nu  appointment  t^  mid-
BhipniHU  at  the  iij?e  of  thirteen  in  the  L'.  S.  navv.
ho  entertnl  u|M)n  a  men-ant iie  eureer,  living  in
Buenos  Ayres,  and  then  in  London  until  he  was
twenty-four  years  old.  He  was  an  extensive  ship-
owner, and  lost  heavily  bv  the  Spanish  and  French
privateers.  In  1H27  he  cnartertHl  the  ship  "Mary
Anne"  and  saile<l  to  Zanzibar,  meeting  the  sultan
and  establishinj;  a  friendship  that  afterward  <le-
velojiod  into  treaty  rtOations  with  the  L'nited  .States.
Making  further  voyages  to  ports  on  the  Indian
ocean,  he  studieil  the  possible  o|)enings  to  Ameri-
can trade.  On  his  return,  with  the  assistance  of
Levi  Woodbury,  his  sug^stions  were  brought  be-
fore congress,  and  in  consequence  the  U.  S.  vessels
"  Peacock*'  and  "  Boxer"  were  sent  out,  with  Mr.
Roberts  as  special  di[>lomatic  agent,  to  make  trea-
ties with  Muscat,  Siani,  aiul  Cochin-China.  His
successes  during  a  voyage  of  twenty-six  months
are  detailed  in  his  posthumous  volume,  "  Embassy
to  the  Eastern  Courts  "  (New  York,  1837).  I^eav-
ing  again  in  1835  in  the  "  Peacock,"  to  exchange
ratifications  of  the  treaties  that  had  been  made
with  Muscat  and  Siam,  and  to  visit  Japan  with  like
purpose,  he  died  at  Macao  of  fever  that  he  had
contracted  in  Siam.  A  monument  over  his  grave,
erected  by  Americans  in  China,  and  a  memorial
window  in  St.  John's  church,  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,

g resented  bv  his  granddaughter,  Mrs.  John  V.  L.
niyn,  of  Albany.  N.  Y.,  keep  alive  the  memory  of
the  first  American  diplomatist  in  Asia,  whfvse  un-
finished work  was  consummated  by  Matthew  Perry
and  Townsend  Harris.  Ilis  wife'  was  the  young-
est daughter  of  Woodbury  I^iangdon.  Of  his  eight
daughters  who  survived  him,  Catharine  Whipple
became  the  wife  of  Rev.  Andrew  P.  PealxMly.  1).  I).,
of  Harvard  University;  Sarah,  author  of  several
volumes  and  various  poems,  marrie<i  Dr.  James
Boyle,  of  Canada;  and  Harriet  Langdon  married
the'  late  Aiiiasa  J.  Parker,  of  Albany,  N.  Y.

ROBERTS,  Elliti  Henrr,  journalist,  b.  in
Utica,  N.  Y.,  30  Sept.,  1837.  lie  was  prepared  for
college  at  Whitestown  seminary  and  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1850.  was  princijwl  of  the  Utica  acad-
emy, taught  Ijatin  in  the  female  seminary.  I)c-
came  etlitor  and  proprietor  of  the  Utica  "  Morning
Herald  "  in  1850,  served  in  the  legislature  in  1867,
and  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican  con-
ventions of  1804,  18(J8,  and  1876.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Itepublican,  serving  on  the  com-
mittee of  ways  and  means  from  4  March,  1871,  till
3  March,  1875,  after  which  he  resumed  the  control
of  his  pajK'r  in  Uti<-a,  which  he  now  (1888)  con-
tinues, and  to  which  hecontribute^l  in  1873  a  series
of  lett^'rs  entitle<l  "To  Greece  and  Beyond."  He
was  a  defeattnl  candidate  for  congress  in  1876.
Hamilton  college  ^ve  him  the  degree  of  LL.  I),
in  1S<J9,  and  Yale  in  1884.  He  has  lieen  president
of  the  Fort  Schuyler  club,  and  is  now  (18N8)  presi-
dent of  the  Oneida  historical  society.  He  delivered
an  address  in  Klmira,  N.  Y.,  on  29  Aug.,  187J),  at
the  Centennial  celebration  of  the  Iwttle  of  New-
town, and  a  course  of  le<-tures  on  "Government
Revenue"  at  Cornell  and  Hamilton  in  1884,  which
were  published  (Ikwton,  1884). Mr.  Roberts  is  also

VOL.  T. — 18


the  author  of  "The  Planting  and  Growth  of  the

Empire  .State"  in  t he  "  .\ merican  Commonwealth

S«Ties"  (Huston.  IKH7).

ROBERTS.  (J<>once  Waxhlnirton.  soldier,  b.
in  Chester  county.  Pa.,  2  Oct.,  XKki;  <1.  near  Mur-
freeslK)rougli,  Tenn..  31  Dtn:,  1862.  After  gradu-
ation at  Yale  iti  18.*i7,  he  studitnl  law  and  practlMHl
in  his  native  county,  and  in  Chicago  after  1860.  He
was  ci)mmi.ssi(m«Hl  major  of  the  42d  Illinois  volun-
t(H-rs  (m  22  July,  1861.  and  partici|iHted  in  the
march  of  Gen,  John  C.  PWrnont  to  Springfield,
111.  He  became  lieutenant  •  colonel  and  colonel.
He  won  honor  in  the  cani[>aign  of  1WJ2.  command-
ing a  brigatle  of  the  Army  of  the  Missnstiippi,
served  at  the  siege  of  Corinth  in  April  and  Slav,
1862,  and  at  Farm ington,  Tenn..  7  Oct..  1862.  At
the  battle  of  Stone  River,  Tenn.,  31  Dec..  1862.  he
had  the  a<lvance  of  the  20th  army  c<»rps,  drove  the
enemy  to  their  breastworks,  and  was  kille<l  while
leading  the  42d  Illinois  in  a  successful  charge.

ROBERTS.  Howard,  sculptor,  b,  in  Philadel-

Shia,  Pa.,  t»  April.  1843.  He  first  studiinl  art  un-
er  Joseph  A.  Kailly  at  the  Pennsvlvania  academy.
When  twenty-three  years  of  age  fie  went  to  Pans,
where  he  studied  at  the  fecole  des  lM>aux-art.s,  and
also  under  Dumont  and  Gumerv.  On  his  return
he  opene<l  a  studio  in  Philadelpliia.  and  pnKluced
there  his  first  work  of  note,  the  statuette  "  Hester
and  Pearl,"  from  Hawthonie's  "Sc-arlet  Ix'tter"
(1872).  It  was  exhibited  at  the  academy  in  Phila-
delphia, where  it  attracted  much  attention,  and
gained  him  an  elec-tion  to  membership.  In  1878
he  went  again  to  Paris,  and  while  there  modelled
"  La  premiere  nose  "  (1876),  which  received  a  medal
at  the  Philadelphia  centennial  exhibition  of  1876.
Among  his  other  works  are  "Hvpatia"  (1870);
"  Lucille,"  a  bust  (1873) ;  "  Lot's  Wife,"  a  statuette ;
and  numerous  ideal  and  {M>rtrait  busts.  His  statue
of  HoU-rt  Fulton  is  in  tlie  caj)itol  at  Washington.

ROBERTS.  James  Booth,  actor,  b.  in  New-
castle,  Del.,  27  Sept.,  1818.  He  was  e<lucat(Hl  at
the  Newcastle  acaaemy.  and  made  his  first  appear-
ance at  the  Walnut  street  theatre  in  Philadelphia
on  18  Jan.,  18Ji6,  as  Richmond  to  Junius  Brutus
B<xith*8  Richanl  111,  In  1851  he  went  to  P^ng-
land  and  playe<l  at  Drurj'  lane  theatre,  I^ondon.  in
the  chara<-ters  of  Sir  (liles  Overreach,  King  I/ear.
and  Richard  111,  He  wrote  a  version  of  Gm'the's
"  Faust,"  which  he  produced  in  Philadelphia,  play-
ing Mejihistopheles,

ROBERTS,  Job.  agriculturist,  b.  near  Gwvnedd,
Philadelphia  (now  Montgomen')  co..  Pa..  23  March.
1757:  d.  there,  20  Aug..  1851.  'From  1791  till  1820
he  was  justice  of  the  jK^ace.  He  encourage<l  me-
chanical and  agricultural  enterprise,  improve«l  the
metluxls  of  farming,  planted  hedges,  intrtKluce<i
green  fcxlder  in  the  feeding  of  cattle,  and  the  use
of  gypsum  as  a  fertilizer:  was  among  the  first  to
intro<Iuce  and  breeil  merino  she<'p  in  Pennsylvania,
and  promoted  the  manufacture  of  silk.  In  1780  he
drove  to  the  Friends'  meeting  in  Gwyne«ld  in  a
carriage  that  was  made  by  hinis«'lf,  which  was  >aid
to  have  been,  at  that  time  and  for  twenty-five  years
afterward,  the  only  one  in  that  county.  He  pub-
lished "The  Pennsylvania  Farmer,  U'ing  a  Selec-
tion from  the  most  appnived  Treatises  on  Hus-
bandry" (Philadelphia,  1804).

RObERTS.  Jonathan,  senator,  b.  in  Upjier
Merion.  .Moiitgomerv  co..  Pa.,  16  Aug..  1771  :  a.  in
Phila<lelphia.  21  July.  IHTA.  His  father,  of  the
s<iine  name.  serve<l  many  years  in  the  assembly,
and  was  one  of  the  deiegjites  to  the  cvnvention
that  ratified  the  constitution  of  1787.  The  son
develojHHl  unusual  literary  taste,  but,  on  the  com-
pletion of  his  education  in  his  seventeenth  year.


274


ROBERTS


ROBERTS


was  apprenticed  to  a  wheelwright.  On  attaining
his  nirtjority  he  returned  home  and  assisted  his
father  in  tlie  work  of  the  farm,  devoting  his  leisure
time  to  studv.  In  1798-'9  he  was  chosen  to  the
assembly,  anil  in  1807  to  the  state  senate.  He  was
then  elected  to  congress,  serving  from  4  Nov.,
1811,  till  28  Feb.,  1814,  and  attaining  note,  particu-
larly in  his  support  of  measures  relating  to  the  war
of  1812.  Peniling  the  consideration  of  a  declaration
of  war  he  matle  an  able  speech,  closing  with  the
words :  *'  I  repose  safely  on  the  maxim,  '  Never  to
despair  of  the  republic.'"  Mr.  Roberts  had  the
entire  confidence  of  Mr.  Madison,  who  availed  him-
self of  his  services  in  many  imjwrtant  emergencies.
During  this  i>eriod  he  wrote  largely  for  public
journals,  many  of  his  letters  appearing  in  the
'•  Aurora,"  his  writings,  notably  a  series  of  letters
addressed  to  John  Rjindolph,  of  Roanoke,  attract-
ing general  public  attention.  When,  in  May,  1812,
the  president  informed  congress  that  there  was  no
hope  that  Great  Britain  would  abandon  her  ag-
gressions, and  an  effort  was  made  to  adjourn  con-
gress, it  was  largely  due  to  Mr.  Roberts  that  an  ad-
journment was  prevented,  and  his  cull  for  the  pre-
vious question  forced  the  vote  on  the  war  bill,  18
June,  1812.  He  urged  a  vigorous  prosecution  of
the  war,  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  ways
and  means,  and  came  to  be  regarded  as  the  repre-
sentative of  Albert  Gallatin,  secretary  of  the  treas-
ury, on  the  floor  of  the  house.  While  serving  his
second  term  he  was  chosen  to  the  senate,  and  en-
tered on  his  duties,  28  Feb.,  1814.  In  the  senate
he  became  notable  for  the  part  that  he  took  in  the
famous  controversy  growing  out  of  the  bill  to  ad-
mit Maine  into  the  Union.  When  the  bill  was  re-
ported with  an  amendment  admitting  Missouri
also,  Mr.  Roberts  moved  the  further  amendment
that  slavery  should  be  prohibited  in  the  latter
state.  The  debate  on  this  motion,  which  lasted
through  three  weeks,  is  historic.  On  its  defeat
came  that  of  Mr.  Thomas,  of  Illinois,  known  as  the
"Missouri  compromise,"  which  Mr.  Roberts  ably
and  deter mineuly  opposed.  After  completing  a
full  term  of  service  in  the  senate,  he  wa^  chosen
again  to  the  state  assembly,  and  he  was  subse-
quently appointed  by  the  governor  one  of  the  canal
commissioners.  For  twenty  years  he  took  a  chief
part  in  Peimsylvania  in  the  opposition  to  Andrew
Jackst)n,  both  before  and  after  the  latter  became
president.  Mr.  Roberts  was  an  early  and  an  active
supporter  of  the  protective  tariff.  In  this  interest
he  was  a  member  of  the  national  conventions  that
met  at  Harrisburg  in  1827  and  at  New  York  in
1830.  He  was  a  delegate  in  1840  to  the  convention
that  nominated  Gen.  Harrison  for  the  presidency,
giving  his  support  to  Henry  Clay,  and  on  behalf
of  the  Pennsylvania  delegation  he  nominated  John
Tvler  for  the  vice-presidency.  When,  on  the  death
of  Harrison,  Tyler  succeeded  to  the  presidency,  he
appointed  Mr.  Roberts  collector  of  the  port  of
Philadelphia,  which  post  he  filled  from  April,
1841.  till  the  following  year.  In  the  contest  that
arose  between  Mr.  Tyler  and  the  Whig  party,  the
president  asked  Roberts  to  remove  about  thirty
officials  in  the  customs  department  and  to  replace
them  with  partisans  of  the  president.  This  Mr.
Roberts  refused  to  do,  nor  would  he  resign.  Mr.
Roberts  had  been  a  member  of  the  Soeietv  of
Friends,  but  was  disowned  by  them  because  of  the
part  he  had  taken  in  furthering  the  war  of  1812.
— His  son,  Jonathan  Manning',  investigator,  b.  in
Montgomery  couiitv.  Pa.,  7  Dec,  1821 ;  d.  in  Bur-
lington, N.  J.,  28  F'eb.,  1888.  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  at  Norristown,  Pa.,  in  1850,  and
practised his  profession for  about  a year,  but


abandoned  it  and  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits.
These  j)n)ving  financially  successful,  he  found  time
to  gratify  his  desire  for  metaphy^sical  investiga-
tions. He  also  took  an  interest  in  politics,  being
an  enthusiastic  Whig  and  strongly  opposed  to
slavery.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Free-soil  con-
vention at  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  that  nominated  Martin
Van  Buren  for  president  in  1848,  and  subsequently
canvassed  New  Jersey  for  that  candidate.  When
the  so-called  spiritual  manifestations  at  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  first  attracted  public  attention,  Mr.  Roberts
earnestly  protested  against  the  possibility  of  their
having  a  suj)ernatural  origin.  After  several  years
of  patient  inquiry  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that
they  were  facts  that  could  be  explained  on  .scien-
tific principles  and  resulted  from  the  operation  of
natural  causes.  This  conviction  led  to  his  estab-
lishing an  organ  of  the  new  faith  at  Philadelphia
in  1878  under  the  title  of  "  Mind  and  Matter."
His  fearless  advocacy  of  his  peculiar  views  involved
him  in  litigation  and  caused  his  imprisonment.
Finding  the  publication  of  a  journal  too  great  a
tax  on  his  resources,  he  abandoned  it,  and  devoted
the  rest  of  his  life  to  study  and  authorship.  Among
his  manuscript,  of  which  he  left  a  large  amount,
is  "  A  Life  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana  "  and  "  A  His-
tory of  the  Christian  Religion,"  which  he  completed
just  before  his  death.

ROBERTS,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Middletowii,
Del.,  30  Dec,  1814.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1835,  assigned  to  the  4th  artil-
lery, and  served  in  the  Florida  war  of  183G-'7  as
captain  in  a  regiment  of  mounted  Creek  volunteers.
From  1837  till  1849  he  was  assistant  professor  of
natural  and  experimental  philosophy  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  and  he  was  made  1st  lieutenant
on  7  July,  1848,  and  cantain  on  20  Aug.,  1848.  In
1850-'8  he  was  engaged  in  hostilities  against  the
Seminoles  in  Florida  and  on  frontier  duty  in  Texas,
Kansas,  and  Nebraska,  and  in  1859  he  was  assigned
to  the  artillery-school  for  practice  at  Fort  Monroe,
Va.,  where  he  was  a  meml)er  of  the  board  to  ar-
range the  programme  of  instruction  in  1859-'61.
He  was  appointed  major  on  3  Sept.,  1861,  became
chief  of  artillery  of  the  7th  array  corps  on  19  Sept.,
1862,  and  commanded  Fort  Monroe  in  186;i-'5
and  Fort  McHenrv.  Md.,  in  1865-'6,  receiving  the
appointments  of  colonel  of  the  3d  Pennsylvania
heavy  artillery,  19  March,  1863.  and  lieu'tenant-
coloiiel,  4th  artillery,  11  Aug.,  1863.  He  was  bre-
vetted  colonel  and  brigaflier-general,  U.  S.  army,
to  date  from  13  March,  1865,  and  brigadier-general
of  volunteers  on  9  April,  1865.  for  meritorious  and
distinguished  services  during  the  war.  On  9  Nov.,
1865,  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service.
From  1  May,  1867,  till  1  April,  1868,  he  was  acting
inspector-general  of  the  Department  of  Washing-
ton, when  he  was  made  sui>erintendent  of  theoreti-
cal instruction  in  the  artillery-school  at  Fort  Mon-
roe. Va.,  serving  until  13  Feb.,  1877.  He  was  pro-
moted colonel  in  the  4th  artillery  on  10  Jan.,  1877,
and  was  placed  on  the  retired  list  on  2  July,  1877.
Gen.  Rot)erts  is  the  author  of  a  "  Hand-Book  of
Artillery"  (New  Yorfe  1860).

ROBERTS,  Jose|)h  Jenkins,  president  of  Li-
beria, b.  in  Norfolk.  \  a.,  15  March,  1809 ;  d.  in  Mon-
rovia, Lilieria,  24  Feb.,  1876.  He  was  a  negro  and
the  son  of  "  Aunty  Robos,"  as  she  was  familiarly
callal  in  Petersburg,  Va.,whence  she  emigrated  with
her  three  sons  to  Lilieria  in  1829.  When  the  colony
of  Liberia  was  founded  by  the  American  colonization
society  he  was  first  lieutenant-governor  anct  then
governor  of  the  colony,  and.  upon  the  formation  of
the  republic  in  1848,  he  was  elected*  its  first  presi-
dent, serving  four  years. When  there  was  a  revolt


ROBERTS


ROBERTS


275


against  President  Edward  J.  Roye  (q.  v.)  in  1871,
hv  WM  again  made  prvnident,  oervin);  until  1H75.
lie  enooufi^ged  agric-ultun>,  proinottHl  iMlucHiion,
fnvorMl  ••iiiiirnition  fn»in  the  I'nit***!  Stut«'««,  und
|.|:i  |iU«  (»n  friendly  terini*  with  KunnH'ttii

mil;  111  IMTHiuntil  hi!<death  hewKapn-sident

of  LiUriu  (.'oilep'.— IIIh  brother,  John  nrifrht,
M.  VL  bishop,  b.  in  l'etor»bur>r.  Vju.  in  IHl.');  d.  in
Monnniti,  LilHTia.  80  Jan..  1H75,  whm  wlucated  in
LilM>ria.  enter«'«l  the  Meth<Hlist  ministry  in  1838,
wrvi'd  ns  jmstor.  pn-siiiinj:  elder,  and  secretary,
and  W)is  iiiikIi-  bisliop  in  1M(>((.

ROUKRTS.  Munthall  Onen,  niorthant,  b.  in
New  York  citv.  22  March,  1814;  d.  in  Saratojra
Spring.  N.  Y..'  11  Sept.,  1880,  His*  father,  a  phy-
sician, came  from  Wales  and  settlwl  in  New  Y<»rk
in  1798.  The  son  recreived  a  goo<l  e<lucation,  and
would  have  lx«en  sent  to  collejje.  as  his  father
wished  him  to  jwlopt  his  own  j)rofes,sion.  but  the
boy  pri'fern'd  a  mercantile  life.  After  leavinfj
school  he  In-came  first  a  grocer's  clerk,  but  soon
afterwartl  secure<l  a  place  with  a  ship-chandler.
By  the  time  he  was  of  ago  he  had  saved  enough
money  to  begin  business  for  himself,  and  in  two
years  he  obtaine<l  a  contract  to  supply  the  U.  S.
navy  do|>artment  with  whale-oil,  on  which  he  real-
ized a  handsome  profit.  He  was  among  the  first
to  recognize  the  mlvantage  of  fitjely  e<piinped
stt'amt'rs  for  Hudson  river,  and  built  the  "  Hen-
drik  Hudson."  He  next  turned  his  attention  to
railma«ls,  was  one  of  the  early  advcK-ates  of  the
Erie.and  projected  the  Delaware,  Ijackawanna,  and
Western  railroatl.  When  the  "California  fever"
began  in  1840  he  made  a  contract  with  the  U.  S.
government  to  transport  the  mails  to  California  by
the  Isthmus  of  Panama.  He  owned  the  "Star  of
the  West."  which  was  sent  with  provisions  to  Fort
Sumter,  and  when  Fort  Monroe  was  threatened
in  the  spring  of  1801  he  raise<l  1.000  men  at  his
own  ex|)ense  and  sent  them  in  his  steamer  "Amer-
ica "to  re-enforce  the  garrison.  He  took  a  great
interest  in  the  Texas  Pacific  railroad,  and  invested
nearly  $2,000,(X)0  in  the  enterprise,  and  he  was  also
largely  intorestetl  in  other  railrtwids  throughout
the  Unitetl  States  and  Cana<la.  He  was  also  one
of  the  earliest  friends  of  the  Atlantic  telegraph
cable.  In  18o2  he  was  nominated  for  congn>ss  My
the  Whig  party,  but  was  defeatefl.  In  1850  he
was  a  delegjite  to  the  first  National  convention  ol
the  Republican  party  which  met  in  Philadelphia
and  nominatwl  John  C.  Fremont  for  the  presi-
dency. In  18Go  he  was  nominated  for  mayor  of
New  York  by  the  Union  party,  but  again  wjis  un-
succt'ssful.  The  value  of  his  gallery  of  pictures
was  estiiimtf<l  at  i|!7.*)().000.

ROBERTS,  Oran  Mllo,  governor  of  Texas,  b.
in  liaurens  district,  S.  C„  U  July,  1815.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Alal)ama  in  18JJ6,
studiinl  law,  l)egan  to  practise,  and  starved  in  the
Alabama  legislature  in  18JJ9-'40.  Removing  to
Texas  in  1841.  he  was  appointed  district-attorney
in  1844  and  district  juuge  in  1840,  holding  this
office  for  five  years.  In  18.')7  he  was  electwl  to  the
supreme  Iwncn  as  associate  jiistice,  which  iwst  he
held  until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  m  1801.
He  was  elected  president  of  the  Secession  conven-
tion, and  was  c<»lonel  of  a  regiment  in  the  Confe<l-
erate  armv  fn>in  1802  till  August.  1804.  when  he
was  calle<I  from  the  flehl  to  lx!come  chief  justice
of  the  suj)n>nu'  court.  In  18<WJ  lie  was  electe«l  to
the  U.  S.  senate,  but  was  not  allowwl  to  take  his
seat.  From  18<M  till  1874  he  taught  law  in  private
schools.  In  1874  and  1870  he  was  again  elccte<l
chief  justice  of  the  Texas  supreme  court.  He  was
governor  of  Texas  from  isfo  till  1883,  in  which


year  he  was  made  prnfetwor  of  law  in  the  Unirer-
sity  of  Texas  whi<-h  jnwt  he  now  (1888)  holds.  He
has  publisluMl  a  th'^riplion  of  Texas  entitled  "Gov.
UolxTts's  T<xas"  (St.  I/oiiis.  1881).

ROBERTS.  Robert  EIHh,  author,  b.  in  Utica,
N.  Y.,  3  June.  1H0«;  <1.  in  I>«-ln>it,  Mich.,  18  Feb.,
1888.  He  was  e<lucateil  by  his  father,  the  R«r.
Jf»hn  UoU^rts.  a  Congregational  clergyman,  and  in
1827  went  to  iK-troit.  where  he  engage<l  in  business.
In  1832  he  was  a  volunteer  in  the  Black  Hawk
war,  after  which  he  apiin  entered  meri-anlile  life.
He  was  identified  with  the  interests  of  Detroit,  lie-
ing  active  in  causing  t  he  thorough  fares  to  In?  tiaved,
in  organizing  the  fire  de|Hirtment,  of  which  ne  was
the  first  nresident.  and  in  establishing  the  water-
works, lie  serve<l  on  the  board  of  education,  e»-
tablishe<l  the  public  library,  and  held  hx-al  offices.
Mr.  Iiol)ens  contribute*!  "  to  the  D<-troit  "Free
Press,"  and  was  the  author  of  "Sketches  of  the
City  of  Detroit  "  (Detroit,  18.V)),  and  "The  City  of
the  Straits,"  illustrated  by  his  daughter.  Cornelia
H.  Rol)erts  (1884).

ROBERTS,  Robert  Riohford.  M.  K.  bishop,
b.  in  Fredt-rick  county,  Md.,  2  Aug.,  1778;  d.  in
Lawrence  Oiunty,  Ind.,  20  March.  1843.  His  father
was  of  Welsh  and  his  mother  of  Irish  ancestry,  and
they  were  communicants  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land. They  n>moved  in  1785  to  Ligonier  Valley,
Westmoreland  co..
Pa.  The  son  united
with  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church
wnen  he  was  four-
teen years  old.  Un-
til he  was  twenty-
one  he  lived  a  thor-
oughly frontier  life,
with  few  lK)fiksand
simple  hal)its.  Be-
ing drawn  gradual-
ly toward  I  lie  min-
istry, he  l)egan  to
study,  and  in  1802
entered  ujton  that
work.lieing  licensed
at  Holmes's  meet-
ing-house, near  Ca-
diz, Ohio. About

the  same  time  he  was  admitted  to  the  Baltimore
conference  ,ind  put  in  charge  of  a  circuit  including
Carlisle.  Pa.,  and  twenty-nine  other  ap|>ointments,
requiring  a  month  to  visit  them  all.  He  studied
constantly,  and  in  1804  a  senior  colleague  n'|K»rted
that  "his  moral  character  was  |K?rfect  and  his  head
a  comi)lete  magazine."  On  14  May.  1810.  he  was
electe<l  bishop,  and  he  j)asse<l  through  all  the  dis-
cussions that  culminated  in  the  establishment  of
the  Methodist  Pnitestant  chuR-h.  Bishop  Simpson,
writing  of  him,  says :  "  While  during  tlie.se  excite-
ments severe  and  exciting  denunciations  of  the
bishops  were  publicly  made— while  they  weri'  called
*IM)|)es'  and  'usuniers* — the  patriarchal  api>ear-
ance  and  the  humble  and  loving  manner  of  liish-
oi)  KolK»rts  disarme<i  prejiulice  wherever  he  wenL"
He  emigrate<l  to  Indiana,  and  accomplishetl  much
for  the  western  missions.  He  was  a  man  »»f  fine
presence.  sim[ile  and  l»eneyolent.  an<l  an  ehniuent
pn«acher.  He  is  buried  at  (Jreencastle.  Intl..  on
the  grounds  of  De  Pauw  university.  S«*«>  his  "  Life,"
by  Kev.  Charles  Klli<.tt  (New  Y..fk.  IKW).
■  ROBERTS.  Sauinel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa..  8  S-pt..  1T««;  d.  in  Pittsburg.  Pa..  13  I)ec,
I  Wa).  He  was  admitte<l  to  the  Imr  of  Philadelphia
in  1785.  ami  after  practising  law  there  for  a  snort
time  removed  to  Lancaster,  and  thence  to  Sunbury.


f^^'^^c-t^^'t^::?


276


ROBERTS


ROBERTS


In  1803  he  was  appointed  president  judge  of  the
5th  judicial  district  of  Pennsylvania,  which  office
he  held  until  his  death.  He  published  "  A  Digest
of  Select  British  Statutes,  etc.,  which  appear  to  be
in  Force  in  Pennsvlvania."  a  work  of  value  (Pitts-
burg. 1817:  2d  ed!.  Philadclnhia,  1847).

ROBERTS.  Solomon  White,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  3  Aug.,  1811;  d.  in  Atlantic
City.  N.  J..  20  March,  1882.  He  was  educate<l  at
the"  Friends'  acatlemy  in  Philadelphia.  When  he
was  sixteen  years  old  he  became  an  assistant  to  his
uncle,  Josiah  White,  who  was  directing  the  works
of  the  Lehigh  coal  and  navigation  company  in  the
construction  of  the  Mauch  Chunk  railway,  the  sec-
ond of  importance  that  was  built  in  the  country.
He  also  assisted  in  the  construction  of  the  canal
from  Mauch  Chunk  to  Easton.  Entermg  the  state
service,  he  had  charge  of  building  a  division  of  a
canal  on  Conemaugli  river,  and  then  was  principal
assistant  to  Sylvester  Welch  in  locating  and  con-
structing the  Portage  railroad  over  the  Alleghany
mountains.  Mr.  Roberts's  division  was  on  the  west
side,  including  a  tunnel  900  feet  long,  the  first
railroad  tunnel  in  the  United  States,  and  the  fine
stone  viaduct  over  Conemaugh  river,  near  Johns-
town, is  his  design  and  construction.  While  this
road  was  in  operation  it  was  one  of  the  wonders  of
the  country.  David  Stephenson,  the  English  en-
gineer, says  of  it  in  his  "  Sketch  of  the  Civil  En-
gineering of  North  America "  (London,  1838) :
"America  now  numbers  among  its  many  wonder-
ful artificial  lines  of  communication  a  mountain
railway  which,  in  boldness  of  design  and  difficidty
of  execution,  I  can  compare  to  no  modern  work  1
have  ever  seen,  excepting,  perhaps,  the  passes  of
the  Simplon  and  Mont  Cenis  in  Sardinia."  Re-
maining in  the  state  service  several  years,  Mr.
Rol)erts  became  in  1838  chief  engineer  of  the  Cata-
wissa  railroad,  in  1842  was  president  of  the  Phila-
delphia, Germantown,  and  Norristown  railroad,
and  from  1843  to  184G  president  of  the  Schuylkill
navigation  company.  During  the  latter  year  he  was
chosen  to  the  legislature,  and  from  1848  till  1856
he  was  engaged  in  locating,  constructing,  and  op-
erating the  railroad  from  Pittsburg  to  Crestline,  a
distance  of  188  miles.  He  located  and  named  the
towns  of  Crestline  and  Alliance.  In  1856  he  was
chosen  chief  engineer  and  general  superintendent
of  the  North  Pennsylvania  railroad,  which  post  he
resigned  in  1879.  He  was  a  member  of  many
learned  societies,  contributed  numerous  papers
to  the  transactions  of  the  American  philosophi-
cal society  and  to  scientific  journals,  and  wrote
"  Reminiscences  of  the  First  Railroad  over  the  Al-
leghany Mountains,"  in  the  "  Pennsylvania  Maga-
zine of  History"  (1878).  He  also  published  " The
Destiny  of  Pittsburg  and  the  Duty  of  her  Young
Men  "  (Pittsl)urg,  1850).— His  wife,  Anna  Smith,
poet,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  Dec.,  1827;  d.
there,  10  Aug.,  1858,  was  the  daughter  of  Randall
H.  Rickey,  and  married  Mr.  Robtuts  in  1851.  She
contributed  poems  to  the  "  Columbian  and  Great
West"  in  1850-'l.  which  were  collected  in  "Forest
Flowers  of  the  West"  (Philadelphia,  1851).

ROBERTS,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Llaner-
chymedd,  Wales,  25  Sept.,  1809.  He  was  educated
at  the  Presbyterian  collegiate  institute  in  Dublin.
Ireland,  after  which  he  was  pastor  and  principal  of
the  academy  at  Holyhead,  Wales,  pastor  of  the
Countess  of  'Huntingdon's  chapel  in  Runcorn,  Eng-
land, in  1848-'55,  and  had  charge  of  Welsh  Pres-
byterian churcrhes  in  New  York  citv  from  1855  till
1868,  in  Scranton,  Pa.,  from  1868  till  1875,  and  in
Utica,  N.  Y..  since  1875.  Several  times  he  has
served  as  moderator  of  the  United  States  Welsh


Presbyterian  general  assembly,  and  as  a  represent-
ative in  councils  of  the  alliance  of  the  Reformed
churches.  The  University  of  the  city  of  New  York
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1863.  He  edit«d
the  "Traethodydd"  in  New  York  from  1857  till
1861,  and  has  conducted  the  "  Cyfaill  "  in  Scranton,
Pa.,  and  Utica,  N.  Y.,  since  1871.  He  is  the  author
of  "  The  Abrahamic  Covenant "  (New  York,  1858),
and  "  The  Election  of  Grace  "  (1859),  both  of  which
are  written  in  Welsh.

ROBERTS,  William  Charles,  clergyman,  b.
in  Alltmai,  near  Aberystwith,  Wales,  23  Sept.,  1832,
He  was  educated  in  the  Evans  high-school  m  Wales,
and  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1855,  at  the
Theological  seminary  In  1858,  and  in  that  year  be-
came pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church  in  Wil-
mington, Del,  He  was  called  in  1862  to  the  1st
Presbyterian  church,  Columbus.  Ohio,  to  a  church
in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  in  1864,  and  to  the  Westminster
church  in  that  city  in  1866.  He  was  elected  cor-
responding secretary  of  the  board  of  home  mis-
sions in  1881,  was  chairman  of  the  committee  that
laid  the  foundations  of  Wooster  university,  Ohio,
and  declined  the  presidency  of  Rutgers  college  in
1882.  In  1887  he  became  president  of  Lake  Forest
university.  111.  He  was  a  member  of  the  first  and
third  councils  of  the  Reformed  churches  that  met
in  Edinburgh  and  Belfast.  From  1859  till  1863  he
was  a  trustee  of  Lafayette  college,  and  he  has  held
the  same  relation  to  J^rinceton  since  1866.  He  has
travelled  extensively  in  Europe,  including  Pales-
tine, Turkey,  and  Egypt.  Union  college  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1872,  and  Princeton  that  of
LL.  D.  in  1887.  Dr.  Roberts  is  the  author  of  let-
ters on  the  great  preachers  of  Wales  (Utica,  1868);
a  translation  of  the  shorter  catechism  into  Welsh ;
numerous  occasional  sermons;  and  magazine  arti-
cles in  English,  Welch,  and  German.

ROBERTS,  William  Milnor,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  Phihulelphia,  12  Feb.,  1810;  d.  in  Brazil,
South  America,  14  July,  1881.  His  father  was
Thomas  P.  Roberts,  treasurer  of  the  Union  canal,
the  first  work  of  that  kind  undertaken  in  Pennsyl-
vania. In  1825  the  son  was  employed  as  chainman
on  canal  surveys  under  Canvass  White.  At  the
age  of  eighteen  he  was  given  charge  of  the  most
diflicult  division  of  the  Lehigh  canal,  and  two  years
later  he  was  appointed  resident  engineer  in  charge
of  the  Union  railroad  and  Union  canal  feeder.  In
1831-'4  he  was  senior  principal  assistant  engineer
on  the  Allegheny  Portage  railroad. In  1^5  he

Elanned  and  built  the  first  combined  railroad  and
ighway  bridge  in  this  country.  It  crossed  the
Susquehanna  at  Ilarrisburg.  and  was  nearly  a  mile
long.  The  piers  are  still  used  to  support  the  great
iron  bridge  of  the  Cumberland  Valley  railroad.  In
1835  he  was  made  chief  engineer  on  the  Harris-
burg  and  Lancaster  railroad,  and  during  the  same
year  he  was  also  appointed  chief  engineer  of  the
Cuml)erland  Valley  railroad,  which  work  was  com-
pleted by  him.  After  1836  he  was  chief  engineer
in  charge  of  the  Monongahela  river  slack  water
navigation,  the  Pennsylvania  state  canal,  and  the
Erie  canal  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1841-'2  he  was  a
contractor  on  the  Welland  canal  enlargement,  in
1845-'7  chief  engineer  and  agent  for  the  trustees
of  the  Sandy  and  Beaver  canal  company,  Ohio,  in
1847  chief  engineer  of  the  Pittsburg  and  Connells-
ville  railroatl.  In  1849  he  declined  the  appoint-
ment of  chief  engineer  of  the  first  proposea  rail-
road in  South  America  (in  Chili),  to  take  that  of
the  BellefontHine  and  Indiana  railroail.  which  he
held  until  1851.  In  1852-'4  he  was  chief  engineer
of  the  Allegheny  Valley  railroad,  ^i-onsulting  en-
gineer of  the  Atlantic  and  Mississippi  railroad,  a


ROBERTS


RonKUTSON


277


contnwtor  for  the  whole  Iron  Mountnin  railroad  of
MiHsouri,  and  chainnan  of  a  fonimiHsion  of  thn>c
apfmintCKl  by  the  IVnnMvlvania  l«>);i!«latur»  to  ex-
amine and  reiM>rt  u|K»n  routes  for  avoidinji;  the  old
Allegheny  |M>rtHge  incline^l  planes.  In  IhC)5-*7  he
was  contmelnr  for  the  entin>  Ki^okuk.  I)<'s  Moines,
and  Minnesota  milroml, consulting  engints-r  for  the
Pitt-sbnrg  and  Krie,  and  Terre  Haute.  Vandalia,
and  St.  Louis  railroads,  and  ehief  engineer  of  the
Keokuk,'Mt.  Pleasant,  and  Muscatine  railroad.  In
1857  he  went  to  Hnuil  to  examine  the  route  of  the
Dom  Pedro  II.  railroa<l,  and,  in  eoini)any  with
Jacoi)  llunibinl.  of  Marylaml,  and  other  Americans,
nnderttMik  the  construction  •f  that  work.  He  re-
tume<l  to  the  I'nite*!  States  in  IHfi,"),  and  at  once
t<M)k  the  field  in  the  interests  of  the  Atlantic  and
(Jn'at  Western  railroad  for  a  prt>|M>sed  extension
through  northeni  Pennsylvania.  In  1H(J(J  ho  was
appointed  U.  S.  civil  onginwr  and  given  charge  of
the  improvement  of  the  Ohio  river,  which  work  ho
relinquished  in  1808  to  accept  the  ap|K)intment
of  associate  chief  engineer  with  James  B.  Vauls
on  the  creat  hridge  across  the  Missouri  at  St.
Louis.  I)uring  Mr.  Eads's  absence  in  Europe  of
a  year  and  more,  Mr.  KoU^rts  had  entire  charge
of  the  work  at  itj«  most  aniuous  and  diflicult  stage.
In  1870  he  accepted  the  chief  engineership  of  the
Northern  Pacific  railroad,  and  in  1874  was  a|>-
pointed  on  the  commission  of  civil  and  military
engineers  to  examine  and  report  upon  plans  for
the  improvement  of  the  moutn  of  the  Mississippi,
visiting  the  various  rivers  in  Europe  where  jetties
had  U'en  constructe<l.  In  1879  he  was  ap{K>inte<l
by  the  emperor  of  Hra/il  chief  of  the  commission
of  hvdraulic  engineers  to  examine  and  reiK>rt  U|X)n
the  improvement  of  hart)ors  and  navigaole  rivers
of  that  empire.  He  had  nearly  completed  the
perifxl  of  his  service  when  he  died  of  fever  on  the
nead-waters  of  San  Francisco  river.  Mr.  Roberts
was  a  contributor,  generally  anonymously,  to  news-
pajiers  and  s«Montiflc  magazines.  In  1879  he  was
electe«l  president  of  the  American  society  of  civil
engineers,  and  at  the  same  time  he  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  English  institute  of  engineers  and  a
fellow  of  the  American  geographicAl  society.  In
18:}6  he  married  a  daughter  of  Chicf-Zustice
John  Bannister  Gibson,  of  Pennsylvania  (q.  r.).
— His  son,  Thomas  Paschall,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  ('arlisle.  Pa.,  21  April,  1843,  was  educated  at
Pennsvlviinia  Hgricultiiral  college  and  at  Dickin-
son college,  and  in  1803  joined  his  father  in  Brazil,
where  he  wjus  employed  as  an  engineer  on  the  Dom
Pe<lro  II.  railway.  He  returned  to  the  United
States  lato  in  1805.  In  the  autumn  of  1806  he
was  appointe<l  principal  assistant  engineer  on  the
United  States  improvement  of  the  Ohio  river,  which
post  he  retained  until  Octol)er,  1870,  when  ho  be-
came assistant  engineer  of  the  Montana  division  of
the  Northern  Pacific  railway.  He  miule  the  first
examination  of  the  route  that  was  finally  adoptwl
through  the  Rocky  mountains  for«that  roa<l,  and
also  examined  and  repf)rted  upon  the  navigability
of  the  upper  Missouri  river.  Ills  rejHjrt,  with  mans,
was  printtnl  by  the  war  deiiartment  in  1874.  lie
was  appointe«l  in  1875  by  the  U.  S.  government  to
the  charge  of  the  surveys  of  tho  upi»er  Mononga-
hcla  river  in  West  Virginia,  and  in  1876-'8  was
chief  engineer  of  tho  Pittsburg  southern  railrojul.
Subsequently  ho  was  engaged  as  chief  enginwr  in
charge  of  the  construction  of  wveral  southern
roa^Is  until  1884,  when  he  was  appointed  chief  en-
gineer of  the  Monongahela  navigation  c<m)|>any,
and  he  has  since  Urn  etigage<l  in  the  extension  of
new  l(x>ks  for  doulih  liK-king  this  important  system
of  steamboat  navigation.


ROUERTHON.  Archibald,  artist,  h.  in  Monr-
musk,  near  AlM>rde«'n.  S-otland.  8  May.  1765:  d.  in
Now  York  city.  0  Dec..  18:«.  During  17H2-'91  he
stuilied  and  pra<'tise<l  art  in  P^linburgh.  Al»ertleen,
and  I»ndon.  In  1791  he  canie  to  this  ••ountrr,
and.  s<K>n  after  his  arrival,  went  to  Philadelphia
to  deliver  to  (Jen.  Wiishington  a  \ti>x  made  of  wood
from  the  oak-tree  that,  sheltered  Sir  William  Wal-
lace after  the  little  of  Falkirk.  It  had  l>een  oom-
niitte<l  to  his  charge  by  the  P^arl  of  Buchan.  At
the  earl's  re<|uest  Washington  sat  to  Kobertson,
who  first  painteil  a  miniature,  and  then  a  larger

G>rtrait,  for  I»nl  Buchan.  Fn>m  1792  till  ]H2\
olwrtson  followed  his  profession  as  a  i>ainter  and
instructor  in  New  York,  working  njostly  in  water-
colors  an<l  crayons.  In  1802  he  assiste<l  in  the  pro-
ject of  forming  an  art  academy,  and  in  1816,  on
the  founding  of  the  American  academy,  he  was
elected  a  director. Though  not  an  architect  br

Cn)fession,  he  fumishtsl  several  plans  for  public
uildings.  He  wa.s  also  the  author  f)f  a  lK)ok  on
drawing. — His  son,  Anthony  Iils|N>nard,  jurist,  b.
in  New  York  city,  8  June.  1H08:  d.  there.  18  Dec,
1808,  was  gra<luati>il  at  ('olunii>ia  in  1825.  studied
law,  wa.s  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  gained  a  high
prfjfessional  reputation.  He  was  a.ssistant  vice-
chancellor  in  1840-'8,  surrogate  of  New  York  city
in  1848,  and  in  1859  was  elected  a  judge  of  the  su-
perior court.  In  1864  he  was  electe<l  for  a  second
term,  and  in  1866  was  chosen  chief  justic-e  by  his
associates.  In  1867  he  was  a  meml)er  of  the  ^tate
constitutional  convention,  and  took  an  active  j>art
in  its  pnK'cedings. — Archibald's  brother,  Alexan-
der, artist,  b.  in  Monvmusk.  near  AU*rdeen,  Scot-
land, in  1708;  d.  in  N'ew  York.  27  May.  1841,  fol-
loweil  his  brother  to  the  United  States  in  1792,
after  having  some  instruction  in  miniature-paint-
ing from  Shelly  in  London.  He  ()ainte<l  land-
scapes in  water-color,  and.  like  his  brother,  was
well  known  as  a  teacher.

R0BERTS4>N,  Charles  Franklin,  P.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  New  York  city,  2  March,  1835;  d.  jn
St.  Ix)uis,  Mo.,  1  May,  1880.  He  obtaineil  a  good
education,  and  at  first  intended  to  enter  upon
a  mercantile  career,  but,  having  his  mind  di-
rected towani  the  ministrj',  he  went  to  Yalo,
where  he  gratluatitl  in  1859.  He  then  entered  the
(Episcopal  general  thef)logical  seminary,  and  was
gratluatcnl  in  1862.  He  was  ordaine<l  deacon  in
tho  Church  of  the  Tninsfiguration,  New  York
city,  29  June,  1862,  by  Bishop  Horatio  Potter,  and
priest  in  St.  Mark's  church.  Malone,  N.  Y.,  28  Oct.,
18()2,  by  the  same  bishop.  He  was  rector  of  St,
Mark's  church,  Malone,  frt>m  1862  till  1808,  when  he
acceptetl  a  call  to  St.  James's  church,  I^tavia,  N.  Y.
Immetliately  afterwanl  he  was  elected  second  bishop
of  Missouri,  and  was  conswratwl  in  Gnwe  church.
New  York  city,  25  Oct..  1808.  He  re<-»'ived  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia  in  18t{8.  that  of
D.  D.  from  the  University  of  the  south,  Ix'wanee,
Tenn.,  in  1883,  and  that  of  LL.  I),  from  the  Uni-
versity of  Missouri,  Columbia,  Mo.,  in  188;i.  Bishop
Robertson  was  vice-president  of  the  St,  Ix)uis  social
science  association,  and  al.so  of  the  National  c<m-
ference  of  charities  and  corrections.  He  published
s«»venU  .siHH'ial  sermons  and  charges,  and  was  the
author  of  valuable  paj>ers  on  "  Historical  Societies
in  Relation  to  I^xal  Histi>rical  Effort  "(St.  I/ouia,
1883);  "The  American  Revolution  and  the  Mis-
sissippi Valley  "  (1884) :  "  The  Attempt  to  separate
the  West  from  the  American  Union  (1885);  and
"The  Purchase  of  the  Ixiuisiana  Territory  in  its
Infiiience  on  the  American  System"  (1885).

ROBERTSON.  Weonce,  jurist,  b.  in  Mercer
county,  Ky.,  18  Nov.,  1790;  d.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,


278


ROBERTSON


ROBERTSON


16  May,  1874.  He  received  a  classical  education
at  Transylvania  university,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1809,  and  began  practice  at
Lancaster.  In  1810  he  was  elected  to  congress,
and  he  served  two  terms,  being  chairman  of  the
land  committee  and  a  member  of  the  judiciary
committee.  He  was  re-elected  a  second  time,  but
resigned  his  seat  in  order  to  resume  the  practice  of
law  lie  drew  up  the  bill  for  the  establishment  of
a  territorial  government  in  Arkansas,  in  the  dis-
cussion of  which  the  house  was  equally  divided  on
the  question  of  prohibiting  slavery,  an  amendment
to  that  effect  being  carried,  but  afterward  re-
scinded by  the  casting  vote  of  Henry  Clay  as
speaker.  The  system  of  selling  public?  lands  in
small  lots  to  actual  settlers  at  a  cash  price  of  $1.25
per  acre  was  projected  by  him.  After  his  retire-
ment from  congress  he  was  offered  the  attorney-
generalship  of  Kentucky,  biit  declined  this  and
other  appointments  in  order  to  devote  himself  to
his  proiession  ;  yet  in  1822  he  was  elected  against
his  (lesire  to  the  legislature,  and  remained  in  that
bodv  until  the  settlement  of  the  currency  question
in  the  session  of  1827,  being  a  leader  of  the  party
that  opposed  the  relief  act  that  made  the  depreci-
ated notes  of  the  state  banks  legal  tender  for  the
Eavment  of  debts.  He  was  speaker  of  the  assem-
ly  from  1823  till  1827,  except  in  1824.  when  the
inflationists,  having  gained  a  large  majority  in
both  houses,  sought  to  abolish  the  court  of  appeals,
which  had  decided  against  the  relief  bill,  by  creat-
ing a  new  court.  lie  drew  up  a  protest  in  1824
that  contributed  greatly  to  tne  final  triumph  of
the  anti-relief  or  old  court  party,  and  wrote  and
spoke  frequently  on  the  exciting  questions  at  issue.
He  was  also  the  author  of  a  manifesto  that  was
signed  by  the  majority  of  the  legislature  in  1827.
He  was  offered  the  governorship  of  Arkansas,  the
mission  to  Colombia  in  1824,  and  in  1828  the  Pe-
ruvian mission,  but  he  declined  all  these  appoint-
ments. For  a  time  he  filled  provisionally  the  office
of  secretary  of  state  in  1828.  In  the  same  year
he  was  made  a  justice  of  the  court  of  appeals,  and
in  1829  he  became  chief  justice,  which  post  he  held
till  184;J,  when  he  resigned  and  resumed active

1)ractice.  Prom  1834  till  1857  he  was  professor  of
aw  in  Transylvania  university.  The  degree  of
LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Centre  and  Au-
gusta colleges.  His  published  works  include  "  In-
troductorv  Lecture  to  the  Law  Class  "  (Lexington,
1836)  ;  ""Biographical  Sketch  of  John  Bovle "
(Frankfort,  1838) ;  and  "  Scrap-Book  on  Law,  j'oli-
tics.  Men,  and  Times  "  (1856).  A  collection  of  his
speeches,  law  lectures,  legal  arguments,  and  ad-
dresses has  been  published.

ROBERTSON,  James,  royal  governor  of  New
York,  b.  in  Fifeshire,  Scotland,  about  1710;  d.  in
England,  4  March,  1788.  He  was  in  his  youth  a
private  and  then  a  sergeant  in  the  British  army,
and  in  1740.  at  Cartagena,  New  Granada,  gained  an
ensigncy.  He  came  to  the  American  colonies  in  1756
as  major  of  the  royal  American  troops  that  were
raised  at  that  time,  w»is  deputy  quartermaster  under
Gen.  Abercrombie  in  1758,  becoming  lieutenant-
colonel  on  8  July,  accompanied  Lorcl  Amhei"st  to
Lake  Champlain  in  1759,  and  took  part  in  the  expe-
dition to  Martinique  in  1702.  He  was  for  many
years  barrack-master  in  New  York,  in  which  post
he  acquired  a  fortune  by  various  methods  of  pecu-
lation and  extortion.  He  paid  for  government
supplies  in  clipped  half-joes  and  moidores,  which
came  to  be  known  as  "  Robertsons,"  until  the
Chamlier  of  commerce  resolved  that  such  coins
should  be  accepted  only  at  their  intrinsic  value.
He  was  promoted  colonel  in  1772,  ordered  to  Bos-


ton in  July,  1775,  and  at  its  evacuation  connived
at  acts  of  rapine  and  shared  in  the  plunder.  He
took  command  of  the  00th  regiment  on  11  Jan.,
1776.  commanded  a  brigade  at  the  battle  of  Long
Island,  and  in  February,  1777,  returned  to  England
on  leave  of  absence,  and  intrigued  against  Gov.
William  Tryon  and  Sir  William  Howe.  He  was
commissioned  as  major-general  on  29  Aug.,  1777,
was  appointed  civil  governor  of  New  York  on  11
May,  1779,  and  arrived  in  New  York  city  on  31
March,  1780.  He  brought  a  letter  of  instructions
from  Lord  George  Germaine,  secretarj'  of  the  colo-
nies, ordering  that  the  deserted  property  of  rebels
should  l>e  leased,  and  the  rents  appropriated  to  a
fund  for  the  aid  of  loyalist  refugees.  He  was  di-
rected to  restore  the  civil  law ;  yet,  instead  of  re-
opening the  constitutional  courts  of  justice,  he
established  arbitrary  police  courts  with  summary
jurisdiction  in  all  classes  of  cases,  first  on  Long
Island,  then  on  Staten  Island,  and  in  December,
1780,  in  New  York  city,  where,  however,  the  new
court  could  not  decide  civil  cases  involving  more
than  £10.  He  ordered  the  neighboring  farmers  to
deliver  up  half  of  their  hay,  and  afterward  seized
a  part  of  the  remainder,  had  the  wood  cut  oh  large
estates  near  New  York  city,  sequestrated  the  reve-
nue of  the  markets  and  ferries,  and  committed
many  extortions  in  connivance  with  the  military
authorities,  profiting  greatly  in  his  purse  by  all
these  acts,  yet  alienating  many  who  might  nave
l>een  won  over  to  the  royal  cause.  When  Maj.
John  Andre  was  captured.  Gov.  Robertson  con-
ferred with  Gen.  Natnanael  Greene,  but,  instead  of
accepting  the  release  of  the  British  spy  in  ex-
change for  Benedict  Arnold,  sealed  his  fate  by
showing  a  letter  from  Arnold  threatening  retali-
ation on  the  Americans.  On  the  death  of  Gen.
William  Phillips,  he  obtained  the  command  in  Vir-
ginia, and  set  out  for  the  field,  but  returned  when
he  heard  of  the  arrival  of  Lord  Cornwallis.  He
was  made  a  lieutenant-general,  20  Nov.,  1782,  and
returned  to  England  on  15  April,  1783.

ROBERTSON,  James,  pioneer,  b.  in  Bruns-
wick county,  Va.,  28  June,  1742 ;  d.  in  the  Chickasaw
country,  Tenn.,  1  Sept.,  1814.  He  was  of  Scotch-
Irish  descent,  and  his  father,  a  farmer,  removed
to  Wake  county,  N.
C,  about  1750,  where
the  son  worked  on  a
farm,  receiving  no  ed-
ucation. In  1759  he
accompanied  Daniel
Boone  on  his  third  ex-
pedition beyond  the
Alleghanies.  He  dis-
covered a  valley,  wa-
tered by  the  Watauga
river,  which  he  ex-
plored while  Boone
went  to  Kentucky,
planted  corn,  and  then
returned  to  North
Carolina,  after  losing'
his  way  and  being
saved  from  death  by
hunters.  In  the  fol-
lowing spring  Robertson  led  sixteen  families  to
the  west.  The  settlers  were  upon  the  hunting-
grounds  of  one  hundred  thousanu  savages,  but  they
planted  and  harvested  their  corn  in  peace  for
fully  four  years.  The  emigrants  supposed  they
were  within  the  limits  of  the  province  of  Vir-
ginia, but  when  the  line  was  mn  in  the  year  1772
it  was  found  to  be  thirty  miles  to  the  northward,
and  they  were  therefore  on  the  land  of  the  Chero-


c^^vf.^^^^^


C?yt/-


ROBERTSON


ROBERTSON


279


keet.  A  lease  was  conclu(le<l  with  the  Indiana,  but
in  the  midst  of  the  festivities  that  fciilowed  a  war-
rior was  iininlfn<«l  liy  a  white  man,  and  the  Hava^jces
left  the  ground  with  thn'atetiiri^  ^etttures.  Ilostdi-
ties  wore  averte<l  hy  UoU'rtwui,  who  went  alone  to
pacify  the  »avajfes,  and  thev  c(>ntinue<l  to  lx>  friends
with  the  whites  until  177^.  In  July  uf  that  year
Oeonostota  (q.  v.)  investe<l  a  fort  that  John  Sevier
had  huilt  at  Watauga;  but  Sevier  and  Itobertson,
with  40  men,  withstood  a  siege  of  twenty  <lays,  and
beat  him  o(t  with  a  heavy  loss  in  killed  and  wound-
etl.  AfU^r  the  ('hen>kees  were  subjugatetl  the  gov-
ernor of  North  Carolina  ai>[)ointed  Itobertson  to
reside  at  the  Indian  eapital  to  hold  Oconostota  in
check  and  to  thwart  the  designs  of  the  British.  In
the  spring  of  1779  he  explored  the  Cumlierland  re-
gion, and  afterwanl  emigrated  there  with  others,
mostly  from  the  Watauga  settlement,  of  which  he
left  Sevier  in  chargis  One  division  of  the  settlers
foundi«<l  Nashville,  Tenn,,  cm  25  Dec.,  1779,  and
after  several  months  they  were  joined  by  the  other
division,  and  or^nized  themselves  into  a  civil  and
military  botly  with  R<ibertson  at  their  head.  The
handful  of  pioneers  had  a  long  conflict  with  four
savage  nations,  outnumbering  them  more  than  one
hundred  to  one.  Of  250  men,  39  fell  within  60  days
before  the  tomahawk  of  the  Cherokee,  and  in  a  very
few  months  G7  had  perished.  The  crops  were  de-
stroyetl  by  a  freshet  and  starvation  was  before
them.  Settlers  began  to  leave,  and  of  the  original
250  persons  only  134  remained.  These  tried  to  in-
due© their  leader  to  abandon  his  post,  but  he  re-
Slied :  "  Each  one  should  do  what  seems  to  him  his
uty. As  for  myself,  ray  station  is  here,  and  here

1  shall  stay  if  every  man  of  you  deserts  me."  With
his  eldest  son,  Isaac  Bledsoe,  and  a  faithful  negro,
he  made  his  way  to  Daniel  Boone,  at  Booneslior-
ough,  Ky.,  who  gave  hmi  powder  and  shot. On

2  April,  17H1,  the  fort  of  Nashville  was  besieged
by  1,000  Indians,  and  Robertson's  life  was  savetl  by
the  heroism  of  his  wife.  At  the  close  of  the  Revo-
lutionary war  he  was  able  to  brinp  into  the  field
about  500  men  experienced  in  Indian  warfare,  and
b>'  his  diplomacv  he  had  made  friends  with  the
C^octaws  and  C)iickasaws,  severed  their  alliance
with  Great  Britain,  and  effectetl  iieaee  with  the
Cherokees.  The  half-breed  Creek  cnief,  Alexander
Mc<}illivray(y.  v.)  concluded  a  treaty  with  the  gov-
ernor of  Ij<juisiana  to  exterminate  the  Americans
west  of  the  AUeghanies,  and  made  war  against
Robertson  in  1784,  continuing  at  intervals  for
twelve  years,  liobertson  constantly  performed
heroic  deeds  and  beat  him  back  with  small  num-
bers. I{olH'rtstin  was  continually  offeretl  by  the
Spanish  governor  peace  and  the  free  navigation  of
the  Mississippi  if  he  would  but  cut  loose  from  the
Union  and  establish,  with  Watauga  and  Kentucky,
an  independent  government.  In  171K)  he  was  a|>-
p<iinte<l  a  brigatlier-general  by  Washington,  and
nis  military  services  did  not  end  till  1790.  He
share<l  with  Sevier  the  honor  and  affection  of  the
Tennesseeans,  and  held  the  jxjst  of  Indian  commis-
sioiu-r  until  his  death.  See  "The  Life  and  Times
of  Gen.  James  Iiol>erts<.>n,"  by  Albigence  W.  Put-
nam (Nashville,  IHTtO),  and  "  The  R*'ar-Guard  of
the  Revolution."  by  James  R.  (tilmore  (New  York,
18»W).— His  wife,  Charlotte  Reeves,  pioneer,  b.
in  Virginia,  2  Jan.,  1751 ;  d.  in  Nashville.  Tenn.,
11  June,  184^J.  married  Robertson  in  1767,  and  ac-
com|>anied  him  to  Watauga  on  its  first  settlement.
^She  was  one  of  the  numlx-r  that  mmle  the  jwrilous
journey  down  the  Ilolston  and  Tennessee  in  1780,
and  was  in  the  fort  of  Nashville  wht-n  it  was  at-
tacke<l  by  1,(K)0  Cherokees,  some  of  whom,  in  their
attempt  tu  capture  the  horses  uf  the  whites,  raatle  a


Kp  in  their  ranks,  through  which  the  settlers  fleiL
ilK'rtson's  wife,  mounte4l  on  the  l(M>kout,  rifle  in
hand,  s4H*ing  the  stainiHMlo  of  the  honH*»  and  the
break  in  the  Indian  line,  ordere<I  the  .oentry  tu
"o|)en  the  gat«*s  and  set  the  dogs  uikmi  them."
The  dogs  flew  at  the  savages,  who  drew  toma-
hawks u{K>n  them,  and  thus  tlie  whiti>s  were  en-
abknl  to  escape.  She  is  reiK)rte<I  to  have  said  to
her  husband :  "  Thanks  Ite  to  (iixl,  who  gave  to  the
Indians  a  dn>iul  of  dogs  and  a  love  for  horses."
She  .shared  all  of  hi*r  liusliand's  imtIIs.  anil  was
much  esteemed  for  lier  noble  ({ualities. — His  grand-
son, Edward  White,  lawver.  b.  near  Nashville.
Tenn..  13  June,  18*^;  d.  in  Wa.-'hington.  D.  C..  3
Aug..  1887.  His  {ttirents  nnnoved  to  Iljerville  uarisb,
I.«a.,  in  1825,  and  he  was  iHlucate<l  at  Nashville  uni-
versity, but  not  graduate<l.  He  l)egan  to  study  law
in  1845.  but  serve<l  in  the  war  with  Mexico  in' 1846
a3  orderly  sergeant  of  the  2d  Ijouisiana  volunteers,
a  six-months  regiment.  In  lK47-'9  he  was  a  mem-
Ixjr  of  the  legislature,  and  after  his  gnuhiation  at
the  law  department  of  the  University  of  Ijouisiana
in  1850  he  practised  in  Iberville  (Mirish,  served  in
the  legislature,  and  was  state  auditor  of  public
accounts  in  1857-'62.  He  entered  the  Confederate
service  in  March,  1862,  as  captain,  and  {wrtici-
pated  in  the  engagements  around  V'icksburg  and
the  siege  of  that  place,  after  which  his  regiment
was  not  in  active  service.  After  the  war  he  re-
sumed practice  in  Baton  Rouge,  and  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Conservative  Democrat,  serving  from
15  Oct.,  1877.  till  4  March.  1883.  In  1886  he  was
chosen  again,  serving  until  the  dav  of  his  death.
— Edward  White's  son,  Sainnel  Matthews,  law-
yer, b.  in  Platjuemine,  Ija.,  1  Jan.,  1852.  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Louisiana  in  1874,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  Imr,  and  ser\'t><l  in  the
legislature.  In  1880  he  was  made  a  meml)er  of  the
faculty  of  the  Stale  university  and  agricultural  and
mechanical  college,  where  he  served  a.s  i>rofessor  of
natural  history  and  commandant  of  ca4iets  until  be
was  elected  to  the  50th  ct)ngress  as  a  Democrat,  to
fill  the  vacancv  caused  bv  the  death  of  his  father.
ROBERTSON,  John' Parish,  Scottish  author,
b.  in  Kelso  or  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  about  1793:  A.
in  Calais,  France,  1  Nov.,  1843.  He  accompanied
his  father  on  a  commercial  voyage  to  La  Plata,  and
soon  returned  alone  t^)  S«)Uth  America  anil  Ix'caine
a  clerk  at  Rio  Janeiro  when  he  was  only  fourteen
years  old.  At  twenty-one  he  was  sent  as  a  mer-
cantile agent  to  Asuncion.  In  1815  Dr.  Jost'  Fran-
cia  (o.  f.)  orderinl  him  and  his  brother,  William  P.,
who  nad  joined  him.  to  leave  Paraguay.  He  re-
mained more  than  a  year  at  Corrientes,  and.  with
the  help  of  an  Irish  lieutenant  of  Artigas.  named
Campbell,  established  a  large  trade  in  hides,  and
was  thus  instrumental  in  reviving  the  pros[H'rity  of
the  province.  F'rom  1817  till  1820  he  was  engaged
in  Great  Britain  in  enlarging  his  commercial  con-
nections. He  purchased  a  large  tract  near  Buenos
Ayres.  and  settled  on  it  a  colony  of  Scotch  agricul-
turists. When  his  {X)litical  friends  had  conquered
the  independence  of  Peru  and  Chili,  he  was  the  first
to  o|>en  those  countries  tt)  commerce.  He  went  to
England  in  1824  in  the  cajwcitvof  a  |M>litical  ai^nt
for  several  of  the  republics,  ilis  larj^o  oossessions
were  swept  awav  in  the  financial  crisis  of  1826,  and
after  spending  four  years  in  South  Americ-a  in  the
endeavor  to  recover  some  part  of  his  fortune,  be
entered  Corpus  Christi  college.  Cambritlgv.  and
passed  through  the  university  course.  He  di'voted
himself  for  most  of  his  rtMiiainiiig  years  to  literary
lalx»r.  He  published,  jointly  with  his  brother, "  Let-
ters on  Paraguay  "  (L«>ndo'n.  18:J8):  a  continuation
entitled  "Francia's  Reign  of  Terror"  (18))9):  and


280


ROBERTSON


ROBERTSON


"  Ijetters  on  South  America"  (1843),  "Solomon
Seesaw  "  (1839)  appeared  under  his  name  only. — H  is
brother,  William  Parisii,  b.  about  1795,  was  the
author  of  another  book  of  travel  entitled  "  Visit  to
Mexico  "  (London,  1853).

ROBERTSON,  John  Ross,  Canadian  journalist,
b.  in  Toronto,  28  Dec,  1841.  He  was  educated  at
Upi)er  Canada  college,  and  founded  the  "  Upf)er
Canada  College  Times  "  in  1859,  in  connection  with
this  institution.  About  1860  he  issued  "  Young
Canada,"  a  somewhat  similar  publication,  the  name
of  which  he  afterward  changed  to  the  "  Young
Canada  Sporting  Life,"  and  still  later  to  "The
Sporting  Life."  At  this  time  he  publisshed  "  Rob-
ertson's Railway  Guide,"  the  first  of  the  kind  that
was  issued  in  Canada.  In  1862-'4  he  published
"  The  Grumbler,"  a  weekly  journal  of  satire  which
had  been  issued  for  some  years  before  by  Erastus
Wiman.  Mr.  Robertson  was  city  editor  of  the
Toronto  "  Globe"  from  1864  till  1866,  and  in  May
of  the  latter  year,  in  conjunction  with  a  partner,  he
issued  the  "  Evening  Telegraph,"  which  became  the
chief  paper  in  the  Conservative  interest.  In  1872
Mr.  Robertson  became  agent  of  the  Globe  printing
company  in  London,  England,  but  he  afterward  re-
turned to  Canada  and  assumed  the  management  of
the  "  Nation  "  newspaper.  In  1876  he  founded  the
Toronto  "  Daily  Telegram,"  of  which  he  is  now
(1888)  the  proprietor  and  managing  editor,  as  well
as  publisher.  He  founded  an  annual  prize  in  con-
nection with  Upper  Canada  college,  and  was  one  of
the  foundei"s  of  the  Lakeside  home  for  little  chil-
dren in  1883.  He  has  written  "  History  of  Craft
and  Capitular  Masonry  in  Canada  "  (Toronto.  1888),
and  "  Iiistorv  of  Cryptic,  Templar,  and  A.  &  A.  Rite
Masonrv  in  Canada^' (1888).

ROBERTSON,  Joseph  Glbb,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Stuartfield,  Aberdeenshire,  Scotland,  1
Jan.,  1820.  He  was  educated  in  Canada,  engaged
in  business  as  a  merchant,  and  is  now  (1888)  presi-
dent of  the  Quebec  Central  railway  company.  He
was  for  many  years  secretary  and  treasurer  of  the
county  of  Sherbrooke,  Quebec,  and  was  mayor  of
Sherbrooke  for  about  twenty  years.  In  1869  he
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  executive  council
of  the  province  of  Quebec,  and  he  was  treasurer
from  that  date  till  September,  1874,  when  he  retired
from  the  government.  He  was  reappointed  treas-
urer in  De  Boucherville's  administration,  22  Sept.,
1874,  and  held  this  portfolio  till  14  Jan.,  1876,
when  he  resigned.  He  was  appointed  treasurer  of
the  province  in  October,  1879,  resigned  this  office
in  January,  1882,  and  was  a  member  of  the  execu-
tive council  and  provincial  treasurer  from  1884
till  1887.  He  held  oflRce  in  the  Taillon  administra-
tion from  25  to  27  Jan.,  1887.  Mr.  Robertson  was
a  delegate  to  England  on  public  business  in  1874.
Since  ne  entered  public  life  he  has  represented  Sher-
brooke, and  is  a  Liberal-Conservative.

ROBERTSON,  Robert  Henderson,  architect,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29  April,  1849.  He  was
educated  at  Rutgers  college,  studied  architecture,
and  established  himself  in  New  York  city.  Among
many  buildings  of  his  design  are  the  Madison  ave-
nue Methodist  church,  St.  James's  Episcopal  church,
the  Young  women's  Christian  association  building,
the  Church  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  Phillips  Presbyte-
rian church,  the  New  York  club  building,  the  Rail-
road men's  building,  St.  Augustine  chapel,  Grace
chapel,  and  the  Mott  Haven  railroad  station,  all  in
New  York  citv.

ROBERTSON,  Thomas  Boiling,  governor  of
Louisiana,  b.  near  Petersburg,  Va.,  m  1773 ;  d.  in
White  Sulphur  Springs,  Va.,  5  Nov.,  1828.  He  was
graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1807,  became  a


lawyer,  and  removed  to  New  Orleans  on  receiving
the  appointment  of  secretary  for  the  territory  of
Louisiana.  He  was  elected  as  the  first  congress-
man from  that  state
by  the  Democrats,
and  was  returned  for
the  three  succeeding
terms,  serving  from
23  Dec,  1812.  till
1818,  in  which  year
he  resigned  his  seat.
Soon  afterward  he
was  elected  govern-
or. Resuming  prac-
tice in  New  Orleans
on  the  expiration  of
his  term,  he  was  soon
made  attorney-gen-
eral, and  shortly  af-
terward appointed

U.  S.  judge  for  the  <r^,/7 yZ^y^' .-^r*^
district  of  Louisiana.  ^^'^^ •^^^^^^^^^^'^^^^^^^
While  visiting  Paris  ^

during  the  last  days  of  the  empire,  he  wrote  letters
to  his  family,  which  were  published  in  the  Rich-
mond "Enquirer,"  and  in  book-form  under  the
title  of  "Events  in  Paris"  (Philadelphia,  1816).—
His  brother,  John,  jurist,  b,  near  Petersburg.  Va.,
in  1787;  d.  in  Mount  Athos,  Campbell  co.,  va.,  5
July,  1873,  was  educated  at  William  and  Mary,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  early  gained  a
good  position  in  his  profession,  and  was  appointed
attorney-general  of  the  state.  He  was  elected  to
congress  For  three  successive  terras,  serving  from  8
Dec,  1834,  till  3  March,  1839.  He  was  judge  of  the
circuit  court  for  many  years.  Although  a  strong
believer  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Jeffersonian  school,
he  deprecated  civil  war,  and  at  the  beginning  of
the  secession  troubles  was  sent  by  Virginia  to  dis-
suade the  southern  states  from  extreme  measures  at
the  same  time  that  John  Tyler  was  despatched  on
a  similar  errand  to  President  Buchanan.  He  pub-
lished a  tragedy  called  "Ricgo,  or  the  Spanish
Martyr  "  (Richmond,  1872),  and  a  volume  of  occa-
sional verses  under  the  title  of  "  Opuseula." — An-
other brother,  Wvndham,  governor  of  Virginia,  b.
in  Manchester,  Chestei-field  co.,  Va.,  26  Jan.,  1803 ;
d.  in  Washington  county,  Va.,  11  Feb..  1888,  was
educated  at  William  and  Mary,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  practice  in  1824,  and  established  him-
self in  Richmond.  He  was  chosen  a  councillor  of
state  in  1830,  and  in  1833  was  again  elected  to  the
council,  which  was  reduced  to  three  members.
He  became  lieutenant-governor  on  31  March,  1836,
and  on  the  same  day  succeeded  to  the  governor-
ship for  one  year  through  the  resignation  of  Little-
ton W.  Tazewell.  In  1838  he  was  elected  to  the
legislature,  and  represented  the  city  of  Richmond
until  he  removed  to  the  country  in  1841.  Return-
ing to  the  capital  in  1858,  he  was  again  elected  to
the  legislature,  and  took  an  active  part  in  its  delib-
erations during  the  period  of  the  civil  war.  He
resisted  the  pro]X)sal  ,of  South  Carolina  for  a
southern  convention  in  1859,  and  after  the  seces-
sion of  that  state  and  others  he  still  urged  the  re-
fusal of  Virginia  to  join  them.  As  chairman  of  a
committee,  he  was  the  author  of  the  anti-coercion
resolution,  in  which  Virginia,  while  rejecting  se-
cession, declared  her  intention  to  fight  with  the
southern  states  if  they  were  attacked.  He  opposed
the  regulation  of  the  prices  of  food  in  1863,  an4
offered  his  resignation  m  1864  when  the  public  de-
manded sucli  a  measure,  but  resum^  his  seat  on
receiving  a  vote  of  approval  from  his  constituents.
He  was  the  author  of  "  Pocahontas,  alias  Matoaka,


ROBERTSON


ROBINS


and  her  DpticendanUi  through  her  Marria^  with
John  Rolfo"  (Kichmond,  1KN7).  He  h>ft  in  manu-
script a  "  ViiidicAtion  of  tho  C«»urHo  of  Virf^inia
throufrhoiit  thi'  Slave  ('ontn)vt'rsv."

HOliEKTSON,  Thomas  JumoH,  Mmator.  b.  in
Fairtlt'lil  foimty,  S.  I".. ."{  Au;j..  1IS2JJ.  Uv  was  Kradii-
ated  at  South  Oarolina  t^olleK*'  in  lH4^t,  and  Htudie<l
medicino,  hut  iMH'auu'  a  planter.  lie  was  (iov.  Hol>-
ert  F.  W.  Allston's  aide-den-ainp  in  IHS^-'l).  Dur-
inif  the  civil  war  he  was  a  decide«l  and  o|H>n  Union-
ist. He  wa.s  a  member  of  tho  State  const  it  utionnl
convention  that  was  held  after  the  pansa^e  t)f  the
reconstniction  acts  of  c<in>rress,  and  was  elected  as
a  Repuldican  to  one  of  the  vacnut  st»ats  in  the
U.  S.  senate,  lie  was  n'H'lecttnl  for  a  full  term,
serving  altopether  from  22  July,  18(W.  till  3  March,
1877,  and  held  the  chairmanship  of  tho  committee
on  man u fact  tires.

R<)I{KRTS(»N,  WiUiam,  Scottish  historian,  b.
in  Ii«irthwick.  S<'otland,  10  Sept.,  1?21 :  d.  in  Kdin-
burgh,  Scotiaml.  11  June.  17y:J.  He  studie«l  the-
ology at  the  University  of  Kdinburgh,  where  ho  was
gra<hmte<l  in  1741.  lie  held  various  livings,  lie-
came,  in  1702,  principal  of  the  University  of  K<lin-
burgh.  and  was  ap|>omtcd  royal  historiographer  of
Scotland  in  17W.  He  devoted  many  vears  to  writ-
ing a  "  Hist«)ry  of  Scotland"  (Ijondon,  1758-'9),
which  brought  him  fame  and  advancement,  and
encouragwl  him  to  apply  the  same  degree  of  care
and  industry  to  a  "  History  of  the  Km|K.'ror  Charles
V."  (17()l)). *  He  then  undertook  a  "History  of
America."  and  published  the  first  eight  books,
dealing  with  the  settlement  and  history  of  the
S[>anish  colonies  (1777),  but  the  Revolutionary  war
deterred  him  from  carrying  out  his  plan.  The
ninth  and  tenth  books,  containing  the  history  of
Virginia  until  1088  and  that  of  New  England  up
to  1052,  were  published  from  his  manuscripts  b^
his  son  William  (1790).  Numerous  collective  edi-
tions cf  Robertson's  works  have  appeared.  His
biography  has  Ix-en  written  by  Dugald  Stewart
(1801)  and  by  Ijord  Brougham  in  his  "  Lives  of  Men
of  Iiett.>rs""(18r)7).

ROBERTSON,  WiUiam  H.,  jurist,  b.  in  Bed-
ford, \VestchesU>r  co.,  N.  V.,  10  Oct.,  1823.  He
receive*!  a  cla^jsical  education,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  Imr  in  1847.  He  was  elected
sujHsrintendent  of  the  common  schools  of  Bedford,
and  in  18411  and  18r>0  was  a  member  of  the  state
assembly.  In  1854  he  was  sent  to  the  state  senate,
and  he  was  elccte*!  county  judge  for  three  succes-
sive terms,  holding  the  omce  twelve  years.  In
1800  he  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Repul>-
lican  ticket.  Judge  Roljertson  was  a  delegate  to
the  Baltimore  c<invention  of  1804  and  again  an
elector,  and  was  then  elected  to  congri'ss,  and
served  from  4  March,  1807,  till  3  March,  1801>.  In
1872  he  returned  to  the  state  senate,  and  was  one
of  the  leaders  of  that  l)ody  till  1881,  when  he  was
appointed  collector  of  the  jnirt  of  Now  York.  His
nomination  to  the  office  by  I'resident  Garfield
without  consultation  with  the  senators  from  New
York.  Roscoe  (.'onkling  and  Thomas  (.'.  Piatt,  letl
to  the  defection  of  the  so-called  Stalwart  wing  of
the  Kciiublican  party.

RintKRVAL,  Jean  Fran<^oiH  do  la  Roqne,
Sieur  dc,  French  colonist,  b.  about  1500;  d.  at  M-a
in  1547.  He  was  a  nobleman  of  Picanly,  and  the
first  persim  that  attempted  to  colonize  New  France
after  Cartier.  He  had  gained  distinction  as  an
officer  in  the  army,  and,  having  obtained  the  king's
consent  to  govern  and  colonize  rana<la,  he  sailed
for  that  country  in  1542.  He  rcachetl  his  destina-
tion in  safety,  wintered  at  Stadacona  (now  (^uebi-cL
and  sent  two  vessels  to  France  for  provisions,  which


he  did  not  reoeiro.  He  then  led  an  unsocressful
exp«<4lition  into  the  interior  of  the  country,  hminff
fifty-eight  men  at  UucIn-c,  and  one  ship.  '  Instead
of  semling  Rol)erval  aid.  the  king  ordered  ('artier
to  bring  him  lionie.  an  his  services  would  be  Talu*
able  in  the  war  in  I'icardy.  He  tierfonncd  several
gallant  exploits,  but  in  1547  saile<l  a  second  time
for  Canada  with  a  large  an<l  valuable  expedition,
but  wax  wrccke<l  on  tin-  tmssago.  and  all  [lerished.

ROBESON,  (ileorfre  .Maxwell,  MM-retary  of  the
navv.  b.  in  Warren  county,  N.  J.,  in  1M27.  lie  wa[s
graduatc<l  at  Princeton  ui  1847,  studie<i  law,  waa
admitted  t<»  the  bar  in  1X50,  and  U-gan  pnunice  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  removing  aftcrwani  to  Camden,
where  he  was  aptMjintcd  prosecuting  attorney  for
the  county  in  1859.  He  took  an  active  part  in
organizing  the  hIhU*  tnK)ps  at  the  t)eginning  of
the  civil  war,  holding  a  commission  as  brigadier-
general  under  tho  governor.  In  18<{7  he  l>ecame
attorney-general  of  New  Jersey,  but  he  resigned  on
receiving  the  apfMiintment  of  secretary  of  tTie  navy
in  the  cabinet  of  President  (irant  on  25  June,
1809.  He  held  this  office  till  March,  1877,  and
was  subs«>quently  a  meml^'r  of  congress  from  18
March.  1879.  tiir3  March,  1KS;{.

ROUIDAUX,  Joseph  Emery,  Canadian  edu-
cator, b.  in  St.  PhilipjR',  Laprairie.  Quebec,  10
March,  1844.  He  was  educated  at  the  Montreal
and  Jesuits'  colleges,  and  graduated  in  law  at
McGill  university  in  1800.  lie  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  that  year,  was  appointinl  queen's  coun-
sel, and  has  l>een  professor  of  civil  law  at  Mc(>ill
university  since  1877.  In  1879  he  was  a  commis-
sioner to  report  on  the  administration  of  justice  in
Montreal,  and  a  meml)er  of  the  commission  to  in-
quire into  matters  connecte<l  with  the  building  of
tne  parliament  house  in  (^uelx'c.  Mr.  Robidaux
was  elected  to  the  Quelx'c  legislative  assenjl)ly,
20  March.  1884,  and  re-eliH-ted  in  December,  1880.

ROBIE,  Thomas,  author,  b.  in  Ik>ston.  Mass.,
20  March.  1089;  d.  there.  28  Aug.,  1?29.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvanl  in  1708.  .studied  theology,
and  afterward  took  up  the  study  of  medicine,  and
obtained  the  degree  of  M.  D.  He  was  librarian  of
the  college  in  1712-'13,  and  fn>m  1714  till  1723
was  a  tutor.  He  published  a  Ixxik  entitled  "The
Knowletlge  of  Christ "  (Boston,  1721),  and  in  the
"TnmsjK'tions  "  of  the  Philosophical  s<x-iety  a  i»a-
per  on  "Alkaline  Sjilts"  (1?20)  and  one  on  "The
v'enoin  of  the  .Spidor"  (1724).

ROBIN,  Claude  C,  French  clergyman,  b.  in
France  about  1750.  He  m*companie<i  Count  Ro-
chambeau  to  the  American  colonies  as  chaplain.
His  ex|x?riences  and  observations  in  this  country,
with  remarks  on  some  of  the  actors  and  events  of
the  lievoluticm, were  given  in  "Nouveau  voyage  dans
rAmerique  s««ptentrit>nalo  en  1781  et  camimgne  de
I'armee  de  M.  le  Comto  de  RiK-hamlteau  '  (Paris,
1782;  English  translation,  Philadelphia^  1783).
Ablie  Robin  was  the  author  also  of  "Voyages
dans  I'interieurde  la  Ijimisiane  "  (Paris,  1807).

ROBINS,  Henry  Ephraim,  dercyman.  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  27  Sept.,  1H27.  His  education
was  received  at  the  Literary  institute,  Suffield,
Conn.,  and  at  Newton  theological  seminary,  where
he  was  graduate<l  in  IHOl.  In  the  same  year  he
was  ordained,  and  in  1M02  he  lH>came  jwstor  of  the
Central  liaptist  church.  Newjxirt,  R.  I.  In  1807
he  tt)ok  the  pastomte  of  the  1st  Itaptist  church,
Rtx'hester,  N.  Y.,  and  he  remaintMl  there  until
1873,  when  he  was  calletl  to  the  presidency  of  Colby
university.  Waterville,  Me.  For  nearly  ten  years
he  administeriMl  the  affairs  of  this  ctdlege  with
success.  In  1882  he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of
Christian  ethics  in  Rochester  theological  seminary.


282


ROBINS


ROBINSON


which  place  he  still  (1888)  occupies. Dr.  Robins  ha.s
spent  much  time  in  stiulv  and  travel  in  Europe.

ROBINS,  Thomas,  banker,  b.  at  South  Point,
his  father's  j)lrtntation,  Worcester  county,  Md.,  1
Jan..  1797;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13  Anril,  1882.
He  receivwl  an  academic  education  in  Maryland,
and  in  1815  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  he
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  until  1852.  Mr.
Robins  was  then  called  tc^  the  presidency  of  the
Philadelphia  bank,  resigning  in  1879,  having  extri-
cated it  almost  from  bankruptcy,  and  carried  it
safely  through  two  panics,  anil  leaving  it  the  most
prosperous  in  the  city.  lie  held  many  places  of
trust,  and  was  at  one  time  president  of  the  com-
mon council  of  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Robins  was  the
author  of  "Notes  of  Travel"  (printed  privately,
Philadelphia,  1873).

ROBINSON,  Annie  Dousrlas,  poet,  b.  in  Plym-
outh, N.  H.,  12  Jan.,  1842.  Her  maiden  name
was  Green.  Under  the  pen-name  of  "  Marian
Douglas  "  she  has  contributed  many  poems  to
magazines  and  newspapers,  and  published  in  book-
form  "Picture  Poems  for  Young  Folks"  (Bo.ston,
1871)  and  a  story  in  prose  entitled  "  Peter  and
Polly,  or  Home  Life  in  New  England  a  Hundred
Years  Ago"(187G).

ROBINSON,  Beverly,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1723 ;  d.  in  Thornbury,  England,  in  1792.  He
was  the  son  of  John  Robinson,  president  of  the
council  of  Virginia  in  1734,  and  afterward  speaker
of  the  house  of  burgesses. The  son  served  under

Wojfe  as  a  major  at
the  storming  of  Que-
bec in  1759,  and  be-
came wealthy  by  his
marriage  with  Su-
sanna, daughter  of
Frederick  Phillipse.
Though  he  opposed
the  measures  that
led  to  the  separation
of  the  colonies  from
the  mother-country,
he  joined  the  loyal-
ists when  independ-
ence was  declared,
removed  .  to  New
York,  and  raised  the
Loyal  American  regi-
ment, of  which  ne
was  colonel,  also  commanding  the  corps  called  the
guards  and  pioneers.  Col.  Robinson  was  also  em-
ployed to  conduct  several  matters  of  importance
on  behalf  of  the  royalists,  and  figured  conspicu-
ously in  cases  of  defection  from  the  Whig  cause.
He  opened  a  correspondence  with  the  Whig  lead-
ers of  Vermont  relative  to  their  return  to  their
allegiance,  and  was  concerned  in  Arnold's  treason.
His  country  mansion  was  Arnold's  headquarters
while  the  latter  was  arranging  his  plan.  (See  illus-
tration on  page  95,  vol.  i.)  After  the  trial  and  con-
viction of  Andre,  Col.  Robinson,  as  a  witness,  ac-
companied the  commissioners  that  were  sent  by  Sir
Henry  Clinton  to  Washington's  headquarters  to
plead  with  him  for  Andre's  life.  Col.  Rooinson  had
previously  addressed  Washington  on  the  subject  of
Andre's  release,  and  in  his  letter  remindetl  him  of
their  former  friendship.  At  the  termination  of  the
war  he  went  to  New  Brunswick,  and  was  a  member
of  the  first  council  of  that  colony,  but  did  not  take
his  seat.  He  subsequently  went  to  England  with
part  of  his  family,  and  resided  in  retirement  at
Thornbury,  near  Bath,  till  his  death.  His  wife  was
included  in  the  confiscation  act  of  New  York,  and
the  whole  of  the  estate  that  was  derived  from  her


^ev.  ^^Itr^^t^i


tm^


father  passed  from  the  family.  As  a  compensation
for  this  loss  the  British  government  granted  her
husband  the  sum  of  £17,(X)0  sterling.  She  dietl  at
Thornbury  in  1822,  aged  ninetv-four  years. — Their
son,  Beverly,  b.  in  New  York  state  about  1755;
d.  in  New  York  city  in  1816,  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1773,  and  at  the  l)eginning  of  the
Revolution  was  a  student  of  law  in  the  office  of
James  Duane.  He  was  a  lieutenant -colonel  in
the  Loyal  American  regiment,  and  at  the  evacu-
ation of  New  York  was  placed  at  the  head  of  a
large  number  of  loyalists,  who  embarked  for
Nova  Scotia.  He  afterward  went  to  New  Bruns-
wick, and  resided  principally  at  and  near  the  city
of  St.  John,  receiving  half-pay  as  an  officer  of  the
crown.  He  was  a  member  of  the  council  of  New
Brunswick,  and  on  the  occurrence  of  the  war  be-
tween Great  Britain  and  France,  was  ^iven  com-
mand of  a  regiment  that  had  been  raised  in  the
colony.  Col.  Robinson  did  much  to  advance  the
interests  of  the  city  of  St.  John.  He  died  while
on  a  visit  to  two  of  his  sons  that  remained  resi-
dents of  New  York  citjf. — Another  son  of  the  first
Beverly,  Morris,  b.  m  the  Highlands  of  New
York  in  1759 ;  d,  at  Gibraltar  in  1815,  served  as  a
captain  in  the  queen's  rangers  during  the  war  of
the  Revolution,  and  after  the  restoration  of  peace
was  continued  in  commission.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  a  lieutenant -colonel  and  assistant
barrack-master-general  in  the  British  army. — An-
other son,  Jolin,  b.  in  New  York  state  in  1761 ;
d.  in  St.  John,  New  Brunswick,  in  1828,  was  a
lieutenant  in  the  Loyal  American  regiment  dur-
ing the  Revolution,  and  when  the  corps  was  dis-
banded he  settled  in  New  Brunswick  and  received
half-pay.  He  became  a  successful  merchant,  was
deputy  paymaster-general  of  the  king's  forces  in
the  colony,  a  member  of  the  council,  treasurer
of  New  Brunswick,  mayor  of  St.  John,  and  presi-
dent of  the  first  bank  that  was  chartered  in  that
city  and  in  the  colony. — Another  son.  Sir  Fred-
ericli  Pliillipse,  soldier,  b.  in  the  Highlands  of
New  York  in  September,  1763;  d.  in  Brighton,
England,  1  Jan.,  1852,  was  attached  to  his  father's
regiment,  and  in  February,  1777,  was  commissioned
an  ensign.  He  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner
at  the  battle  of  Stony  Point,  but  was  excnanged,
and  left  this  country.  He  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  captain  in  1794,  served  in  the  West  Indies
under  Sir  Charles  Gore,  and  was  present  at  the
siege  of  Fort  Bourbon  in  the  island  of  Martinique.
In  1795  he  returned  to  England,  and  in  1812  te
served  as  brigadier-general  in  the  peninsula.  After
the  termination  of  the  peninsular  war  he  went
to  Canada  as  commander-in-chief  of  the  troops  in
the  upper  province.  Pie  commanded  the  British
force  in  the  attack  on  Plattsburg  under  Gen.
Prevost,  and  protested  against  the  order  of  his
superior  officer  when  he  was  directed  to  retire.
From  1  July,  1815.  till  1816,  he  administered  the
government  of  L'pjier  Canada  during  the  absence
of  Francis  Gore.  He  soon  afterward  removed  to
the  West  Indies,  where  he  took  command  of  the
forces.  He  became  a  lieutenant-general  in  1825,  and
in  1841  was  promoted  to  the  full  rank  of  general.
On  2  Jan.,  1815,  he  was  made  a  knight  commander
of  the  Bath,  and  in  18^38  he  became  a  knight
grand  cross  of  that  order.  —  Another  son.  Sir
William  Henry,  b.  in  the  Highlands  of  New
York  in  1766  d.  in  Bath,  England,  in  1836,  ac-
companied his  father  to  England,  was  appointed
to  a  place  in  the  commissariat  department  of  the
British  army,  and  was  its  head  at  tiie  time  of  his
death.  He  was  knighted  for  his  long  services.
His  wife,  Catherine,  daughter  of  Cortlandt  Skin-


ROBINSON


ROBINSON


283


net,  attomey-poiH'rnI  of  New  Jentpy.  d.  at  Wl»-
tlioriM-  Mi.uM',  M«rlf»w.  Knulnntl.  in  1843.

HOBINSON,  ChttrlPH,  jf"*'f™'»i"  "'  Kanwin,  b.
in  llnnlwick,  Masst.. 21  July,  1H18.  lie  wa8o<lurat-
ed  at  Ha^lli'v  and  Amherst  aca«leinie*«  an«l  at  Am-
herst college,  but  was  compeliocl  by  ilhu^s  to  leave
in  his  so<*ond  year.  He  studie*!  nuHlieine  at  Wood-
stm-k.  V't..  and  at  Pittsfleld.  Mass..  where  he  re-
ceive«l  his  dejfn'o  in  1S4;{.  and  pnu-tisi'd  at  Ik'lcher-
town,  Sprinfffleld.  an*l  Fitchburi;,  .Mjuss.,  till  1849,
when  he  went  to  ('aiifornia  bv  the  overland  route.
He  nlitod  a  daily  |»ai>er  in  ^vu'ramento  oalleti  the
•*  Settler's  and  Miners  Tribune"  in  \M(),  took  an
active  part  in  the  riots  of  IKW  as  an  ufiholder  of
stiuattcr  soven'i^fnty,  was  seriously  wounde<l.  and,
wnile  under  indietment  forconspinwy  and  murder,
wa.s electtnl  to  the  lejrislature.  He  was  sul)sef|uently
dis«-harjfe<l  by  the  court  without  trial.  On  his  re-
turn to  Massachusetts  in  1KV2  he  conducted  in
Pitchburg  a  weekly  i)ai>er  called  the  "News"  till
June,  1854.  when  he  went  to  Kansas  as  confiden-
tial agent  of  the  New  England  emigrant's'  aid
scx'iety,  and  settled  in  Jjawrence.  He  became  the
Icatler  of  the  Fre<'-state  jmrtv.  and  was  made  chair-
man of  its  executive  committee  and  conunander-
in-i'hief  of  the  Kansas  volunteers.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Topeka  convention  that  a<lf)pted  a  free-
state  constitution  in  IS.'w,  and  under  it  was  elected
governor  in  1856.  He  was  arrested  for  treason  and
usur[>ation  of  office,  and  on  his  trial  on  the  latter
charge  was  acquittetl  by  the  jury.  He  was  elected
again  by  the  I"  ree-state  party  in  18.58,  and  for  the
thirtl  time  in  18,')9.  under  the  Wyandotte  constitu-
tion, and  entere<l  on  his  terra  of  two  vears  on  the
admission  of  Kansas  to  the  Union  m  January,
1861.  He  organized  most  of  the  Kansas  regi-
ments for  the  civil  war.  He  afterward  served
one  terra  as  representative  and  two  terms  as  sena-
tor in  the  legislature,  and  in  1882  was  again  a  can-
didate for  governor.  In  1887  he  became  superin-
tendent of  IIa.skell  institute  in  Lawrence. — His
wife.  Sarah  Tappan  Doolittle,  author,  b.  in
Belchertown.  Mass..  12  July,  1827.  was  eclucated
at  the  New  .Salem  academy,  and  married  Dr.  Rob-
inson at  Belchertown  on  30  Oct.,  1851.  Her
maiden  name  was  Ijawrence.  She  has  published
"  Kansas,  its  Kxterior  and  Interior  Life  (Boston,
18.56),  in  which  she  describes  the  scenes,  actors,  and
event-s  of  the  struggle  l)etween  the  friends  and  foes
of  slavery  in  Kansiis,  during  which  her  house  was
plundi'n'<l  and  burned,  and  her  husband  was  im-
prisoned for  four  months.

ROBINSON,  Charles  Seymonr,  clergyman,  b.
in  Bennington,  Vt.,  31  March,  1829.  He  wis  gradu-
ated at  Williams  in  1849.  studied  theology  in
1851-*2  at  Union  seminarv.  New  York  city,  and  in
1852-'3  at  Princeton.  an<{  <m  19  April,  18.55,  was
ordained  pastf»r  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in  Trov,
N.  V.  In  1800  he  took  charge  of  a  church  in
Brooklyn.  In  1868-'70  he  had  charge  of  the  Ameri-
can chapel  in  Paris.  In  1870  he  became  pastor
of  a  congregation  in  New  York  city,  which  soon
afterward  erectetl  the  Madison  avenue  Presbyte-
rian church,  resigning  in  1887.  He  receive<l  "the
degrcre  of  I).  D.  from  Hamilton  in  18<17  an<l  that  of
LL.  I),  from  I^afayette  in  1885. Dr.  liobinson  has

EublishfMl  volumes  of  sermons  and  other  works  that
ave  jMisst'd  through  sevrnil  e<lit ions,  and  collections
of  hymns  and  tunes  that  are  extensively  used.  The
titles  of  his  publications  are  **  Songs  of  the  Church  "
(New  York,  1862);  "Songs  for  the  Sanctuary"
(1865) ;  "  Short  .Studies  for  Sunday-School  Teachers"
(1868):  "lk>thel  and  Penuel "  (1873):  "Chureh
Work "(1873);  "Paalrasand  Hymns" (1875);  "Cal-
vary Soni^  for  Sunday-Schools' "  (1875) ;  "  Spiritual


Sonrn  for  Church  and  Choir"  (1878);  "Studiw  in
the  New  Testament  "  (1H«0) ;  ".Spiritual  SfmgH  for
Social  Meetings"  (18H1);  ".Spiritual  .Song*  for
.Sundav-.S«'h<K)ls "  (1881);  "Studies  of  Neglected
Texts''  (\HK\);  "  Uudes  Domini"  (1884);  "Ser-
mons in  S<nigs"  (18K5);  ".Sabtiath  Kvening  .Ser-
mons" (1887) ;  "The  Phanu>hs  of  the  Itondage  and
the  Kxo<lus"  (1887);  and  ".Simon  Peter,  his  Life
an<l  Tinu-s"  (2  vols..  IHXH).

•  ROBINSON.  ChrlHtopher,  sr.ldier.  b.  in  Went-
moreland  county.  Va..  in  17<W;  d.  in  York  (now
Tor«)nto),  UpiK'r  Canada,  in  1798.  IIo  was  a  de-
s<'endantof  Cnristopher  Robinson  (l(M5-*90).  elder
brother  of  Dr.  John  Robinsc^m,  bishop  of  Bristol
anil  Ijondon,  who  came  to  America  m  1660  and
was  afterward  secretary  of  the  colony  of  Virginia.
The  vounger  Christo^)her  was  e<lucate<I  at  William
and  Marv,  and  early  m  the  Revolution  fled  t<»  New
York,  wWre  he  receivwl  a  commission  in  the
Ix>yal  American  regiment  under  his  relative,  Bev-
erly Robinson.  He  served  at  the  south,  and  was
wounde<l,  and  at  the  peace  went  to  Nova  Scotia
,  and  received  a  grant  of  land  at  Wilmot.  He  soon
I  removed  to  Upjier  Canada,  wasappointe<Iinsi)ector
j  of  the  n>8erves  of  the  crown,  and  Anally  s<'tt!e<l  in
I  York.  In  1790  he  repn*sented  thecounti«*sof  Ijcn-
i  nox  and  Addington  in  the  assembly. — His  son.  .Sir
John  BeTerly,  Imrt.,  b.  in  Ik-rthfer,  Ix)wer  Can-
ada, 26  July,  1791  ;  d.  in  Torrmto,  30  Jan.,  186.3,
studied  law,  meanwhile  serving  as  a  clerk  of  the
assembly,  and,  on  being  admitted  to  the  Iwr  in
1812,  was  appointed  attomev-general  of  Upper
Canada,  which  office  he  held  till  181.5,  He  was
solicitor-general  in  181.5-'18,  attoniey-general  in
1818-'29,  and  chief  justice  of  Up|)er  Canaila  from
15  July,  1829,  till  his  death.  He  was  for  eighteen
years  a  meml)er  of  the  legislature,  .serA-ingaU»ut  an
equal  length  of  time  in  each  chaml»er.  When  the
war  of  1812  began  he  was  one  of  a  company  of  1(X)
volunteers  that  followe<l  Sir  Isaac  Brock  in  the  ex-
pedition that  led  to  the  capture  of  Detmit.  and  he
was  jtresent  at  the  Iwttle  of  C^ueenstown  Height.*.
In  Noveml)er,  1850.  he  was  ai>[>ointed  a  com|>anion
(civil  division)  of  the  order  of  the  liath,  and  he  was
cn'ate<l  a  Iwronet,  by  patent.  21  Sept..  18.54,  He
was  chancellor  of  Trinity  college,  Toront»>,  and  the
author  of  several  works  on  Canada. — John  Bev-
erly's son.  Sir  JaineH  Lnkin,  of  Toronto,  suc-
cee<le<l  him  as  sectind  baronet.  30  Jan.,  18(W. — An-
other son,  John  Beverly,  Camulian  lawyer,  b.  at
Beverly  house.  Toronto.  21  Feb.,  1H20.  was  oducat-
eil  privately  and  at  Upper  Canmla  college.  studie<l
law,  and  was  admittecl  to  the  bar  of  Upj)er  Canada
in  1844.  He  served  during  the  reljellion  of  1837
as  aide-de-camp  to  Sir  Francis  liond  Head,  and
partici|»ated  in  the  enpigement  near  Toronto,  He
wgan  the  practice  ot  law  at  Toronto,  was  president
of  its  citv  council,  and  was  electwl  mayor  in  1857.
Mr.  Robinson  represented  Toninto  in  the  legisla-
tive a.ssemblv  of  Canada  from  1857  till  1861,  and
West  Toronto  from  the  latter  date  till  18«W.  He
was  elected  for  Algoma  to  the  Dominion  (parlia-
ment in  18?2,  and  sat  until  the  dissolution  in  1874.
Mr.  Robinson  was  also  a  member  of  the  executive
council  of  Canada,  and  jiresident  of  that  Ixxlv
in  the  Cartier-.Maitlonald  administration  from  2Y
Man-h  till  21  Mav.  lH<i2.  He  was  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  Ontario  In  lM80-'7.

ROBINSON,  ChrlHtopher  Blachett,  Canadian
publisher,  b.  in  Thorah,  Ont..  2  Nov.,  1837.  He
was  eilucated  at  the  public  schiKils  and  by  private
tuition,  engnge<l  in  journalism  in  1857,  and  edited
the  "  Canadian  Post "  in  Beaverton.  In  1861  he  re-
moved this  pajter  to  Lindsay,  where  he  published
it  for  ten  vears. In  1871  he 'sold  his  interest  in  the


284


ROBINSON


ROBINSON


*'  Post "  and  removed  to  Toronto,  where,  in  1872,  he
established  "  The  Canada  Presbyterian,"  the  chief
denominational  paiier  of  the  country,  which  he  still
(1888)  conducts.  In  conjunction  with  Prof.  Gold-
win  Smith  he  also  founded  at  Toronto  "  The  Week,"
the  principal  literary  periodical  in  the  Dominion.
Mr.  Robinson  publishes  Sabbath-school  papers,  the
"  Canada  Law  Journal,"  "  Rural  Canadian,"  and
the  "  Dominion  Oddfellow,"  of  which  he  is  also
managing  editor.  He  was  president  of  the  Cana-
dian press  association  in  1884,  and  has  been  a  di-
rector in  hanking  and  manufacturing  institutions.
ROBINSON,  Conway,  jurist,  b.  m  Richmond,
Va.,  15  Sept.,  1805;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  30
Jan.,  1884.  The  first  emigrant  of  this  family  was
John  Robinson,  who  settled  in  Virginia,  apparent-
ly in  York  county,  where  his  son  Anthony  was  a
large  landed  proprietor  in  1691.  The  family  is  not
to  be  confused  with  that  of  the  colonial  treasurer,
or  with  Christopher  Robinson,  president  of  the
council.  Conway  Robinson's  father,  John,  was  ap-
pointed in  1787  clerk  of  the  superior  court,  Rich-
mond, and  was  the  author  of  "  Forms  in  the  Courts
of  Law  of  Virginia."  The  son  received  his  education
at  a  school  in  Richmond,  and  became  deputy  clerk
under  his  father.  Here  he  studied  law  and  issued
a  new  edition  of  his  father's  "  Forms  "  (Richmond,
1826),  which  is  still  valued  by  clerks  in  Virginia.
He  secured  a  large  practice  soon  after  entering  on
his  profession.  He  next  issued  his  "  Law  and  Equi-
ty Practice  in  Virginia"  (3  vols.,  1832-'9),  which
has  been  highly  praised.  In  1842  Mr.  Robinson
became  reporter  to  the  Virginia  court  of  appeals,
but,  after  publishing  two  volumes  of  reports
(1842-4),  he  resigned  the  office  in  1844.  From
1846  till  1849  he  devoted  himself,  with  other  emi-
nent lawyers,  to  a  revision  of  the  civil  and  crimi-
nal code  of  Virginia,  which  went  into  effect  on  1
July,  1850.  In  the  same  year  a  constitutional  con-
vention met  in  Virginia,  some  of  whose  changes,
such  as  the  election  of  all  judges  by  the  people,
were  vainly  opposed  by  Mr.  Robinson.  Furtner
changes  in  the  code  being  necessitated  by  the  new
constitution,  he  was  chosen  by  Richmond  its  rep-
resentative in  the  house  of  delegates  in  1852,  m
order  that  he  might  assist  in  the  revision.  In  1860
he  took  up  his  residence  at  "  The  Vineyard  "  near
Washington,  D.  C,  and  practised  in  the  supreme
court. He  had  begun  in  1854,  and  in  1874  cora-

Sleted,  "  The  Principles  and  Practice  of  Courts  of
ustice  in  England  and  the  United  States "  (2
vols.,  Richmond,  1855).  This  work  was  preceded
by  careful  researches  in  England,  where  its  value
has  been  recognized  by  high  authorities.  Conway
Robinson  was  for  many  years  chairman  of  the  ex-
ecutive committee  of  the  Virginia  historical  society,
which  published  his  "  Account  of  the  Discoveries
of  the  West  until  1519 ;  and  of  Voyages  to  and
along  the  Atlantic  Coast  of  North  America,  from
1520  to  1573  "  (1848).  He  made  several  important
discoveries  in  history,  and  in  1853  found  in  the
state  archives  in  London  a  MS.  journal  of  the  first
legislative  assembly  in  Virginia  (1619).  At  the
close  of  the  alx)ve-named  work  on  the  early  voy-
a^es  to  America  he  alluded  to  a  work  in  prepara-
tion. "  The  Annals  of  Virginia,"  but  this  was  not
published,  as  the  later  years  of  the  author  were  de-
voted to  his  "  History  of  the  High  Court  of  Chan-
cery, and  other  Institutions  of  England ;  from  the
time  of  Caius  Julius  Ca?sar  imtil  the  Accession  of
William  and  Mary  (in  1688-'9)."  Of  this  work  the
first  volume  has  been  published  (Richmond,  1882),
and  the  second  and  concluding  volume  will  proba-
bly appear.  The  first  volume  possesses  a  value  in-
dependent of  the  second,  and  has  large  annotated


indices.  It  is  the  only  work  of  the  kind  in  Eng-
lish, and  is  virtually  a  cyclopsedia  of  legal  history
in  the  eleven  centuries  that  it  covers.

ROBINSON,  Edward,  biblical  scholar,  b.  in
Southington,  Conn.,  10  April,  1794;  d.  in  New
York  city,  27  Jan.,  1863.  He  was  brought  up  on  a
farm,  taught  at  East  Haven  and  Farmington  in
1810-'ll,  entered  Hamilton  college,  where  his  un-
cle, Seth  Norton,
was  a  professor,
and  was  gradu-
ated in  1816.  Af-
ter studying  law
for  a  few  months,
he  returned  to  the
college  as  tutor  in
mathematics  and
Greek,  and  while
there  married  a
daughter  of  Sam-
uel Kirkland.  His
wife  died  within  a
year.  In  1821  he
went  to  Andover
to  superintend  the
publication  of  an
edition  of  Homer's
"Iliad,"  with  selected  notes.  He  there  began  the
study  of  Hebrew,  aided  Prof.  Moses  Stuart  in  the
preparation  of  the  second  edition  of  the  latter's
"Hebrew  Grammar"  (Andover.  1823),  and  in
1823-'6  was  his  assistant,  and  for  a  part  of  the
time  his  substitute,  in  the  chair  of  sacred  litera-
ture in  the  theological  seminary.  In  1826  he
went  fo  Germany,  and  pursued  philological  studies
at  Halle  and  Berlin.  He  married  the  daughter  of
Prof.  Ludwig  Heinrich  von  Jakob,  of  Halle,  in
1828,  and  after  travelling  through  Europe  returned
home  in 1830,  and  was  appointed  extraordinary

frofessor  of  sacred  literature  in  Andover  seminary,
n  1831  he  began  the  publication  of  the  "  Biblical
Repository,"  which  he  edited  for  four  years.  After
spending  three  years  in  Boston,  engaged  on  a
scriptural  Greek  lexicon,  he  accepted  in  1837  the
chair  of  biblical  literature  in  union  theological
seminary,  New  York  city.  He  explored  Palestine
in  1838  with  the  Rev.  Eli  Smith,  and  in  ia39-'40
remained  in  Berlin  to  digest  his  notes  and  verify
his  discoveries.  This  work  gave  the  fii-st  impetus
to  modern  biblical  research.  He  returned  to  the
duties  of  his  professorship,  and  in  1843  edited  the
first  volume  of  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra,"  into  which
was  merged  the  "  Biblical  Repository."  He  revis-
ited Jerusalem  in  1852,  being  again  accompanied
by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Smith.  He  began  in  1856  the  re-
vision of  his  works  on  scriptural  geography,  but
did  not  live  to  complete  it.  His  biblical  library
and  maps  were  purchased  after  his  death  for  Ham-
ilton college,  with  the  exception  of  many  volumes
that  he  had  given  to  Union  theological  seminary.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Dartmouth
in  1832.  and  from  the  University  of  Halle  in  1842,
that  of  LL.  D.  from  Yffle  in  1844.  and  received  a
gold  medal  from  the  London  royal  geographical
society  in  1842.  While  associated  with  Prof.  Stu-
art, he  assisted  in  making  a  translation  of  George
B.  Winer's  "  Greek  Grammar  of  the  New  Testa-
ment" (Andover,  1825).  He  published  independ-
ently a  "  Greek  and  English  Lexicon  of  the  New
Testament"  (1825),  based  on  the  "Clavis  Philo-
logica"  of  Christian  A.  Wahl:  revised  Augustine
Calmet's  "  Dictionary  of  the  Bible"  (Boston.  1832);
translated  from  the  German  Philip  Buttman's
"  Greek  Grammar  "  (1833) ;  compiletl  a  '*  Dictionary
of  the Holy  Bible  for  the Use  of  Schools  and


KOBINSON


ROBINSON


285


, f


Younjf  Perwns"  (Boston,  1838);  prcpMinKl  a  "  IFar-
mnny  of  thi>  (Impels  in  (Jrt'fk  "  (Anilnvor.  IWM):
traiislat«Ml  from  the  liUtinof  \V'ilh<'lm  (n>!<(>niu!«  the
"  llfl>row  Lt'xicon  of  the  Old  Testament,  includinf;^
the  Biblieal  Chaldee"  (lioston,  IWtt;  ftlh  ish,  with
corre<-tions  an<l  nilditions,  1854);  an<l  jirodiieed  a
"Greek  and  English  Ijexicon  of  the  New  Testa-
ment" (Boston,  IKiO;  last  revision.  New  York,
1850).  a  work  which  sii|H'rsetl»Hl  his  translation
of  Wahl's  work.  lM><-anie  a  standard  authority
in  the  Unite^l  States,  and  was  several  times  re-
printetl  in  (ir<>at  Britain.  The  fruit  of  his  first
survey  of  Palestine  and  historical  studv  of  scrijv
tural  topography  was  "  Biblical  Uesearclies  in  Pal-
estine. Mt.  Sinai,  and  Arabia  I*elnea.  a  .lounial  of
Travels  in  1838,  by  E.  Kobinson  and  E.  Smith,  un-
dertak<>n  in  reference  to  Biblical  tieography  "(Bos-
ton and  Ijondon,  1841 ;  German  tninslation,  Halle,
1841).  It  was  re<ognized  in  all  countries  as  the
most  valuable  contribution  to  biblical  geography
and  archaH>logv  that  hiul  appeared  since  the  days
of  Hadrian  lieland,  and  incited  other  students  to
enter  this  then  neglect<'d  field  of  investigation.  A
second  "  Harmony  of  the  Four  Gospels  in  Greek"
(BosUm,  1845)  was  followed  bv  a  '*  Harmony  of  the
Gospels  in  English  "(lioston.  1846;  Ii<mdon,  1847);
also  in  Fn-nch  (Brussels.  1H51). After  his  second

Iourney  in  the  East  Dr.  Kobinson  published  "  I^ter
biblical  Itesean-hes  in  Palestine  and  the  Adjacent
Regions :  a  Journal  of  Travels  in  the  Year  1852.  by
Edward  Robinson,  Eli  Smith,  and  others,  dniwn  up
from  the  Original  Diaries,  with  FHstorical  Illustra-
tions "( Boston  and  Ijondon,  1850;  German  trans-
lation, Berlin,  1856).  Revised  editions  of  the  (treek
and  English  "  Harmonies,"  edited  bv  Matthew  B.
Riddle,  were  nublished  in  1885  and  1886.  A  "  Me-
moir of  Rev.  William  Robinson,  with  some  Account
of  his  Ancestors  in  this  Country"  (printed  private-
ly. New  York,  1859),  is  a  sketch  of  his  father,  who
for  fortv-one  years  was  pastor  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  in  Southington,  Conn.  Dr.  Robin-
son's last  work,  "  Physical  Geography  of  the  Holy
Land,"  a  supplement  to  his  "  Biblical  Researches."
was  edited  by  Mrs.  Robinson  (New  York  and  Ijon-
don, 1865).  See  "  The  Life,  Writings,  and  Char-
acter of  F}<lward  Itobinson,"  by  Henrv  B.  Smith
and  Roswell  I).  Hitchco<k  (New  York,  18(W).—
His  wife,  Therese  Albertina  Louise  von  Jakob,
author,  b.  in  Halle,  (lermany,  26  Jan..  1797;
d.  in  Hamburg,  Germany,  13  April.  1869,  went
in  1807  to  Russia  with"  her  father,  who  held
high  {josts  under  the  government,  and  returneil  to
Halle  in  1816.  In  Russia  she  acquired  an  intimate
knowledge  of  the  Slavic  languages  and  literature,
an<l  wrote  her  first  iH)ems.  After  her  return  to
Germany  she  translated  Walter  Scott's  "  Old  Mor-
tality "and  "Black  Dwarf."  which  she  publishetl
under  the  uen-name  of  "Ernst  Berthold  "  (Halle.
1822).  All  her  other  works  were  signed  ""ralvi,"
an  anagram  formed  from  the  initials  of  her  maiden
name.  She  wrote  many  original  tales,  some  of
which  were  collected  in  a  volume  bearing  the  title
of  "  Psyche  "  (1825).  A  German  translation  of  the
popular  songs  of  the  .Servians  was  issuwl  under  the
title  of  "  Volkslitnler  der  Serben  "  (Halle,  1826;  new
ed..  Ix'iiwic,  1853).  After  her  arrival  in  the  Unitetl
States  sne  translate<l  into  German  John  Pickering's
work  "  t)n  the  A<I()iition  of  a  Uniform  Orthogra-
phy for  the  Indian  lianguages  of  North  America"
(Ix'i|»sic.  18;i4).  Her  i>ther  works  in  the  CJerman
language  that  were  publishtnl  during  her  n>sidence
in  this  country  are  "  Characteristik  der  Volkslie<ler
germanischen  Nationen"  (I^eipsic.  1840);  "Die
Unechtheit  der  Li»tler  Ossians  '  (1840);  "  Aus  der
Oescbichte  der  erstea  Ansiedclungen  in  den  Ver*


einigten  Staat4>n."  tmrnprising  a  hiiitonr  of  Jnbn
Smith  (1845);  "Die  Colonisation  von  New  Eng-
land "  (1H47).  which  was  imiM-rfectly  translatwl  into
English  by  William  Ilazlitt.  Jr. ;  and  three  tales
that  wen'  originally  publishe^l  in  lycijisic  and  tranii-
lateil  into  Englis)i  by  her  (laughter.  ap|>earins[
under  the  titles  of  "  Ileloise.  or  the  Unrevealed
.Secret"  (New  York,  1850);  "Life's  Discipline:  a
Tale  of  the  Annals  tf  Hungary"  (1851);  and  "The
Exiles"  (IK'Vl),  which  last  was  republishe<l  as
"Woo<Ihill.  or  the  Ways  of  Provi«lence "  (1856).
She  contriinite<l  o^-casioiud  essays  in  English  on
the  subjwts  that  engagwl  her  studv  to  the  "  North
American  Review,"  the  "Biblical  fteiHwitory." and
other  American  |>eriodicals.  One  st'ries  of  articles
was  reis.sued  in  lKx>k-form  under  the  title  of  "  His-
torical View  of  the  lianguages  and  Literature  of
the  Slavic  Nations,  with  a  Sketch  of  their  Popular
Poetry"  (New  York  and  IX)ndon.  1850).  After  the
death  of  her  husband.  Mrs.  Robinson  reside*!  in
Hamburg,  where  her  son.  Edward,  was  American
consul.  Her  last  work  wasj)ublishe«l  in  the  I'nited
States  under  the  title  of  "  Fifteen  Years,  a  Picture
from  the  Ijast  Century  "  (New  York,  1870).  A  col-
lection  of  her  tales,  with  her  biography  by  her
daughter,  was  published  (2  vols..  Ixjipsic.  1874).

ROBINSON.  Ezekiel  Oilman,  e<lucator.  b.  in
AttlelMirough.  Mass..  2:^  March.  1815.  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1838.  and  at  Newton  theo-
logical seminary  in  1842.  From  1842  till  1845  he
was  pastor  of  tfie  Baptist  church  in  Norfolk,  Va.,
during  which  perioti  he  sen'ed  for  one  year,  b^
permission  of  his  church,  as  chaplain  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia,  After  a  short  pastorate  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  he  l)ecame  in  1846  professor  of
biblical  interpretation  in  Western  theological  r*mi-
nary.  Covington,  Ky,  In  1850  he  was  chosen  jiastor
of  the  Ninth  street  Itoptist  church.  Cincinnati,
Ohio.  In  1853  he  was  electe<l  professor  of  theoloey
in  Rochester  theological  seminary,  and  in  1860  ne
was  made  its  president.  In  1872  he  resigned  his
place  at  Rochester  to  become  president  of  Brown
university,  which  office  he  still  (1888)  holds.
Under  his  administration  this  college  has  wlvanced
its  alrea<ly  high  re{)utation.  Dr.  Robinson  is  pre-
eminently a  teacher,  broad  and  full  in  his  scholar-
shi|>.  stimulating  and  inspiring  in  his  methods.
While  he  is  faithful  to  his  special  e<lucational  work,
his  high  reputation  as  a  preacher  and  lecturer  has
kept  him  much  in  the  pulpit  and  on  the  platform.
He  has  been  a  trustee  of  Vassar  college  from  ita
foundation,  and  receiveil  the  honorarj'  degrees  of
D.  I),  and  LL.  D.  from  Brown  in  1853'and  1872  re-
spectively. Dr.  Robinscm's  published  writings  con-
sist chiefly  of  sermons.  ad<lresses,  and  review  arti-
cles. For  several  years  he  was  editor  of  the
"  Christian  Review.  His  books  include  a  revised
translation  of  Neander's  "  Planting  and  Training
of  the  ChuR'h  "  (New  York.  1865) ;  "  Yale  Lec^tures
on  Preaching"  (1883);  and  "  Principles  and  Prac-
tice of  Moralitv"  (lioston.  1888).

ROBINSON,  Fayette,  author,  b.  in  Virginia;
d.  in  New  York  city.  26  March.  1859.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Mexico' and  her  Military  Chieftains"
(Philmlelphia,  1847);  "Account  of  the  Organiza-
tion of  the  Army  of  the  Unite«l  .States  with  Biog-
graphies  of  Distingui-shetl  Officers"  (1H48);  "CaR-
fornia  and  the  Gold  Regions"  (New  York,  1849);
"Grammar  of  the  Sjwnish  Lanpiage"  (Philadel-
phia 1850);  a  romance  entitle<l  "Wizard  of  the
Wave"  (New  York.  18.'53);  a  translation  of  An-
thelme  Brillat-.Savarin's  "Physiologic  du  goflt"
(Philadtlj.hia.  1854),  and  novels  from  the  French.

ROBINSON,  (iftorre  Dext«r,  governor  of
Massachusetts,  b.  in  Lexington,  Mass.,  20  Jan^


286


ROBINSON


ROBINSON


1834.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1856,  was
princiiMil  of  the  high-school  at  Chicopee,  Mass.,  for
nine  years,  studied  Taw  with  his  brother  Charles,  and
was  admitte<l  to  the  bar  in  1866.  He  practised  at
Chic'OfHJC,  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1874, en-
tered the  state  senate  in  1876,  and  later  in  the  same
year  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  liepublican,  tak-
ing his  seat  on  15  Oct.,  1877.  He  was  thrice  re-
elected, and  resigned  his  seat  in  1883,  having  been
elected  governor.  In  1884  and  1885  he  was  re-
elected, serving  till  the  close  of  1886.

ROBINSON,  Horatio  Nelson,  mathematician,
b.  in  Hartwick.  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y..  1  Jan.,  1806;  d.
in  Elbridge,  N.  Y.,  19  Jan..  1867.  He  received
only  a  common-school  education,  but  early  evinced
a  genius  for  mathematics,  making  the  calculations
for  an  almanac  at  the  age  of  sixteen.  A  wealthy
neighlxir  gave  him  the  means  to  study  at  Prince-
ton, and  at  the  age  of  nineteen  he  was  appointed  an
instructor  of  mathematics  in  the  navy,  which  post
he  retained  for  ten  years.  He  then  taught  an
academy  at  Canandaigua,  and  afterward  one  at
Genesee,  N.  Y.,  until  in  1844  he  gave  up  teaching
because  his  health  was  impaired,  and  removed  to
Cincinnati,  Ohio.  There  he  prepared  the  first  of  a
series  of  elementary  mathematical  text-books,
which  have  been  adopted  in  many  of  the  academies
and  colleges  of  the  United  States.  In  revising  and
completing  the  series  he  had  the  assistance  of  other
mathematicians  and  educators.  He  removed  to  '•
Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  in  1850,  and  to  Elbridge  in  1854.
His  publications  include  "University  Algebra"
(Cincinnati,  1847),  with  a  "  Key  "  (1847) ;  "  Astrono-  i
my.  University  Edition"  (1849);  "Geometry  and
Trigonometry  (1850) ;  "Treatise  on  Astronomy"
(Albany,  1850);  "Mathematical  Recreations"  (Al-
bany, 1851);  "Concise  Mathematical  Operations"
(Cincinnati,  1854);  "Treatise  on  Surveying  and
Navigation  "  (1857),  which,  in  its  revised  form,  was
edited  by  Oren  Root  (New  York,  1863) ;  "  Analyti-
cal Geometry  and  Conic  Sections"  (New  York,
1864) ;  "  Differential  and  Integral  Calculus  "  (1861),
edited  by  Isaac  F.  Quinby  (1868).

ROBINSON,  James  Sidney,  soldier,  b.  near
Mansfield,  Ohio,  14  Oct.,  1827.  He  learned  the
printer's  trade  in  Mansfield,  and  in  1846  established
the  Kenton  "  Republican,"  which  he  edited  for
eighteen  years.  In  1856  he  was  secretary  of  the
first  convention  of  the  Republican  party  that  was
held  in  Ohio.  He  was  for  two  sessions  clerk  of  the
state  house  of  representatives.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the  4th  Ohio  regi-
ment, and  was  soon  made  a  captain.  He  took  part
in  the  operations  at  Rich  Mountain,  Va.,  was  pro-
moted major  in  October,  1861,  served  under  Gen.
John  C.  Fremont  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  and
became  lieutenant-colonel  in  April,  and  colonel  in
August,  1862.  He  was  engaged  at  the  second  bat-
tle of  Bull  Run,  and  at  Cedar  Mountain  and  Chan-
cellorsville,  and  was  severely  wounded  at  Gettys-
burg. He  commanded  a  brigade  under  Gen.  Joseph
Hooker  and  Gen.  Alpheus  S.  Williams  in  the  At-
lanta campaign  and  tne  march  to  the  sea.  was  com-
missioned brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  12
Jan.,  1865,  received  the  brevet  of  major-general  on
13  March,  and  was  mustered  out  on  31  Aug.  On
his  return  to  Ohio  he  became  chairman  of  the  state
Republican  committee.  In  1879  he  was  appointed
by  the  governor  commissioner  of  railroads  and
telegraphs.  He  was  elected  to  congress  for  two
successive  terms,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1881,  till  12
Jan.,  1885,  and  subsequently  held  the  office  of
secretarv  of  state  of  Ohio.

ROBINSON,  Jolin,  clergyman,  b.  probably  in
Lincolnshire,  England,  in  1575  or  1576 ;  d.  in  Ley-


den,  Holland,  about  the  beginning  of  March,  1625.
He  entered  Corpus  Christi,  Cambridge,  in  1592,
was  chosen  a  fellow,  and  is  supposed  to  have  re-
ceived the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  lo99.  He  officiated
as  a  minister  of  the  established  church  near  Nor-
wich, but  omitted  parts  of  the  ritual,  having  be-
come inclined  toward  Puritan  doctrines  at  the  uni-
versity, and  was  soon  suspended  from  his  functions.
He  removed  to  Norwich,  where  he  gathered  about
him  a  band  of  woi-shippers.  In  1604  he  formally
withdrew  from  the  national  church,  resigning  his
fellowship,  and  connected  himself  with  a  body  of
dissenters  in  Gainsborough,  Lincolnshire,  and  the
adjacent  district.  He  was  one  of  ministers  of  the
congregation  at  Scrooby,  Nottinghamshire.  A
part  of  the  flock  went  with  the  ouier  minister  to
Holland.  Some  months  later,  Robinson  and  the
rest  of  the  congregation  determined  to  emigrate,
in  order  to  escajK}  persecution.  After  being  de-
tained by  the  police  and  enduring  various  hard-
ships, the  entire  congregation  escaped  to  Amster-
dam, and,  after  passing  nearly  a  year  there,  settled
in  Leyden  in  tne  early  summer  of  1609,  where
Robinson,  with  three  others,  in  1611,  purchased  a
large  house  with  an  enclosed  court.  The  church
met  for  worship  in  the  house,  and  some  of  the  com-
pany seem  to  nave  built  homes  within  the  court.
He  was  recognized  by  his  opponents  as  "the  most
learned,  polished,  and  modest  spirit  that  ever  sepa-
rated from  the  Church  of  England,"  and  in  Leyaen
gained  a  high  reputation  by  his  disputations  in  de-
fence of  Calvinism  in  1613  with  Episcopius,  the
successor  of  Arminius.  He  became  also  a  member
of  the  university  in  September,  1615.  His  congre-
gation was  increased  by  accessions  from  England,
and  when,  in  1617,  the  plan  of  emigration  to  Amer-
ica was  discussed,  he  took  the  heartiest  interest  in
the  scheme,  and  was  active  in  promoting  negotia-
tions with  the  Virginia  company.  There  was  diffi-
culty in  bringing  the  matter  to  a  conclusion,  and
about  the  beginning  of  1620  he  was  a  party  to  a
proposition  to  certain  Amsterdam  merchants  to
remove  to  New  Amsterdam ;  but  the  states-general
declined  to  further  the  plan,  and  Robinson  and  his
company  fell  back  on  their  original  purpose.  And
when  the  younger  members  of  the  congregation
sailed  in  t^e  "  Speedwell "  in  July,  1620,  he  took
leave  of  them  in  a  memorable  sermon,  intending  to
follow  with  the  others  the  next  year.  A  part  of
the  remainder  of  the  church  departed  after  his
death :  as  also,  in  1631,  did  his  son,  Isaac,  who  has
many  descendants  in  the  United  States.  The  Ley-
den pastor  was  the  author  of  "An  Answer  to  a
Censorious  Epistle  "  (1609) ;  "  A  Justification  of
Separation  from  the  Church  of  England  against
Mr.  Bernard's  Invective  entitled  'The  Separatist's
Schism'"  (1610);  "Of  Religious  Communion,  Pri-
vate and- Public"  (1614);  "A  Manumission  to  a
Manuduction"  (1615);  "The  People's  Plea  for  the
Exercise  of  Prophecy"  (1618) ;  "Apologia  justa  et
necessaria"  (1619),  which  yas  translated  into  Eng-
lish in  1625 ;  "  Defence  of  the  Doctrine  propounded
by  the  Synod  of  Dort "  (1624) ;  "  Letter  to  the  Con-
gregational Church  inTiondon"  (1624);  "Appeal
on  Truth's  Behalf "  (1624);  "Observations  Divine
and  Moral"  (1625);  "On  the  Lawfulness  of  Hear-
ing of  the  Ministers  in  the  Church  of  England  "
(1634) ;  and  "  A  Brief  Catechism  concerning  Church
Government,"  the  earliest  known  edition  of  which
was  printed  in  1642.  The  "  Works  of  John  Robin-
son, Pastor  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers,"  have  been
published,  with  a  memoir  and  annotations  by  Rob-
ert Ashton,  and  an  inaccurate  account  of  his  de-
scendants by  William  Allen  (3  yol8.,*London  and
Boston,  1851).


ROBINSON


ROBINSON


287


f


ROBINSON,  John,  elcrfo^man.  )>.  in  Cabamui
oouijty.  X.  (.'..  H  Jjin.,  17tt»:  d.  in  Poplar  Tent,
N.  ('..  14  I)«c'.,  1848.  He  receivoil  an  M-a<li*niic
education  at  WinnsbortiUgh,  S.  ('.,  stiulitMi  thtxj|o>fy,
wa»  li(t*n.stHl  to  [>rt>M(.-h  on  4  Ajiril,  1708,  and  organ-
irwl  several  churches  in  Duiun  county,  N.  C.  lie
aoee|it<Hl  the  charjje  of  the  Pri'shyterian  church  at
Kayottoville  in  1H(H).  est<il)lir<hc«l  a  <-hus.sicai  s<-hool,

en'ach«*<l  in  I\)plar  Tent  in  1801-'5,  and  then  in
'ayetteville  apiin  till  1M18,  when  he  returned  to
Poplar  Tent.  The  L'niversitv  of  North  (.'arolina
gave  him  the  degree  of  I).  I),  in  1H29.  He  was  one
of  the  most  |M)pular  and  |>ersua.sive  preachers  of  his
faith,  and  not  less  eminent  as  an  instructor.  He
pul>li.she<l  only  a  "  Kulogv  on  Washington  "  (1800).
ROBINSON,  John  Clev<>land,  s^>ldier.  b.  in
Hiii^hniiiton,  N.  Y..  10  April, 1MI7, He  was  ap-

fointeil  a  cadet  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
83.'),  left  a  year  before  griuluution  to  study  law,
but  returne<l  to  military  service  in  October,  1889,
when  he  was  c(>mmissione<l  as  2d  lieutenant  in  the
5th  U.  S.  infantry.  He  joined  the  army  of  occu-
pation in  Texas  at  Corpus  C'hristi  in  J>epteml>er,
184.'),  as  n>gimental  and  brigade  ({uartermaster,
being  promotetl  1st  lieutenant  in  .June,  1840,  was
at  Palo  .\lto  and  Kesaca  de  la  Palma,  served  with
distinction  at  Monterey,  and  |)artici|Mite<l  in  the
concluding  operations  of  the  Mexican  war.  He  was
matie  captain  in  August,  18.')0,  was  engagi-^l  against
hostile  Indians  in  Texas  in  1853-'4,  was  ordered  in
1856  to  Fk>rida,  where  he  led  expeditions  against
the  Seminoles  in  the  Everglades  and  Big  Cyprus
swamp,  and  in  1857-'8  took  part  in  the  Utah  exfje-
dition.  At  the  l)eginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was
in  command  at  Fort  Mcllenry,  Baltinu>re.  and  pre-
venle<l  its  capture  by  the  insurgents  by  means  of  a
successfid  ruse.  Subsemiently  he  was  engaged  in
mustering  volunteers  at  I)etroit,  Mich.,  and  Colum-
bus, Ohio,  and  in  .Septemlwr,  1861,  he  was  appoint-
ed colonel  of  the  1st  Michigan  volunteers,  lie  was
proraote<l  major  in  the  L.  S.  army  in  February,
1862,  was  commissioned  as  brigatiier-general  of
volunteers  on  28  April.  1862,  and  commanded  a
brigade  at  Newport  News.  He  was  soon  trans-
ferred to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  com-
manded the  1st  brigade  of  Gen.  Philip  Kearny's
division.  He  took  part  in  the  seven  days'  iHittles
l»efore  Richmond,  and  commanded  a  division  at
Fredericksburg,  Chancellorsville,  and  (Jettysburg,
where  he  earned  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel,
U.  S.  army,  and  in  the  operations  at  Mine  Run  and
in  the  l)attles  of  the  Wilderness,  receiving  the
brevet  of  colonel  for  his  services  there.  At  Spott-
sylvania  Court-House,  while  lemling  a  gallant
enlarge  on  the  enemy's  breastworks,  he  receivetl  a
bullet  in  his  left  knee,  ne<^>essitating  amputati(m  at
the  thigh.  He  received  the  brevet  of  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers  on  24  June,  1864.  He  was  un-
fit for  further  service  in  the  field,  and  sul)se<juently
commanded  districts  in  New  York  state,  l)eing
brevetted  brigjMiier-  and  major-general,  U.  .S.  army,
in  March,  186.').  served  as  military  <(>mmat\jJer  anil
commissioner  of  the  Bureau  of  freedmen  in  North
Carolina  in  186(J,  was  promoteti  colonel  in  the  regu-
lar army  in  July,  18<W,  mustered  out  of  the  volun-
teer service  on  'l  Sept,.  18«J6.  comman«le<l  the  I>e-
partment  of  the  South  in  1867.  and  the  I)epartraent
of  the  Lakes  in  1867-'8,  and  on  6  May,  1869,  was
retiretl  with  the  full  rank  of  major-general.  In
1872  he  was  elected  by  the  liepublicans  lieutenant-
governor  of  New  York  on  the  ticket  with  (Jov.
John  A.  Dix.  He  was  chosen  commander-in-chief
of  the  Grand  army  of  the  republic  in  1877  and  1878,
and  president  of  the  Society  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  in  1887.


ROBINSON,  John  M.,  senator,  b.  in  Ken-
tucky in  1798;  d.  in  Ottawa  III.,  27  April,  1848.
When  a  l)oy  ho  move<l  with  his  |>arcnt«  to  Canni.
III.,  where  he  afterward  resided,  engaging  in  the
practice  of  law.  He  was  chosen  to  the  L.  S.  sen-
ate in  place  of  John  .Mclx>an,  deoeaaed,  and  served
from  4  Jan.,  1881.  till  S  March.  1841.  In  the  year
of  his  death  he  was  elected  one  of  the  supneme
court  judges  of  Illinois.

ROIilNSON,  Liicias,  governor  of  New  York,
b,  in  Windham,  (in-ene  co..  N.  Y.,  4  Nov.,  1810.
He  was  islucated*  at  the  ac^idemy  in  Delhi.  N.  Y.,
studied  law,  and  was  admitttnl  to  the  liar  in  1882.
He  became  district  attorney,  and  was  apfjointed
master  of  chancery  in  New  York  city  in  1848  and
reapjH)inte<l  in  ItW.").  Ijeaving  the'  Democratic
I)arty  on  the  formation  of  the  Republican  organi-
zation, he  was  elected  a  memU'r  of  the  assembly
in  18.')9  and  comptn)ller  of  the  state  in  18*51  an^
1868.  In  186.J  he  was  nominate^l  for  the  same  of-
fice by  the  Democrats,  but  failed  of  election.  In
1871-*2  he  was  a  meml)er  of  the  constitutional  com-
mission. In  1875  he  was  elected  comptroller  by
the  Democrata  He  was  chosen  governor  in  1870.
In  1879  he  was  again  nominated  by  the  Demo-
crats for  the  governorship.  Itut  was  not  elected.
One  of  the  entrances  to  the  Niagara  Falls  jiark  is
namecl  in  his  honor.

ROBINSON.  Matthew.  Baron  KoKEBV.b.  near
Hythe,  Kent  co.,  England,  in  1718;  d.  30  Nov.,
18(90.  He  was  educated  at  Westminster  an<l  Cam-
bridge, and  electted  to  {)arliament  from  Canterbury
in  1747  and  1754.  He  led  a  life  of  primitive  sim-
plicity, and  was  an  enthusiast  for  liwrty,  and  the
measures  for  the  coercion  of  the  American  colonies
were  esfK'cially  ri'pugnant  to  his  sense  of  justice.
He  succeede<l  his  uncle.  Richard  Robins<5n,  arch-
bishop of  Armagh,  as  Itaron  Rokeby  in  the  peerage
of  Ireland  on  10  Oct.,  1794.  He  publishe<l  "  Con-
siderations on  the  Measures  Carrying  on  with  re-
spect to  the  British  Colonies  in  'North  America"
(2d  ed.,  liondon,  1774);  "Considerations  on  the
British  Colonies"  (1775);  "A  Further  Examina-
tion of  our  American  Measures"  (1776);  and
"  Pea<-e  the  B<'st  Policy  "  (1777).

ROBINSON.  Merritt  M„  lawyer,  b.  in  Louisi-
ana alK>ut  1810;  d.  there*,  5  June.  18.50.  He  was  the
reporter  of  the  supreme  court  of  lj«iuisiana  from
1841  till  1847.  He  nublished  a  useful  "  Digest  of
the  Penal  Jjaws  of  Louisiana  Analytically  Ar-
ranged"  (New  Orleans,  1841).  His  "  Rejiorts,"
comprising  sixteen  volumes,  including  four  that
he  edited,  were  enriched  with  valuable  marginal
notes  (New  Orleans,  lM42-'7).

ROBINSON,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  4  April,  1707;  «1.  in  I/ondon,  England.  27
Oct.,  1767.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was  the
third  son  of  William  Robinson,  one  of  the  early
Cambridge  colonists,  and  who,  it  is  said,  was  a
kinsman  of  Rev.  John  Robinson,  of  Ij«>vden.  f^astor
to  the  pilgrims  that  came  in  the  "  Mayflower."  In
1786  Samuel  settU'd  in  Hardwick,  Mass.,  when'  he
was  selectman  ten  years,  assessor  thnv  years,  and
town-clerk  four  years,  and  a  deacon  of  the  churi-h.
From  1755  till  1759  he  commanded  a  comjiany  in
the  French  war.  On  his  return  to  Massachusetts
from  one  of  his  campaigns,  mistaking  his  route,  he
passe<l  by  jK-cident  tlirough  what  is  now  lienuing-
ton.  Vt.,  and,  impr«>ssed  by  the  attractiveness  of
the  country,  determineil  to  S4'ttle  there.  He  formed
a  com{)any  at  Hanlwick.  pua-has*-!!  the  rights  of
the  ori^nal  grantees  of  lands,  and,  taking  a  colony
with  him  in  1761,  settled  Ik-nningt<m,  this  being
the  first  town  in  what  is  now  Vermont.  He  "  was
the  acknowledged  leader  in  the  band  of  pioneers


288


ROBINSON


ROBINSON


in  the  settlement  of  the  town,  and  continued  to
exercise  a  controilinjf  influence  in  its  afftiirs  during
the  remainder  of  his  life.'"  Gov.  Wentworth  com-
missioned him,  8  Feb.,  1762,  a  justice  of  the  peace,
and  he  was  then  the  first  jierson  that  was  appoint-
ed to  a  judicial  office  within  the  limits  of  that  ter-
ritory. He  was  chosen  to  present  a  petition  to  the
kinj?  for  relief  during  the  controversy  between
New  York  and  New  Hampshire  regarding  jurisdic-
tion, and  reac^hed  London  in  February,  1707.  His
mission  was  nartially  successful,  but  it  was  left  in-
complete by  nis  sudden  death  from  small-pox.  He
was  buried  in  the  cemetery  connected  with  the
church  of  his  favorite  preacher,  Rev.  George  White-
field,  and  a  monument  with  an  elaborate  inscrip-
tion was  erected  to  his  memory  in  the  cemetery  at
Bennington  Centre. — His  son,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.
in  Hanlwick,  Mass.,  9  Aug.,  1738;  d.  in  Benning-
ton, Vt.,  3  iMav,  1813,  at  the  age  of  seventeen  was
a  member  of  his  father's  company,  and  the  next
year  was  adjutant  of  Col.  Ruggles's  regiment.  He
accompanied  his  father  to  Bennington,  and  was
active  in  the  New  York  controversv  and  in  the  af-
fairs of  the  town.  He  commanded  a  company  in
the  battle  of  Bennington,  performed  other  military
services  during  the  Revolution,  and  rose  to  the
rank  of  colonel.  In  1777-'8  he  had  charge,  as  over-
seer, of  the  Tory  {)risoners,  in  1779-'80  he  repre-
sented the  town  in  the  assembly,  and  he  was  for
three  years  a  member  of  the  board  of  war.  He
was  the  first  justice  of  the  peace  appointed  in  town
under  the  authority  of  Vermont  m  1778,  and  was
also  during  the  same  year  one  of  the  judges  of  a
special  court. Col.  Robinson  was  one  of  the  few

Bersons  who  managed  a  correspondence  with  the
British  general  Haldimand  during  the  Revolution-
ary war,  securing  Vermont  from  invasion. — An-
other son,  Moses,  governor  of  Vermont,  b.  in
Hardwiek,  Mass.,  15  March.  1741 ;  d.  in  Benning-
ton, Vt.,  20  May,  1813,  removed  to  Bennington  with
his  father,  and  became  one  of  the  foremost  citizens
of  Vermont.  He  was  chosen  town-clerk  at  the
first  meeting  of  the  town,  and  served  for  nineteen
years ;  was  colonel  of  the  militia,  and  at  the  head
of  his  regiment  at  Mount  Independence  on  its
evacuation  by  Gen.  St.  Clair,  and  was  a  member  of
the  council  of  safety  at  the  time  of  the  battle  of
Bennington  and  during  the  campaign  of  that  year.
He  was  appointed  the  first  chief  justice  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Vermont,  which  office  he  held  for
ten  years.  In  1789  he  became  the  second  governor
of  the  state.  In  1782  he  was  one  of  the  agents  of
Vermont  to  the  Continental  congress,  and  on  the
admission  of  Vermont  into  the  Union  he  became
in  1791  the  first  U.  S.  senator,  serving  until  1790.
He  was  a  warm  friend  of  Madison  and  Jefferson,
and  bitterly  opposed  Jay's  treaty.  The  degree  of
A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Yale  in  1789.  and
by  Dartmouth  in  1790. — Another  son,  David,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Hardwiek,  Mass.,  4  Nov.,  1754;  d.  in
Vermont,  11  Dec,  1843,  removed  to  Bennington
with  his  father  in  1701.  While  his  brother  Moses
was  on  duty  at  the  Catamount  tavern  as  one  of  the
committee  of  safety,  David  and  his  brothers  Leon-
ard and  Silas  were  in  the  Bennington  battle,  as
members  of  the  company  that  was  commanded  by
their  brother  Samuel.  Afterward,  by  regular  pro-
motion, David  attained  to  the  rank  of  major-gen-
eral of  Vermont  militia,  which  post  he  held  from
1812  till  1817.  He  was  sheriff  of  the  county  for
twenty-two  years,  ending  in  1811,  after  which  he
was  if.  S.  marshal  for  Vermont  for  eight  years.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention  in
1828.  —  Another  son,  Jonathan,  senator,  b.  in
Hardwiek,  Mass.,  24  Aug.,  1750;  d.  in  Bennington,


Vt.,  8  Nov.,  1819,  received  a  classical  education,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  prac-
tised in. Bennington.  He  was  town-clerk  six  years,
in  the  legislature  thirteen  years,  chief  justice  of
the  state  from  1801  till  1807,  and,  when  his  prede-
cessor on  the  bench,  Israel  Smith,  resigned  his  seat
in  the  U.  S.  senate,  was  elected  to  serve  through
the  unexpired  term,  and  on  its  conclusion  was  re-
elected, serving  from  26  Oct.,  1807,  till  2  March,
1815.  In  the  latter  year  he  became  judge  of  pro-
bate and  held  the  office  for  four  years,  and  in  1818
again  represented  Bennington  in  the  legislature.
The  honorary  degree  of  A.  B.  was  conferred  on
him  by  Dartmouth  in  1790,  and  that  of  A.  M.  in
1803. — The  grandson  of  Moses,  John  Staniiord,
governor  of  Vermont,  b.  in  Bennington,  Vt.,  10
Nov.,  1804;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  24  April.  1860,
was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1824,  studied  law  in
Bennington,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1827,  and
took  a  high  position  among  the  lawyers  of  the
state.  He  was  a  memljer  of  the  legislature  for
many  terms,  and  was  elected  governor  in  1853  as  a
Democrat  on  joint  ballot  of  the  two  houses,  there
being  no  choice  by  the  people.  His  party  had  not
elected  a  candidate  before  for  forty  years.  He  was
frequently  a  Democratic  candidate  for  congress.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  National  Democratic  con-
vention in  1800,  and  died  during  its  sessions.

ROBINSON,  Solon,  author,  b.  near  Tolland,
Conn.,  21  Oct.,  1803;  d.  in  Jacksonville.  Fla.,  3
Nov.,  1880.  He  received  a  common-school  educa-
tion, and  began  to  learn  the  carpenter's  trade  at  the
age  of  fourteen,  but  was  not  strong  enough  to  con-
tinue, and  turned  to  peddling  and  to  other  means
of  gaining  a  living.  He  early  acc|uired  a  literary
reputation  by  contributing  graphic  pajiers  to  the
Albany  "  Cultivator,"  and  became  a  popular  writer
on  agricultural  subjects  for  newspapers  and  maga-
zines. About  1870  he  removed  to  Jacksonville,
Fla.  While  conducting  the  agricultural  depart-
ment in  the  New  York  "Tribune,"  he  occasion-
ally wrote  sketches  of  New  York  city  life  among
the  poorer  classes,  which  were  printed  in  the  local
columns.  One  of  these  articles  attracted  popular
attention,  and  was  expanded  into  a  book  entitled
"  Hot  Corn,  or  Life  Scenes  in  New  York  "  (New
York,  1853),  of  which  50,000  copies  were  sold  in  six
months.  He  was  the  author  also  of  "  How  to  Live,
or  Domestic  Economy  Illustrated  "  (1800^ ;  "  Facts
for  Farmers;  also  for  the  Family  Circle,"  which
had  an  extraordinary  circulation  (1864) ;  and  "  Me-
won-i-toc  "  (1867).

ROBINSON, Stillman  Williams,  civil  en-

fineer,  b.  in  South  Reading,  Vt.,  0  March,  1838.
le  studied  at  schools  in  Vermont,  and  was  gradu-
ated as  a  civil  engineer  at  the  University  of
Michigan  in  18(53.  Entering  the  service  of  the
U.  S.  lake  survey,  he  continued  so  engaged  until
1800,  when  he  was  appointed  instructor  of  civil
engineering  at  the  University  of  Michigan.  In
1870-'8  he  neld  the  chair  of  mathematics  in  Illinois
industrial  university,  and  he  was  then  appointed
professor  of  piiysics  and  mechanical  engineering
in  Ohio  state  university,  which  place  he  now
(1888)  holds.  Among  his  important  inventions  are
the  Robinson  photograph-trimmer;  the  Templet
odontograph ;  a  wire  grip  fastening  machine;  a
boot  and  shoe  nailing  machine;  and  iron  piling
and  substructure  machinery — most  of  which  are  in
active  operation  under  the  control  of  specially
organized  corporations.  Prof.  Robinson  is  a  fellow
of  the  Americjan  association  for  the  advancement
of  science,  and  a  ineml)er  of  the  American  society
of  civil  engineers,  and  of  the  American  society  of
mechanical  engineers. In  addition  to  chaptere  in


ROBINSON


ROBINSON


railway  rpportx,  and  numcrouii  ncientiftc  papen  in
neriojlicHh  and  transa<'ti<tns,  ho  hai*  published  "  A
rnM'tiral  Tn>Htiso  <>t>  tlu'TwIhof  Whwls"  (New
York,  1870);  "  Uuiln>a«I  Ki-onomies,  or  Notes  with
Comments"  (1KH2):  and  "Strength  of  Wrought-
Imn  Bridjje  MemU'rs"  (1W^2).

KOKINSON.  Stuart,  clergyman,  b.  in  Straljane,
Countv  Tvn>no.  In-lund,  14  Nov.,  1814;  d.  in
I»uisville.'  Ky..  5  Oct.,  1881.  The  family  sottle<l
in  New  York  city  in  1817,  and  several  years  later
removed  to  Berkeley  county,  Va.  The  sob  was
gra4liiate<l  ut  Amherst  in  IkU\,  studie<l  theology  at
Union  seminary.  Va.,  and  at  Princeton,  and  was
onlaine<l  as  a  Presbyterian  minister  on  8  Oct.,
1841.  He  preache<l  and  taught  for  six  years  at
Maiden,  Va.  From  1847  till  18.')2  he  wa.s  {lastor  of
the  chun-h  in  Kninkfort,  Ky.,  when*  he  established
a  female  seminarv.  He  accepted  the  pastorate  of
an  iiideiHMident  c)iurch  in  I^ltimore  m  ]Hi)2,  but
resignetl  in  1854.  and  with  a  large  part  of  the
congregation  organize<l  a  regular  Presbyterian
church.  He  established  and  conducte<l  a  wriotli-
cal  called  the  "  Presbyterial  Critic  "  (1^55-6).  In
1856-'7  he  was  professor  of  church  government  and
pastoral  theology  at  Danville  seminary.  In  18,'>8
ne  took  charge  of  achurch  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  which
removed  soon  afterward  into  a  large  new  edifice.
He  purchased  the  "  Presbvterian  Henild,"  changed
its  name  to  the  "True  t*resbyterian,"  and  in  its
columns  maintained  with  zeal  the  doctrine  of  the
non-secular  chanw'ter  of  the  church,  which  brought
him  into  sharp  conflict  with  the  section  of  the
Presbyterians  in  Kentucky  who  upheld  the  con-
trary view.  His  loyalty  l)eing  called  in  (juestion,
bis  paper  was  suppresse<l  in  1862  by  the  military
authorities,  and  the  eilitor  removetl  to  Canada,
where  he  preached  to  large  audiences  in  Toronto
till  the  close  of  the  war.  In  April,  18r>G,  he  re-
turned to  his  church  in  Ijouisville,  and  resumed
the  publication  of  his  paper,  changing  the  title
to  the  "  Free  Christian  Commonwealth."  He  was
expelled  from  the  general  assembly  of  1806  at  St.
Louis  on  account  of  his  acti*m  in  signing  what
wiB  known  as  the  "Declaration  and  Testimony,"
which  protested  against  political  deliverances  by
that  body.  Dr.  Robinson  and  his  colleagues  of  the
presbytery  of  Jjcjuisville  were,  by  an  order  of  that
body,  debarred  from  seats  in  the  courts  of  the
church,  and,  after  an  earnest  controversy  with  the
Rev.  Dr.  Robert  J.  Breckenridge,  he  induced  the
synoil  of  Kentucky  to  unite  with  the  general  assem-
bly of  the  Southern  Presbyterian  church  in  1869,
of  which  he  was  chosen  mo<lerator  by  acclamation.
He  was  instrumental  in  inducing  the  Southern
church  to  join  in  the  Pan- Presbyterian  alliance  at
fklinburgh  in  1877,  which  he  attended  as  a  dele-
gate, and  in  securing  the  adoption  of  a  revised  IxMk
of  government  and  discipline.  From  the  perio«l  of
his  ministry  in  Frankfort  he  was  accustomed  to
expound  the  Old  Testament  on  Sunday  evenings.
These  lectures  were  widely  read  in  |>amphlet-form
and  sul>se<juently  publisheil  in  a  volume.  One  of
these  disc-ourses,  dclivereil  in  Toronto  in  February,
1805.  on  the  subjetit  of  "Slavery  as  liecogiiiziHl  by
the  Mosaic  Civil  Law.  aiul  as  liecognized  also  and
Alloweil  in  the  Abrahamic.  Mosaic,  and  Christian
Church,"  was  ex|>anded  and  published  (Toronto,
1865).  He  was  alstj  the  author  of  "The  Church
of  Qod  as  an  F^ssential  Klement  of  the  Gos^tel  "
(Philadelphia,  18.58),  and  of  a  book  of  outlines  of
sermons  entitUsl  "Discourses  of  Redemption"
(New  York.  INW).

ROBINSON,  William  Erigena.  iournalist.  b.
near  C<H>k.xt<iwn.  County  Tyrone,  Ireland,  6  May,
1814.  He  attende<l  Cookstown  classical  school,  and
you  y. — 1»


enteml  the  R<^>yal  academical  institullnn  at  BoN
fast,  but  waM  comrM-lle<l  by  (ticknem  to  leave.  He
emigrate<l  to  the  I  nitiHl  Slates  in  182)6,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1841,  and  studi«-<l  in  the  law-school
there.  While  a  meml»er  of  the  college  he  founded
the  "  Yale  lianner,"  and  wrote  e<lilorial  articles  for
the  daily  press,  lie  was  engaged  as  e<lit'>r  of  the
New  Haven  "  Daily  Courier."  but  left  it  on  account
of  its  Know-Nothing  sentiments,  and  became  m
journalitft  in  New  York  city.  His  articlesi,  signed
"  Richelieu,"  in  the  "  Tribune,"  established  his  repu-
tation. He  was  eilitor  for  a  time  of  the  Bufialo
"  Kxpress,"  and  subse«juently  of  the  "  Irish  World."
He  organized  the  movement  for  the  relief  of  Ire-
land in  1847,  and  i»rocured  the  authorization  by  con-
gress of  the  sending  of  the  frigate  "  Macedonian"
with  provi.sions  to  Ireland.  In  184><-'y  he  edited  a
weekly  paper  calknl  "The  Pe<iple."  An  address  on
"  The  Celt  and  the  Sjixon  "  that  he  dcliveretl  before
a  ctillege  society  in  1851  at  Clinton.  N.  Y.,  was  pub-
lisheil,  and  provoked  anima<lversions  in  Knglish
newspajiers  and  reviews  and  in  the  del>ates  of  par-
liament. In  1854  he  entered  on  the  practice  of  law
in  New  York  city.  He  wasaittKiintea  U.  S.  assessor
of  internal  revenue  for  BrooKlyn  in  18<J2.  and  held
that  olTice  for  five  years.  He  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat  in  1860,  and  was  again  elected  in  1880,
and  continued  in  his  seat  by  re-election  in  1882.
His  management  and  jH'rsistent  atlvwacy  secured
the  passage  in  1808  of  a  bill  asserting  the  rights  of
expatriation  and  naturalization,  which  resulted  in
the  abandonment  of  the  dfK-trine  of  {jerpetual  alle-
giance by  Great  Britain  and  Germany.  Besides  his
political  writings  in  the  daily  press,  he  has  pro-
duced popular  poems  and  delivered  lectures  and
addresses  on  literary  subjects.  He  is  prefMiring  for
fiublication  a  lHH)k  on  Irish-American  genealogies.
ROBINSON,  William  Stevens,  iournalist.  b.  in
Concord,  Mjjss.,  7  Dec,  1818:  d.  in  >Ialden,  Ma.ss.,
11  March,  1870.  He  was  «Hlucate<i  in  the  public
schools  of  Concord.  Iearne<l  the  printer's  tratle,  at
the  age  of  twenty  Int-ame  the  editor  and  publisher
of  the  "  Yeoman's  Gazette  "  in  Conc«<rd.  and  was
afterwanl  assistant  eilitor  of  the  Ix)well  "Courier."
He  was  an  oppf)nent  of  slavery  while  he  atlheretl  to
the  Whig  imrty,  and  when  the  Free-soil  |)arty  was
organized  he  left  the  "Courier,"  and  in  .luly,  1848,
took  charge  of  the  Boston  "  Daily  Whig."  His
vigorous  and  sarcastic  editorials  increased  the  cir-
culation of  the  paper,  the  name  of  which  was
changed  to  the  "  Republican  ":  yet.  after  the  presi-
dential canvass  was  ended,  Henry  Wilson,  the  pro-
prietor, di-cided  to  assume  the  e<Iitorial  manage-
ment and  mtxlerate  the  tone  of  his  journal.  Rob-
inson next  edited  the  I^owell  "  .Vmerican,"  a  Free-
soil  Democratic  pajwr,  till  it  dietl  for  lack  of
support  in  1853.  lie  was  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture in  1852  and  1853.  In  1850  he  began  to  write
letters  for  the  Springfield  "Republican"  over  the
signature*  "  Warrington,"  in  which  questions  of  the
day  and  public  men  were  disoussetl  with  such  l»old-
ness  and  wit  that  the  corn'S|Mmden(.r  attracte<l  wide
popular  attention.  This  conne«'tion  wjis  continued
until  his  death.  From  1862  till  1873  he  was  clerk
of  the  Massachusetts  house  of  representatives.
"  Warrington,"  by  his  articles  in  the  newspapers
an<l  magazines,  was  instrumental  in  defeating  Ben-
jamin F.  Butler's  effort  to  obtain  the  Republican
nomination  for  governor  in  1871.  and  in  1873  he
was  Butler's  strongest  op[>onent.  Itesides  pam-
phlets and  addresses,  he  piiblishtnl  a  "  .Manual  of
i  Parliamentar)-  liaw  "  (Boston.  1875).  His  widow
published  iH-rsonal  reminiscences  fr*>in  his  writings
i  entitliMl  "Warrington  Pen- Port  raits."  with  a  me-
I  moir  (Boston,  lb7«).— His  wife,  Harriet  HanM>n.


290


ROBITAILLE


ROCAFUERTE


b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  Feb.,  1825,  was  one  of  the  in-
tellectual circle  of  factory-girls  that  composed  the
staff  of  the  "  Lowell  Offerinj;."  She  is  a  sister  of
John  W,  Hanson.  She  contributed  poems  to  the
Lowell  "Courier"  while  Mr.  Robinson  was  its  edi-
tor, and  from  this  intnxluction  sprang  a  friendship
that  resulted  in  their  marriage  on  30  Nov.,  1848.
She  wjis  his  assistant  in  his  editorial  work,  and  was
as  devoted  as  himself  to  the  anti-slavery  cause.
She  has  also  taken  an  active  part  in  the  \woman's-
rights  movement,  and  in  1888  was  a  member  of
the  International  council  of  women  at  Washing-
ton. 1).  C.  Her  works  include  "  Massachusetts  m
the  Woman  Suffragje  Movement"  (Boston.  1881);
"  Eiirly  Faetorv  Labor  in  New  England "  (1883) ;
and  "baptain  Marv  Miller,"  a  drama  (1887).

ROBITAILLE,"  Theodore,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Varennes,  Quebec,  29  Jan.,  1834.  He
was  educated  at  the  Seminary  of  Sainte  Therese,
Laval  university,  and  McGill  college,  where  he  was
graduated  in  medicine  in  1858.  He  became  a  suc-
cessful physician,  and  represented  Bonaventure  in
the  Canada  assembly  from  1861  till  1867,  and  in
the  Dominion  {)arliament  from  1867  till  July,  1878.
He  also  represented  that  place  in  the  Quebec  as-
sembly from  1871  till  January.  1874,  when  he  re-
tired in  order  to  confine  himself  to  the  Dominion
parliament.  He  became  a  member  of  the  privy
9ouneil  of  Canada,  and  was  receiver-general  from
30  Jan.,  1873,  till  5  Nov.  of  that  year,  when  he  re-
signed with  the  administration.  He  was  lieuten-
ant-governor of  the  province  of  Quebec  from  26
July,  1879,  until  September,  1884.  He  became  a
member  of  the  Canadian  senate,  28  Jan.,  1885. —
His  brother,  Lonis,  Canadian  physician,  b.  in  Va-
rennes, Quebec,  30  Oct.,  1836,  was  educated  at  the
Seminary  of  Sainte  Therese  and  at  McGill  uni-
versity, where  he  was  graduated  as  a  physician  in
1860.  He  established  himself  at  New  Carlisle,  and
was  successful  in  his  practice.  Dr.  Robitaille  was
appointed  in  January,  1869,  surgeon  of  the  regi-
mental division  of  Bonaventure,  in  1871  commis-
sioner for  the  census  for  the  county  of  Bonaven-
ture, and  in  1875  vice-consul  of  France  for  the
district  of  Gaspe.  He  was  collector  of  customs  at
New  Carlisle  in  1873-'83,  and  was  a  member  of  the
Dominion  senate  from  8  Feb.,  1883,  till  25  Jan.,
1885,  when  he  resigned.  In  1885  he  was  appointed
inspector  of  customs,  and  vice-president  of  tne  Baie
des  Chaleurs  railway.  In  1879  he  was  elected  to
the  Dominion  parliament  for  Bonaventure,  but  de-
clined. He  has  travelled  extensively.  Both  the
brothers  are  Conservatives  in  politics.

ROBLEDO,  J  one  (ro-blay'-do),  Spanish  soldier,
b.  in  Spain  in  the  beginning  of  the  16th  century ;
d.  in  Santiago  de  Armas,  Colombia,  1  Oct.,  1546.
He  went  to  New  Granada  with  the  expedition  of
Pedro  de  Heredia  (a.  v.)  in  1533,  and  in  1537  ac-
companied the  expedition  of  the  governor  of  Carta-
gena, Pedro  Badillo,  for  the  conquest  of  the  prov-
mce  of  Antioquia,  which  had  iieen  discovered  by
Francisco  Cesar.  After  the  unsuccessful  return  of
Badillo.  Robledo,  with  part  of  the  former's  followers
and  fresh  troops,  penetrated  again  to  the  interior
in  1539,  and  founded  in  the  valley  of  Aserma  the
city  of  Santa  Ana  de  los  Caballeros.  In  1541  he  left
Santa  Ana  with  160  men  for  the  conquest  of
Antioquia,  and,  after  defeating  the  Pastusos  and
Pijaos  Indians,  founded  the  city  of  Santa  Cruz  de
Antioquia.  He  went  to  Spain  in  1542  to  obtain  a
royal  commission  as  governor,  and  during  his  ab-
sence Pedro  de  Heredia  and  Velalcazar  disputed
the  title  to  the  province,  the  latter  remaining  at
last  in  possession.  On  Robledo's  return  from
Spain  in  1546  he  tried  to  reconquer  the  territory,


but  was  surprised  by  Velalcazar  at  Loma  de  las
Coles,  carried  to  Armas,  and  executed  there.

ROBLES  PEZUELA,  Manuel  (ro-bles-nay-
thwav'-lah),  Mexican  soldier,  b.  in  Guanajuato  about
1810;  d.  in  Chalchimocula,  24  March,  1862.  He
entered  the  Military  college  in  his  youth,  and  in
1832  the  engineer  corps.  In  1842  he  became  ca|>-
tain,  and  was  appointed  professor  in  the  Military
college,  and  in  1846  he  became  lieutenant-colonel.
In  the  same  year  he  was  engineer-in-chief  of  the
fortifications  of  Vera  Cruz  during  the  siege  and
bombardment  by  the  U.  S.  forces.  He  also  forti-
fied the  passes  of  Cerro  Gordo  and  Peflon  Viejo.  and
from  11  till  13  Sept.,  1847,  served  under  Santa-
Anna  at  Chapultepec.  After  the  evacuation  of
the  capital  by  the  Mexican  forces  he  retired  with
the  army  to  Queretaro.  and  in  the  next  year  served
under  Bustamante  against  the  revolution  of  Para-
des in  Quanajuato.  Afterward  he  took  part  in  the
whole  campaign  of  Sierra  Gorda.  In  1852  Gen.
Arista  made  him  secretary  of  war,  and  in  the  same
year  he  marched  to  the  northern  frontier  to  subdue
the  revolutionary  forces  of  Carbajal.  After  the
accession  of  Santa-Anna  he  was  banished,  and
travelled  through  the  United  States  and  Europe
to  study  fortification,  being  present  during  part  of
the  Crimean  war.  He  returned  to  Mexico  in  Sep-
tember, 1858,  joined  Gen.  Echeagaray  against  the
government  of  Zuloaga,  and,  after  the  fall  of  that
president,  Robles  took  charge  of  the  executive.
His  government  was  of  short  duration,  as  he  did
not  receive  the  necessary  support  from  the  other
generals,  and  resigned  the  executive,  21  Jan.,  1859.
In  the  same  year  he  was  appointed  by  Miramon
commander  of  the  forces  that  were  besieging  Vera
Cruz,  and  he  took  part  with  that  general  in  the
campaign  against  the  constitutional  forces  until
the  battle  of  Calpulalpam,  23  Dec,  1860.  He  then
lived  in  retirement  until  the  foreign  invasion  in
December,  1861,  when,  as  the  Republican  govern-
ment distrusted  him,  he  was  connned  to  the  inte-
rior and  ordered  to  reside  in  Zacatecas ;  but  he
disobeyed,  and  was  on  his  way  to  join  the  French
army  when  he  was  arrested  at  Tuxtepec  on  20
March,  carried  to  San  Andres,  and  condemned  by
court-martial  to  be  shot.  The  sentence  was  exe-
cuted, notwithstanding  the  intervention  of  Gen.
Prim,  and  the  envoys  of  France,  Belgium,  and  the
United  States.

ROCAFUERTE,  Vicente  (ro-cah-foo-air'-tay).
South  American  statesman,  b.  in  Guavaquil,  Ecua-
dor, 3  May,  1783 ;  d.  in  Lima.  Peru,  16  May,  1847.
In  1812  he  was  elected  deputy  for  his  province  to
the  Spanish  cortes,  where  his  opposition  to  the  ar-
bitrary government  of  Ferdinand  VII.  caused  him
to  be  persecuted,  and  he  fled  to  France.  In  1819
he  went  to  Lima  and  the  United  States,  where  he
published,  by  order  of  the  Mexican  patriots,  a  work
advocating  independence.  In  1824  he  went  to
Mexico  and  became  secretary  of  Gen.  Michelena  on
a  diplomatic  mission  to  England.  In  December  of
that  year  the  British  government  recognized  the
independence  of  Mexico.  Soon  aft«rward  Miche-
lena returned,  and  Roc'af  uerte,  remaining  as  charge
d'affaires,  concluded  in  1826  a  commercial  treaty
with  Great  BriUiin.  In  1830  he  resigned  and  re-
turned to  Mexico,  where  he  was  co-editor  of  the  pa-
per "  Fenix  de  la  Libertad,"  attacking  the  despotic
administration  of  Gen.  Bustamante.  For  this  he
was  persecuted,  and  he  resolved  to  return  to  Guaya-
quil, where  he  arrived  in  1833.  Soon  after  his  ar-
rival he  was  appointed  deputy  to  congress  for  the
province  of  Pichincha.  but  he  was  exiled  for  his
opposition  to  the  administration.  I'he  province  of
Guayaquil  now  declared  against  the  government


ROCHA


ROC'HAMBKAU


291


of  Gen.  FlorM,  and  ap(tninted  Rocafuert«  mipreme
chief,  Il«  WHS  taktMi  jirisoiipr  l>y  Klorws,  but  they
wiTc  reo«>nciliil,  uiid  K4»cafut>rt«  pmmii^ed  Uj  co-
operuto  in  the  r(>urf;ai)izAtu>n  of  tlie  ri'tiublic.  Ho
was  ap|M)inUMl  chief  of  the  pruviiicits  of  (tiiuvtt(|iiil

aiid  Munabi.  tiiul
in  1885  was  iplt-ct-
ed  constitutional
pn*»i(lont  of  the
republic.  He  in-
troduce<l  many  re-
forms, es^KH'ially
in  the  public  treiis-
ury.  In  IKW  he
was  ap|M>inte<l
ffovemor  of  the
province  of  Ouav-
aquil.  and  in  1h4<S
he  was  a  deputy  to
the  convention
that  was  held  in
Quito.  The  pro-
visional govern-
ment of  6  March.
1845,  ap|)ointed
him  minister  to
Peru,  whence  he
Si>nt  arms  and
other  implements
of  war.  In  184r)
he  was  electe<l  sen-
ator by  four  provinces,  and  in  the  conjrress  of  1846
ho  lK>came  president  of  the  senate.  On  accfjunt  of
the  ex|)e«lition  that  Gen.  Flores  was  preparing  in
KurojK'.  liocafuerte  was  ap|X)inte<l  minister  to  Chili.
Peru,  and  liolivia,  to  arraii)^  for  means  of  defence
against  that  invasion.  Althouf^h  he  was  ill,  he
acce|>te«l  this  patriotic  mission,  but  died  soon  after
his  arrival  in  Lima.  The  illustration  reprt'sents  his
tondt  in  Ijimii.  He  wrote  "  Ideas  necesarias  4  tixlo
pueblo  independiente.  que  quien'  ser  libre"  (Phila-
<lelphia.  1820) ;  "  Bosquejo  liKerisimo  de  la  revolu-
cion  de  Mejico,  desde  el  pri^o  de  I);uala  hasta  la  pro-
clamacion  imiwrial"  (1821);  "hi  sistema  C'olom-
biano  popular,  electivo  y  representativo,  es  el  qiie
mis  con\nene  a  la  America  independiente"  (1823):
"  Cartas  de  un  Americano  sobre  las  ventajas  de  los
gobiernosrepublicanosftHlen»tivos"(Ijondon.  1825);
"  Knsayo  sobre  carceles"  and  "  Knsayo  sobre  toler-
aneia  relijjiosa,  bajo  el  aspecto  politico,  y  como  me-
dio de  coloiiizacion  v  de  projjreso"  (Mexico.  1831).
KOCHA,  JiiHtiniano  Joh6  da  (ro-chah).  Bra-
zilian journalist,  b.  in  Hio  Janeiro.  8  Nov..  1812;
d.  there  in  186^1  He  received  his  education  in
France,  at  the  College  of  Henry  IV..  and  retunie<l
to  S.  Paulo,  where  he  was  graduated  in  law.  In
1836  he  foumletl  the  jieriodicals  "Atlante"  ami
"  Chronista,"  the  last  in  op[X)sition  to  the  regent,
Diego  Antonio  Feijo.  In  1839  he  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  Conservative  fmrty.  and.  ceasing  to  f)ul>-
lish  the  "  Chronista."  founded  the  "  Brazil  in  1840,
in  which  he  opposefl  the  declaration  of  the  majority
of  the  em|H>ror.  When  the  ministry  of  the  major-
ity was  organiztnl  on  24  July,  his  journal  U'came
the  organ  of  the  opposition.  In  18;i8  he  had  Ixrn
ai>|xiiiit<Ml  profi«ssor  of  ancient  history  and  geogm-
pny  in  the  Imi^erial  ct)llege  of  Pedro  II.  In  1841
he  obtaine<l  the  chair  of  law  in  the  Militar)'  college
of  Itio  Janeiro,  and  in  18.50  he  taught  liatin  and
French  in  the  same  institution.  Jle  was  also  an
etlitor  of  the  "Jornal  de  Commercio,"  and  wrote
•'('onsid«>ra<;Aos  sobre  a  pustica  criminal  no  Brazil
•'  >|M'ciiilmentc  sobre  &  iuri<lic<;flo  en  que  sf>n  dem-
(>n.>trmlo  os  defeitos  railicah^  de  esta  tan  renutada
Instituiy^  "  (Kio  Janeiro,  1835) ;  "  Conoiso  ae  geo-


graphia  elementaria  offrBcida  ao  OoTerno  de  sua
majestada  ^  accept«4la  |M)r  ellon  {tara  el  uso  dew
volumnos  do  Collegjo  Imiterial  Pwiro  II."  (1888);
an<l  translations  of  Fn-ncli  no%'els  (18JJfr-'45).

KO('HA.MltK.\r,  Jean  Bapthte  Donatien
de  Vlineure,  Count  de  (ri>-sham-l»o).  French  »o|-
di«T.  b,  in  V'endome,  1  July.  1725 ;  «I,  in  his  castle
at  Thore,  10  May.  1807.  llis  father  was  a  lieuten-
ant-general and  governor  of  Vendome.  The  son
was  destined  for  the  church,  and  n«c«MvcMl  his  edu-
cation in  the  college  of  the  Jesuits  at  Blois.  when
the  death  of  his  elder  brother  left  him  sole  heir
to  the  paternal  estate.  He  enlerwl  the  army  in
1742  a«  cornet  in  the  regiment  of  Saint  Simon,  and
served  across  the  Rhine,  and  in  Bavaria  an<l  lio-
hemia. He was  promoteil  as  colonel  in March^

1747.  was  present  at  the  siege  of  Maestricht in

1748,  and  after  the  conclusion  of  peace  won  for  his
regiment  a  great  reputation  for  precision  in  drilL
On  1  June,  1749,  he  8Ucceo<le<I  his  father  as  gov-
ernor of  Vendome.  At  Minorca,  in  Aj»ril,  1756,
he  led  his  regiment  to  the  assault  of  Fort  St.
PhilipiK?. and  greatly  contributed  to  the  capture  of
Port  Mahon.  He  was  then  created  a  knight  of  .St.
Ijouis,  promoted  brigadier-general,  and  served  with
preat  credit  in  Germany  in  1758-'61.  He  Ix^came
inspector-general  of  cavalry  in  1769.  and  lieuten-
ant-general, 1  March,  1780.  Count  Hochamlieau
was  ap|H)inted  to  the  command  of  the  army  that
was  destine«l  to  supj)ort  the  American  patriots,  and
obtainoil  from  Ijouis  XVI.  iH-nnission  to  increase  it
to  6.000  men.  He  embarkwl  at  Brest.  2  May.  1780,
and  sailed  immediately  under  the  escort  of  Cheva-
lier de  Ternay  with  five  ships  of  the  line.  Off  Iter-
muda  a  British  fleet  attacke<I  them ;  but  it  was
driven  back,  and  on  12  July  they  landed  safely  in
Rhode  Island.  Rochaml)eau  lx>gan  immediately
to  erect  fortifications  by  which  lie  pr«^venti><l  .Sir
Henry  Clinton  and  Admiral  Arbulhnot  fn)m  mak-
ing an  attack  that  they  had  concerted.  After  es-
tablishing his  headcpiarters  at  Xew|H>rt.  he  wrote
to  Ijafayette,  on  27  Aug.,  urging  the  adoption  of  a
cautious  plan  of  o{>erations.  and  in  an  interview
with  Washington  at  Hartford,  on  22  Sept..  con-
certed the  operations  of  the  following  cainftaign.
He  established  a

severe  discipline
among  his  troops,
and  sent  his  son
to  Paris  on  28
Oct.  to  urge  the
forwartling  of
money,  supplies,
and  re  -  enforce-
ments. After  re-
ceiving tidings  of
the  arrival  of
Count  de  Grasse
with  3,000  men.
he  had  another
interview  with
Washington,  in
which  the  plan  of
the  Virginian  _  ^n.
campaign  was  de-  ^  cf^ '2u>  ■f^cA^ur>^c*A/i.
termin*^!.  He

left  his  quarters.  18  June.  1781,  and.  marching  to-
wanl  Hudson  river,  defeate*!  on  Manhattan  island
a  detachment  of  Clinton's  armv.  ancl  cro«se<l  the
river  as  if  he  intende<l  t«)  enter  }^ew  Jersev.  but.  in-
stead, joined  Washington's  armv  at  Phillipsburg,
nine  miles  from  Kingsbridge.  This  skilful  move-
ment compelled  Clinton  to  abandon  his  nro|x>sed
expedition  for  the  relief  of  Comwallis.  ana  obli^:ed
the  latter  to  retire  from  Virginia After  crossing


292


ROCHAMBEAU


ROCHE


Delaware  river  at  Trenton,  the  united  armies  were
reviewed  by  congress  at  Philadelphia,  and  Rochain-
beau  and  ^ashinfrton,  taking  the  advance  with  a
small  escort,  arrived  at  Williamsburg.  Va.,  on  14
Sept.,  where  they  met  Lafayette  and  Count  de
Samt  Simon,  who  had  just  landed.  They  concerted
the  plan  of  campaign,  and  the  siege  of  Yorktown
was  begun  on  29  Sej)t.  Two  assaults  were  led
against  the  place  by  Saint  Simon  and  Rochambeau,
and  Count  cie  Grasse  having  driven  back  the  Eng-
lish fleet.  Cornwallis  understood  that  further  resist-
ance was  impossible,  and  he  surrendered.  After
returning  to  his  winter-quarters,  Rochambeau  sent
Lauzun's  legion  to  the  aid  of  Gen.  Greene,  and.  in
April,  1782,  marched  to  invest  New  York,  but  the

Elan  was  abandoned.  After  visiting  Washington
e  went  to  Providence,  R.  1..  and  arranged  for  the
embarkation  of  his  army  at  Boston.  He  paid  again
a  visit  to  Washington  at  New  Windsor,  and  em-
barked in  Chesapeake  bay,  14  Jan.,  178Ji,  upon  the
frigate  "  fimeraude,"  arriving  in  Brest  in  March
following.  After  the  surrender  at  Yorktown,  con-
gress presented  him  with  two  cannons  that  had
been  taken  from  the  enemv.  upon  which  were  en-
graved his  escutcheon  and  a  suitable  inscription.
Louis  XV'L  created  him  a  knight  of  the  Saint
Esprit,  appointed  him  governor  of  Picardy  and  Ar-
tois,  and  presented  him  with  two  water-color  paint-
ings by  Van  Blarenberghe,  representing  the  cap-
ture of  Yorktown.  and  the  English  army  defiling
before  the  French  and  Americans.  Before  he  left
Boston,  congress  had  presented  him  with  resolu-
tions that  praised  his  bravery,  the  services  he  had
rendered  to  the  cause  of  independence,  and  the  se-
vere discipline  he  had  maintained  in  his  army,  and
had  also  mstructed  the  secretary  of  foreign  rela-
tions to  recommend  him  to  the  favor  of  Louis
XVI.  He  was  deputy  to  the  assembly  of  the  nota-
bles in  1788,  repressed  riotous  movements  in  Al-
sace in  1790,  was  created  field- marshal,  28  Dec,
1791 ,  and,  after  refusing  to  become  secretary  of  war,
was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  Army  of  the
North,  but  resigned,  15  June,  1792,  and  retired  to
his  castle.  He  was  imprisoned  in  the  Conciergerie
at  Paris  in  1793  and  narrowly  escaped  the  scaffoldr
In  1804  he  was  created  a  grand  officer  of  the  Legion
of  honor  by  Napoleon  and  given  a  pension.  One
of  the  four  statues  forming  a  part  of  the  Lafavette
monument  to  be  erected  in  Washington  by  the  IJ.  S.
government,  will  be  that  of  Rochambeau.  Luce
de  Lancival  wrote  at  his  dictation  his  "  Memoires
du  Marechal  de  Rochambeau"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1809;
translated  into  English  by  William  E.  Wright,
London,  1838).  His  wife  died  17  May.  1824.—
His  son,  Donatien  Marie  Joseph  de  Vimeure,
Viscount  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  the  castle  of
Rochambeau,  near  Vendome,  7  April,  1750;  d.
near  Leipsic,  Saxony,  18  Oct.,  1813,  became  in
1767  a  lieutenant  in  the  regiment  of  Bourbonnois,
was  promoted  captain  in  1773  and  colonel  in  1779,
and  in  1780  accompanied  his  father  to  the  United
States  as  assistant  adjutant-general.  On  28  Oct.
he  was  sent  to  France  with  cipher  despatches  for
the  king,  and  in  March  following  he  rejoined  his
father  at  Newport.  He  was  promoted  major-gen-
eral in  1791,  and  lieutenant-general,  9  July,  1792,
appointed  in  August  following  governor-general  of
the  Leeward  islands,  and  pacified  Santo  Domingo,
but  in  Martinique  he  was  opposed  by  the  royalist
army,  under  the  Count  de  Behagues,  the  former

fovernor-general,  who  was  also  supported  by  the
Iritish.  I&>chambeau  compelled  the  latter  to  re-era-
bark;  but  they  returned,  14  Feb.,  1794,  with  14,000
men.  Although  his  forces  numbered  only  about
700  men,  Rochambeau  sustained  a  siege  in  the  for-


tress of  St.  Pierre  for  forty-nine  days,  and  obtained,
on  23  March,  an  honorable  capitulation.  In  1796
he  was  again  appointed  governor-general  of  Santo
Domingo ;  but,  J)eing  opposed  by  the  commissioners
of  the  I)ire<:tory,  he  was  removed  and  transported
to  France,  where  he  was  imprisoned  in  the  fortress
of  Ham.  He  was  appointeu  in  1802  deputy  com-
mander of  the  expeclition  to  Santo  Domingo,  and,
landing  on  2  Feb.  at  F'ort  Dauphin,  defeated  Tous-
saint  1  Ouverture  (q.  v.)  at  Crete  de  Pierrot,  in  the
valley  of  Artibonite.  and  at  Ravine  de  Couleuvre,
and.  pursuing  his  success,  destroyed  the  insurgent
army  in  the  passes  of  the  Cohas  range.  After  the
death  of  Victor  Leclere  (q.  v.),  2  Dec.,  1802,  he
continued  the  war  with  vigor ;  but  his  severity  and
the  heavy  taxes  he  imposed  upon  the  country  dis-
pleased the  wealthy  population,  and  his  army  di-
minished daily  by  desertions,  famine,  and  yellow  fe-
ver. Nevertheless,  he  recaptured  Fort  Dauphin,  de-
feated Dessalinesand  Christophe,  and  twice  relieved
the  garrison  of  Jacmel,  but  was  besieged  at  last  in
Cape  Pran^ais  by  Dessalines,  who  was  supported
by  an  English  fleet.  Provisions  being  exhausted,
he  evacuated  the  city,  30  Nov..  1803,  and  surrendered
to  the  English  admiral.  He  was  transported  to
Jamaica,  and  in  1805  was  sent  to  England  and
imprisoned  in  a  fortress  till  1811,  when  he  obtained
his  release  by  exchange.  He  took  part  m  the  cam-
paign of  1813  in  Germany,  and  commanded  a
division  of  the  corps  of  Lauriston  in  the  battles  of
Lutzen  and  Bautzen,  and  at  Leipsic,  where  he  was
killed  toward  the  close  of  the  action.

ROCHE,  Alexandre  de  la.  French  colonizer^
b.  in  1  Heppe  in  1594 ;  d.  in  Le  Moule,  Guadeloupe,
in  1GG7.  He  was  the  younger  son  of  a  wealthy
family,  early  entered  the  army,  and  in  1627  joined
the  expedition  of  Diel  d'finambue  to  St.  Christo-
pher. He  took  an  honorable  part  in  the  contest
Dctween  the  English  and  the  Spanish  in  that  isl-
and, and  in  1635  accompanied  Diel  du  Parquet  to
Martinique.  He  assisted  in  the  establishment  of
the  colony,  and  was  afterward  a  lieutenant  of
Ilouel  in  (jruadeloupe.  There  he  founded  the  city
of  Le  Moule,  in  Grande  Terre,  and  built  a  fort,
which  he  successfully  defended  against  the  Span-
ish. He  was  granted  hereditary  letters  of  nobility
by  Louis  XIV.,  with  a  concession  of  land  that  now
forms  the  counties  of  Le  Moule  and  Saint  Franyois.

ROCHE,  James  Jeffrey,  author,  b.  in  Queen's
county,  Ireland,  31  May,  1847.  His  parents  re-
moved to  Prince  Edward  island  when  he  was  an
infant,  and  he  was  educated  in  St.  Dunstan's  Col-
lege in  that  province.  He  went  in  1866  to  Boston,
Mass.  In  llfe3  he  joined  the  editorial  staff  of  the
"  Pilot,"  and  he  is  still  (1888)  connected  with  that
journal.  He  has  contributed  to  periodicals  and
published  "Songs  and  Satires"  (Boston,  1887).

ROCHE,  Troiliis  de  Mes^oiiat,  Manjuis  de  la,
French  colonizer,  b.  in  Nantes,  France,  in  1549;  d.
in  Paris  in  1606.  He  had  already  attained  fame  as
a  general,  when  he  received  a  commission  from
Henry  IV.  in  1598,  by  virtue  of  which  he  was  em-
powered to  found  establish  ments\  in  New  F'rance
and  on  the  coast  of  North  America,  of  which  he
was  appointed  governor  and  lieutenant-generaL
He  fitted  out  three  vessels  and  sailed  from  Dieppe,
bringing  with  him  120  emigrants,  most  of  whom
were  drawn  from  the  French  prisons.  Champlain
speaks  of  this  expedition  and  attributes  its  failure
to  the  scant  knowledge  that  his  pilot,  Guillaume
Chetmlel,  had  of  the  American  coast.  At  the  sug-
gestion of  the  latter,  he  landed  forty  of  his  men
on  Sable  island,  where  they  remainq^l  nearly  seven
years  without  succor,  and  then  explored  the  shores
of  Acadia. After  obtaining  such  information  as


ROCHEFOKT


ROCHESTER


293


he  (leitired.  he  sailed  for  France,  intending  to  take
on  boani  those  that  he  hml  left  on  Sa))le  island,  but
he  was  prevented  by  head-winds  from  lundin^'.  On
his  arrival  in  France  his  pilot  was  onh-n'd  by  the
parliament  of  Uouen  to  ^o  in  iseareh  of  \m  follow-
ers, who  would  have  |>erished  of  cold  and  hunf^>r
if  they  h»ui  not  chanc«*<l  to  discover  some  wrtvkwl
vessels  on  the  c<iast.  The  marquis  was  imprisoned
for  a  year  by  the  Duke  de  Men-tpur.  lieutenant  of
the  kinjr  in  the  provinces  of  Hrittany  and  Nor-
mandv.  After  his  release  ho  endeavore<l  to  obtain
supplies  in  Paris  for  his  colony,  but  the  contempt
and  indifference  of  the  court  were  insurmountable
obstacles  to  his  enterprise,  and  he  is  said  to  have
die<l  from  vexation  at  not  bcinj;  allowed  to  com-

Sleto  his  discoveries.  Narratives  of  Roche's  expe-
ition  are  inserted  in  the  "  Voya|;es"  of  Champiain
and  in  the  histories  of  Lesearbot  an«l  Charlevoix.
Some  writers  a.ssign  an  earlier  date  for  the  discov-
eries iin<l  imprisonment  of  the  marrjuis.

ROCHEFORT,  CC'sar  de  (rosh-for),  French  au-
thor, h.  in  Ik'Uey  in  1«W0;  d.  there  in  1«91.  His
real  name  appears  to  have  l)een  Ijouis  de  Poincy.
He  lived  for  some  time  in  the  Antilles,  and  wrote
"  Histoire  naturellu  et  morale  des  !les  Antilles,
avec  un  dicticmnaire  carallH}"  (Rotterdam,  l(Jo8:
translated  into  Dutch,  16(52;  German,  Munich,
1604 :  and  Knj;lish,  London,  1660),  and  "  Tableau
de  nie  de  Tabago.  ou  de  la  Nouvelle-Oualchre,
Tune  des  Antilles  de  rAmeritjue"  (Ijcvden,  16(55).
BOCHEFOrCAlLl)  -  LIANCOIRT  D'ES-
TISMAC,  Fran<;ol8  Alexandre  FrMerIc,  Duke
de  la  (rosh-ftMvco),  French  publicist,  b.  in  I^a
Roche-Guyon,  14  Jan.,  1747;  d.  in  Paris,  28  March,
1827.  He  was  known  in  his  youth  as  Count  de
la  Rochefoucauld,  but  in  1767  took  the  title  of
Duke  de  Liancourt,  and  on  28  May,  1 78;i,  succeeded
hLs  father  as  a  |x>er.  He  rose  to  be  a  lieutenant-
eeneral  in  1790,  and  was  kniphted  in  1784.  As  ear-
ly as  1775  he  carriwl  on  agricultural  improvements
on  his  estate  of  Liancourt,  and  in  1780  founded
there,  at  his  own  expense,  a  school  of  mechanical
arts  for  soldiers' sons,  which  has  become  the  school
of  •'  Arts  et  metiers  "  of  France.  He  was  a  favorite
of  Louis  XVI.,  who  repose<l  much  confidence  in
him,  and  sought  his  juivice  before  concluding  a
treaty  of  alliance  with  the  Unite«l  States,  which  the
duke  urged  him  to  sign.  He  was  deputy  to  the  as-
sembly of  notables  in  1788,  and  to  the  states-gen-
eral in  1789,  presided  over  the  constituent  assem-
bly during  the  night  of  4  Aug.,  1789,  in  which  the
abolition  of  titles  of  nobility  was  vote<i,  was  mili-
tary commander  at  Rouen  in  1792,  and  endeavonxl
to  save  the  king.  He  was  dismissed,  12  Aug.,  1792,
and  {)asse<l  to  England,  where  he  sojourned  till
1794,  when  he  came  to  the  United  States.  After
travelling  through  the  principal  states,  he  devoted
himself  to  the  study  of  the  agricultural  metlnxls  of
the  country,  and  Iwught  a  farm  in  Pennsylvania,
where  he  s|)entsomo  time  in  ex|)eriments.  In  1798
he  visitinl  Denmark  and  Holland,  and  in  1799  he
retunie*!  Ui  live  on  his  estate  of  Liancourt.  which
Bonaimrte  n»store<l  to  him ;  but  he  steatlily  refuse<l
to  a<'cept  any  office  at  the  imiH>rial  court,  though
he  was  a  memlK*r  of  the  cor|)s  legislatif  during  the
whole  of  Na|K)leon's  reign.  At  the  restoration  of
Louis  XV' I II.  he  was  created  a  peer,  and  afterward
he  devote<l  himself  to  the  pn>secuti(m  of  us^'ful
arts  and  to  l)enevolent  institutions.  He  established
in  Paris  the  first  savings-bank,  and  was  also  influ-
ential in  intrtxlucing  vaccination  in  France.  To-
ward the  close  of  his  life  he  IxH-ame  an  enp>r  o|>-
ponent  of  the  government.  adv«K-ating  American

firinciples  and  American  institutions,  and  acquired
hrough  his  benevolence  and  philanthropic  actions


frrmt  popularity,  which  cAUiM<d  tho  rojraliiits  U>

give  him  the  mcK-k  surname  of  the  "Saint  Vincent
de  Paul  of  the  litM>ral  party."  His  life  has  ln-en
written  by  his  wwx  (1H210-  His  works  include
"  J<'tudes  sur  les  prisons  de  Philailelphif  "  (Phils-
del|)hia,  179(5),  and  "  VVtvage  dans  les  Klats-Unis"
(H  vols..  New  York.  179.'i-'7).

ROCHESTER.  Nathaniel,  nioneer.  b.  in  Cople
iMirish,  Westmoreland  co.,  Va.,  21  Feb..  1752;  d.  in
R<K*h«*ster,  N.  V.,  17  .May,  lM;il,  lie  was  a  dcwvnd-
ant  of  Nicholas  RiK-hester,  who  came  to  the  colonj
of  Virginia  fmm  the  county  of  Kent,  England,  in
1689,  and  Uuight
land  in  Westmore-
land county.  When
he  was  t  wo  years  of
age  his  father  died,
an<l  when  he  was
seven  his  mother
married  Thomas
Critcher,  and  the
family  removes!  to
Granville  county,
N.C..  inl763.  His
means  of  education
were  limited,  but  he
lost  no  opf»ortunity
of  his  busy  life  to
make  goo«l  an  v  early
deficiencies.  In  1768
he  became  a  clerk  in
Hillsboro.N.Cand

in  1773  entere<l  into  partnership  with  his  employer.
In  1775  he  was  appointe*!  a  memlier  of  the  c«)m-
mittee  of  safety  for  Orange  county,  and  in  August,
1775,  he  attended,  as  a  meml)er,  the  first  provincial
convention  in  North  Carolina,  and  wa.s  maile  pay-
master, with  the  rank  of  major,  of  the  North  Caro-
lina line,  consisting  of  four  regiments.  On  the  re-
assembling of  the  conventicm  in  May,  1776,  the
provincial  force  was  increa.se<l  to  ten  regiment-s
and  a  resolution  was  passed,  10  May,  "  that  Na-
thaniel Rochester,  Estpiire.  be  appointeil  a  Deputy
Commi-ssary-General  of  militarv  and  other  stores
in  this  county  for  the  use  of  the  ('ontinental  annv."
He  entered  upon  his  duties  at  once;  but  his  health
failed,  and  he  was  comiH'lled  to  resign.  The  same
year  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of  North
Carolina.  He  filletl  other  useful  offices,  and  was
a  commissioner  to  establish  and  sui>erintend  a
manufactory  of  arms  at  Hillslx>ro.  tne  iron  for
which  had  to  l)e  drawn  frt>m  Pennsylvania  in  wag-
ons. In  1778  he  Ix'gan  business  again  with  Col.
Thomas  Hart,  father-in-law  of  Henrv  Clay,  and
James  Brown,  afterward  minister  to  France,  and
in  178:J,  in  connection  with  the  former,  he  began
the  "  manufacture  of  flour,  rope,  and  nails "  at
Hagerstown,  Md.  While  living  in  that  place  he
became  in  succession  a  memlnT  of  the  Maryland
a.ssembly,  ])ostmaster,  and  judge  of  the  county
court,  and  in  1808  he  was  ch»)sen  a  presidential
elector,  and  votetl  for  James  Ma<lison.  He  l>ecame
the  first  president  of  the  Hagerstown  l«ank  that
year,  and  at  that  time  was  conducting  large  mer-
cantile establishments  in  Kentucky  as  well  as  in
Maryland.  In  1800  he  first  visitwl  the  "(Jenesee
country."  where  he  ha<l  previously  iMiught  640 acres,
and  in  Septemlx«r  of  that  year  he  ma<le  larj^e  pur-
chases of  land  in  Livingston  c«>unty.  N.  \ .,  near
Dansville,  in  connwtion  with  Maj.  Charh's  Car-
roll, Col.  William  Fitzhugh.  and  Col.  Hilton.  In
1802  he  purchase*],  jointly  with  Carroll  and  F'itz-
hugh,  the  "  l(H)-acre  or  Allan  .Mill  tract,"  in  Falls
Town  (now  R<K-hester),  and  in  May,  1810,  he  re-
moved from  Hagerstown  and  settled  near  Dans-


294


ROCKINGHAM


ROCKWELL


ville,  where  he  remained  five  years,  building  a
paj)er-raill  and  making  various  improvements.  In
1815  he  removed  to  Bloomfield,  Ontario  eo.,  and
in  April,  1818,  took  up  his  residence  in  Rochester,
whicn  hatl  been  named  for  him.  In  181(5  he  was
a  second  time  chosen  a  presidential  elector,  in
January,  1817,  he  wjis  secretary  of  a  convention
held  at  Canandaigua  to  urge  the  construction  of
the  Erie  canal,  and  in  the  course  of  the  year  he
went  to  Albany  as  agent  of  the  netitioners  for  the
erection  of  Monroe  county,  but  uid  not  succeed  in
his  mission  until  1821.  He  was  the  first  clerk  of
the  new  county,  and  its  first  representative  in  the
state  legislature  of  1821-2.  In  1824  he  was  jirolni-
nent  in  organizing  the  Bank  of  Rochester,  and  was
made  its  first  president.  Shortly  afterward  he  re-
signed the  post  and  retired  from  active  life.  He
was  in  religion  an  Episcopalian,  an<l  was  one  of
the  founders  of  St.  Luke's  church  in  Rochester.
— His  grandson,  Thomas  Fortescue,  physician,
b.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  8  Oct.,  1823 ;  d.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  24  May,  1887,  was  graduated  M.  A.  at  Ho-
bart  (then  Geneva)  college  in  1845,  and  studied
medicine  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He
was  graduated  M.  D.  in  1848,  and  after  serving
for  a  year  as  interne  in  Bellevue  hospital.  New
York,  continued  his  studies  in  Elurope  for  a  year
and  a  half  longer,  and  then  began  practice  in
New  York  city.  He  married,  on  6  May,  1852,
Margaret  Munro,  daughter  of  Bishop  William  H.
De  Lancey.  In  1853  he  established  himself  in
Buffalo,  where  he  took  the  chair  of  the  principles
and  practice  of  medicine,  together  with  that  of
clinical  medicine,  in  the  Medical  department  of
the  university  of  Buffalo.  Prom  1853  till  1883  he
was  attending  physician  to  the  Sisters  of  Charity
hospital,  and  in  1861  he  became  consulting  physi-
cian to  the  Buffalo  general  hospital.  In  March,
1863.  he  was  appointed  a  special  inspector  of  field
hospitals.  He  was  president  of  the  New  York
state  medical  society  m  1875-'6,  and  its  delegate  to
the  International  medical  congress  at  Philadelphia
in  1876.  Besides  many  technical  papers  on  profes-
sional topics,  he  published  "  The  Army  Surgeon  "
(Buffalo,  1863);  and  "Medical  Men  and  Medical
Matters  in  1776"  (Albany,  1876). — Another  grand-
son, William  Beatty,  soldier,  b.  in  Angelica,  N.  Y.,
15  Feb.,  1826,  entered  the  U.  S.  service  as  major
and  additional  paymaster  of  volunteers  on  1  June,
1861.  He  was  transferred  to  the  permanent  estab-
lishment as  paymaster  on  17  Jan.,  1867,  and  on  17
Feb.,  1882,  was  appointed  paymaster-general  of  the
army,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  See
"Early  History  of  the  Rochester  Family  in  Ameri-
ca," by  Nathaniel  Rochester  (Buffalo,  1882).

ROCKINGHAM,  Charles  Watson  Went-
worth,  Marquis  of,  English  statesman,  b.  in  Eng-
land, 19  March,  1730;  d.  in  Wimbledon,  Surrey,
England,  1  July,  1782.  He  attached  himself  with
ardor  to  the  Whig  party  in  his  youth,  escaping
from  home  in  December,  1745,  to  bear  arms  in  the
army  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  against  the  last
of  the  Stuarts.  The  Hanoverian  princes  rewarded
his  devotion  with  distinctions  and  honors.  In  1750
he  succeeded  his  father  in  the  marquisate.  The
reactionary  course  of  George  III.  impelled  him  to
resign  his  office  of  lord  chamberlain,  and  on  the
death  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  in  1764  he  became
the  recognized  chief  of  the  Whig  party,  and  was
called  on  30  June,  1765,  to  preside  over  a  cabinet.
The  principal  task  that  he  set  before  himself  was
to  restore  a  harmonious  feeling  between  the  mother
country  and  the  colonies  in  North  America,  exas-
perated as  they  had  been  by  the  measures  of  the
preceding  ministry. In  this  object  he  was  opposed


by  the  king  and  was  not  supported  by  his  col-
leagues. The  ministry  made  a  show  of  carrying
the  stamp-act  into  execution,  but  recoiled  from  the
work  of  enforcing  it  with  the  bayonet,  antl  when  the
manifestations  in  America  had  nuide  clear  the  state
of  feeling  there,  Rockingham  was  able,  in  March,
1766,  to  secure  the
repeal  of  the  stamp
duties.  Before  he
succeeded  in  redeem-
ing his  promise  to  re-
move the  restrictions
on  commerce  or  to
carry  further  meas-
ures of  conciliation
he  was  compelled,  by
the  defection  of  the
Duke  of  Grafton  and
the  ill  will  of  the
king,  to  give  up  the
seals  of  office  in  May.
During  the  minis-
tries of  the  Duke  of
Grafton  and  Lord
North  he  combated
the  errors  of  his  suc-
cessors, and  led  in  op-
position the  younger
statesmen  that  finally  repaired  them.  At  the
height  of  the  crisis,  when  England,  distracted  by
faction,  had  to  face  a  coalition  of  France,  Spain,  and
the  United  States,  Rockingham  was  again  called  to
the  direction  of  affairs,  but  had  scarcely  taken  up  the
work  when  he  died.  He  accepted  omce  on  the  ex-
press condition  that  peace  should  be  concluded  with
the  United  States,  and  began  negotiations  with  the
belligerents.  In  the  earlier  stages  of  the  conflict
Rockingham  and  his  secretary,  Edmund  Burke,
were  not  inclined  to  accept  the  claims  of  the  colo-
nists to  immunity  from  taxation  and  from  parlia-
mentary control  that  were  supported  by  William
Pitt.  Rockingham  was  the  representative  of  the
aristocratic  traditions  of  the  Whig  party,  while
Pitt  was  the  precursor  of  Democratic  ideas.  He
was  not  an  orator,  and  as  a  man  of  affairs  was
hampered  by  a  timid  disposition.  Yet  his  good
sense  and  his  uprightness  in  a  period  of  corruption
and  intrigue  aided  in  regenerating  the  Whig  party.
Burke,  in  eulogizing  his  patron,  said  that  "  m  op-
position he  respected  the  principles  of  government,
and  in  the  ministry  protected  the  liberties  of  the
people."  See  the  IJarl  of  Albemarle's  "  Memoirs  of
the  Marquis  of  Rockingham  and  his  Contempora-
ries "  (London,  1852).

ROCKWELL,  Alphonso  David,  physician,  b.
in  New  Canaan,  Conn.,  18  May,  1840.  He  was
educated  at  Kenyon  college  and  graduated  in  medi-
cine at  Bellevue  medical  college,  New  York  city,
in  1864.  Entering  the  army  as  assistant  surgeon
of  the  6th  Ohio  cavalry,  he  was  soon  promoted
surgeon  of  brigade  with  the  rank  of  major,  and
served  through  the  campaigns  of  1864  and  1865  in
Virginia.  In  1866  he' associated  himself  with  Dr.
George  M.  Beard  for  the  study  of  the  uses  of  elec-
tricity in  the  cure  of  nervous  diseases.  He  was
electro-therapeutist  to  the  New  York  state  women's
hospital  from  1874  till  1884,  and  has  since  been
professor  of  electro-therapeutics  in  the  New  York

Eost-graduate  medical  school  and  hospital.  With
>r.  Beard,  he  was  the  originator  of  important  meth-
ods of  using  electricity,  especially  general  faradiza-
tion as  a  tonic  agent,  and  the  pioneer  in  establish-
ing electro-therapeutics  on  a  scientific  basis  in  the
United  States,  where  electricity  had  been  neglected
by  the  profession  and  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of


R(X?KWRLL


RODDEY


206


charlatanR.  Up  doscribeil  the  constitutional  oftoct*
of  funeral  electrization  in  tlie  "  New  York  M«Hlic«l
Record  "  in  18<W,  and  sul)»«o<iupntly  wrote,  with  Dr.
Beard,  five  artit-les  on  "  Me<lic«l  I'm's  of  Klw-
tricitv"  which  attractiMl  much  attention  and  were
translated  into  various  Kuropean  lan>;ua{;es.  In
1808  he  pul>lishe<l  an  article  on  "General  Klectri-
zation  in  certain  Uterine  Disorders,"  and  in  1869
he  issued  a  morioeraph  on  "  Klectricity  as  a  Means
of  Din^Miosis."  Tie  also  ouhlishetl  an  article  on
the  "I'omimrativc  Value  of  the  (ialvunicand  Fara-
dic  Currents"  in  1870;  in  1871  one  on  "  Klectroljr-
sisand  its  Ap[>lication  to  the  Treatment  of  Disease."
There  appeared  also  an  exhaustive  treatise,  by  him
conjointly  with  Dr.  Beanl,  on  the  "Medical  and
Surcfical  LVs  of  Electricity"  (New  York.  18?2;
revisi'd  ed.,  1875;  new  ed.,  with  much  additional
matter,  1878;  «th  revised  e<l..  New  York.  1888).
Amoiifj  his  other  monographs  and  pniters  arc
"Clinical  Researches  in  Electro-.Sur^ery  '  (1873);
"Application  of  Electricity  to  the  Central  Nervous
System"  (1873):  "  Electrolytic  Treatment  of  Can-
cer" (1874);  "Physiological  and  Therapeutical
Relations  of  Electricity  to  the  Nervous  System  "
(1875); "Aphasia"  (1876); "Intermittent Hemi-

f)legia"  (1877);  a  volume  of  "  Ijectures  on  the  Re-
ation  of  Electricity  to  Medicine  and  Surgery"
il878);  "Use  of  Electricity  in  the  Troatment'of
5pilepsy"(1880);  "Differential  Indications  for  the
Use  of  the  Dynamic  and  Franklinic  Forms  of
Electricity  "  (1^2);  and  "Successful  Treatment  of
Extra-Uterine  Pregnancy"  (188Ji).

ROCKWELL,  James  Otis,  iMx>t,  h.  in  Lebanon,
Conn.,  3  Nov.,  1808;  d.  in  Providenct^  R.  I..  7
June,  1831.  His  family  removed  to  Manlius,  N.  Y..
when  he  was  alwut  fourteen  years  old.  He  was
apprenticed  to  a  printer  in  Utica,  and  soon  began
to  write  poems  that  gained  for  him  more  than
a  local  reputation.  Going  to  Boston  at  the  age
of  eighteen,  he  worked  at  his  trade,  and  sulise-
quently  obtained  editorial  employment  in  the  office
of  the  "Statesman."  In  the  autumn  of  1829  he
became  editor  of  the  Providence  "  Patriot."  Some
of  his  {K)etry  is  preserved  in  Rufus  W.  Griswold's
"Poets  and  Poetry  of  America"  (Philadelphia,
1842),  and  in  C'harl'es  W.  Everest's  "  Poets  of  Con-
necticut" (Hartford.  IHiii).

ROCKWELL,  Joel  Edson.  clergyman,  b.  in
Salisbury.  Vt.,  4  May,  1810;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
29  July,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in
1837,  and  in  1841  at  Union  theological  seminary.
New  York  city,  ordained  on  13  Oct.,  1841,  and  was
jiastor  of  the  f*resbyterian  church  at  Valatie.  N.  Y.,
till  1847,  and  then  for  four  years  in  Wilmington,
Del.  He  next  had  charge  of  the  Central  church  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  till  1808,  and  subseouently  of  the
church  at  Stapleton,  on  Staten  island.  From  1852
till  1860  he  edited  the  "  Sabbath-School  Visitor  "  in
New  York  city.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Jefferson  college  in  1859.  lie  published
"Sketches  of  the  Presbyterian  Church"  (Phila-
delphia, 1854);  "The  Yiiung  Christian  Warned"
(18.)7) ;  "  Visitors'  Ouestions  "  (1857) ;  "  Scenes  and
Impressions  Abroa«l"  (New  York,  1859);  and  "  My
Sheet- Anchor  "  (Phila<lelphia.  1864).

ROCKWELU  John  Arnold,  jurist,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  27  Aug..  180^^ ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  10  Feb.,  1861.  He  was  gnuluatecl  at  Yale  in
1822.  and  studied  and  practised  law  in  Norwich.
He  was  a  state  senator  in  18!i8-'9,  U-came  judge  of
the  New  London  county  court  in  1840,  and  in  1H45
was  elected  to  congress,  serving  two  terms.  Among
the  measures  that  he  intnxluced  was  one  for  conj-
muting  the  spirit  ration  in  the  navy  for  its  ecjuiva-
lent  in  money. As  cbainnan  of  the  committee  on


claims  he  was  the  chief  originator  of  the  court  of
claims  in  Washington,  to  which  he  mainly  cnn>
fined  his  practice  after  his  S4>rvice  in  oongresa.  He
was  the  author  of  a  standard  treatise  on  "Spanish
and  American  I^aw  in  Relation  to  Minest  and  Titles
to  Real  Estate"  (2  vols..  New  York,  lK5I-'2).

RiK'KWELU  JnliuH.  jurist,  b.  in  Colebmok.
Conn.,  26  April,  1805;  d.  in  Ix-nox.  Majw..  19  May,
1MH«.  He  was  graduate<l  at  Yale  in  1K26,  studied
at  the  law-sch<Hjl,  was  admitted  to  the  Itar  in  1829,
and  settled  in  Pittsfleld,  .Mass.,  in  the  following
year.  He  was  eUt-twl  a  memU-r  of  the  Massachu-
setts legislature  in  IKM,  its  sfieaker  in  IKt'i-'K,  and
then  served  as  t»ank  commissioner  for  three  years.
He  was  a  rejiresentative  in  congress  from  2  Feb.,
1844,  till  3  March,  1851,  having  Tieen  elected  as  a
Whig  for  four  successive  terms.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  MassjK'husetts  constitutional  convention  in
185Ji.  On  Edward  Everett's  resignation  of  his  seat
in  the  U.S.  senate,  Mr.  Rmikwoll  whs  Hp|Miinte<l  to
fill  the  vacancy,  and  served  from  15  June,  1K.54,  till
Henr)'  Wilson  was  elected  by  the  legislature  and
took  his  seat  on  10  Feb.,  1855.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  on  the  Fremont  ticket  in  1856,  was
again  elected  to  the  state  hou.se  of  representatives
in  1858.  and  was  chosen  sneaker,  which  office  he
had  held  when  in  the  legislature  before.  In  1859
he  was  appointe<l  one  of  the  judges  of  the  superior
court  of  Massachust>tts.  serving  till  1871.  when  he
resigned.  He  has  since  reside<l  in  I^enox,  Sla.ss.,  and
been  connected  with  various  banks. — His  cousin,
Charles,  author,  b.  in  Colebrook.  Conn..  22  Nov.,
180<>;  d.  in  Albany.  N.  Y.,  17  April.  1882,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1826.  taught  for  five  years  in
the  American  deaf  and  dumb  asylum.  Hartford,
Conn.,  and  then  studied  theology  at  Andover  semi-
nary, where  he  was  gra<luated  in  1834.  He  was  or-
dained on  30  Sept.,  1834,  as  a  Congregational  min-
ister, was  a  chaplain  in  the  U.  S.  navy  f«»r  the  next
three  years,  and  from  ISSS  till  1845  was  nastor  of  a
church  at  Chatham.  Mass.  He  afterwara  preached
in  Michigan  and  Kentucky  and  in  New  England
towns,  taught  in  lioston,  Mass.,  and  BiiKjklyn,
N.  Y.,  in  1856-'9,  was  pastor  of  the  Reformed  church
at  Kiskatom,  N.  Y.,  in  1860-'6,  and  afterward  sup-
plied various  pulpites.  He  was  tJie  author  of
"Sketches  of  Foreign  Travel  and  Life  at  .Sea "(2
vols.,  Boston,  1842).  and  "  The  Catskill  Mountains
and  the  Region  Artmnd"  (New  York,  1867).

ROCK  WOOD.  t'harlesUreene,  mathematician,
b.  in  New  York  city.  11  .Ian.,  1843.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1864.  where  in  1866  he  receivinl  the
degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  course  for  advanced  scientific
studies.  In  1868  he  was  called  to  the  professoi*ship
of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  nt  Bt)wdoin.
and  in  1873  he  accepteil  that  of  mathematics  and
astronomy  at  Rutgers,  whence  in  1877  he  |>assed
to  the  chair  of  matnematics  in  Princeton,  which  he
now  (1888)  holds.  Prof.  RockwtKnl  was  a  member
of  the  Princeton  eclipse  expedition  that  was  sent  to
Colonulo  in  1878,  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  as-
sociation for  the  advancement  of  scieni-e,  and  a
memlwr  of  the  American  metrological  society,  of
which  he  was  the  first  secn'tary.  He  has  acipiired
considerable  reputation  by  his  studies  of  American
earth({uakes,  on  which  subject  he  has  contributed
papers  to  the  "  American  Journal  »>f  Science  "  sint«
18«2.  The  annual  summaries  of  progress  in  vul-
canology  and  seismology  in  the  n'|)Orts  of  the
Smithsonian  institution  /or  1884-'0  were  his.

RODDEY,  Philin  Dale,  soldier,  b.  in  North
Carolina  m  1818.  He  was  for  many  years  owner
and  captain  of  8teanilM>ats  in  the  navigation  of
Tennessee  river.  Heorganizetl  acompany  of  scouts
early  in  1861  for  the  Confederate  service,  and  sub-


296


RODENBOUGH


RODGERS


sequently  a  brigade,  and  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general, 31  Aug.,  1863.  His  command  was
clothed,  armed,  and  subsisted  without  cost  to  the
Confetlerate  government.  He  wa.s  one  of  the  most
successful  of  partisan  officers,  and  was  engaged  in
many  of  the  great  battles.  Since  1870  he  has  re-
sided chioflv  in  London,  England.

ROI)ENBOrGH,Theophllns  Francis,  soldier,
b.  in  Kaston,  Pa.,  5  Nov.,  1838.  He  was  educated
at  Ijafayette  college,  engaged  in  mercantile  busi-
ness, and  on  27  March,  1861.  was  appointed  2d
lieutenant  in  the  2d  U.  S.  dragoons.  He  was  pro-
moted 1st  lieutenant  on  14  May,  was  engaged  at
Gaines's  Mills  and  the  subsequent  operations  of
the  peninsular  campaign  of  1862,  being  promoted
captain  on  17  July,  was  captured  at  Manassas,  but
was  immediately  exchanged,  and  commanded  a
squadron  in  Stoneman's  raid  and  a  regiment  at
Gettysburg.  He  was  engaged  in  the  cavalry  opera-
tions of  1864,  was  wounded  at  Trevillian's  Station,
and  again  at  Winchester,  losing  his  right  arm
while  leading  his  regiment  in  a  charge.  He  was
brevetted  major  for  his  bravery  on  this  occasion,
and  lieutenant-colonel  for  meritorious  conduct  dur-
ing the  war,  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  18th
Pennsylvania  cavalry  on  29  April,  1865,  and  re-
ceived the  brevets  of  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers for  services  during  the  war,  of  colonel,  U.  S.
army,  for  bravery  at  Todd's  Tavern,  and  of  briga-
dier-general, U.  S.  array,  for  gallant  conduct  at
Cold  Harbor.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the  volun-
teer service  on  31  Oct.,  1865,  became  major  of  the
42d  U.  S.  infantry  on  28  July,  1866,  and  was  re-
tired from  active  service  on  15  Dec,  1870,  on  ac-
count of  wounds  received  in  the  line  of  duty,  with
the  full  rank  of  colonel  of  cavalry.  He  became
secretary  of  the  Military  service  institution  in
1879,  and  as  assistant  inspector-general  of  the  state
of  New  York  in  1880-'3  was  efficient  in  improving
the  militia  organization.  Gen.  Rodenbough  is  the
author  of  "  From  Everglade  to  Cafion  with  the
Second  Dragoons"  (New  York,  1875);  "Afghanis-
tan and  the  Anglo-Russian  Dispute"  (1886);  and
"  Uncle  Sam's  Medal  of  Honor"  (1887).

RODES,  Robert  Einmett,  b.  in  Lynchburg,
Va.,  29  Maroh,  1829;  d.  in  Winchester,  Va.,  19
Sept.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Virginia  mili-
tary institute  in  1848,  and  was  professor  in  the  in-
stitute for  several  vears.  He  then  moved  to  Mo-
bile, Ala.,  entered  tKe  Confederate  army  as  colonel
of  the  5th  Alabama  infantry  in  1861,  and  was  pro-
moted brigadier-general,  21  Oct.,  1861,  and  major-
general,  2  May,  1863.  His  brigade  was  composed
of  six  Alabama  regiments  of  infantry,  in  Gen.  Dan-
iel H.  Hill's  division,  Jackson's  corps,  Army  of
Northern  Virginia.  His  division  was  composed  of
the  brigades  of  Gens.  Doles,  Daniel,  and  Ramseur.
He  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Winchester.

RODUERS,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  5  Aug.,  1727;  d.  in  New  York  city,  7  May,
1811.  His  parents  removed  in  1728  to  Philadel-
phia, Pa  He  was  fitted  for  the  ministry  by  Rev.
Samuel  Blair  at  New  Londonderry,  Pa,  and  on  16
March,  1749,  was  installed  as  pastor  of  the  Presby-
terian church  at  St.  George's,  Del.  In  September,
1765,  on  the  death  of  David  Bostwick,  he  assumed
the  pastoral  charge  of  the  latter's  congregation  in
New  York  city,  which  rapidly  ^rew  m  numbers,
and  in  1767  erected  a  second  building,  on  the  cor-
ner of  Beekman  and  Nassau  streets.  In  1768  he
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Edinburgh  uni-
versity. He  was  an  antagonist  of  the  Episcopalians,
through  whose  influence  an  act  of  incorixjration
was  refused  to  his  society,  and  throughout  the  Revo-
lution he  was  an  ardent  and  active  patriot. Near


/d/^^t A^^/€/


the  close  of  Februarv,  1776.  he  removed  his  family
from  New  York,  and  did  not  retuni  till  its  evacua-
tion by  the  British  at  the  end  of  the  war.  During
the  summer  of  1776  he  acted  as  chaplain  to  Gen.
William  Heath's  brigade.  The  following  winter  he
spent  in  the  south,
and  was  reported  as
engaged  in  an  at-
tempt to  win  over
the  Regulators  of
North  Carolina  to
the  American  cause.
He  was  chaplain  of
the  New  York  pro-
vincial congress,  and
afterward  of  the
council  of  safety,
and  of  the  first  legis-
lature in  1777.  Dur-
ing the  war  he
8 reached  at  Amenia,
r.  Y.,  Danbury,
Conn.,  and  Laming-
ton,N.J.  The  Brit-
ish used  the  church
in  Wall  street  for
barracks,  and  the  brick  church  on  Beekman  street
for  a  hospital,  and  left  both  in  ruins.  While  they
were  rebuilding,  the  vestry  of  Trinity  church  per-
mitted the  Presbyterians  to  worship  in  St.  Paul's
church  and  St.  George's  chapel.  The  united  Pres-
byterian congregations  decided  to  employ  but  one
minister,  and  he  remained  the  sole  pastor  till  a
coadjutor  was  engaged  in  1789.  Dr.  Rodgers  was
moderator  of  the  first  general  assembly  held  in
1789.  He  was  vice-chancellor  of  the  ifew  York
state  university  from  its  creation  in  1787,  and  was
chosen  president  of  the  Missionary  society,  which
was  established  in  1796.  A  contemporary  says:
"  Dr.  Rodgers  is  certainly  the  most  accomplislied
gentleman  for  a  clergyman,  not  to  except  even  Dr.
Cooper,  that  I  have  ever  been  acquainted  with.  He
lives  in  elegant  style,  and  entertains  company  as
genteelly  as  any  gentleman  in  the  city."

RODtrERS,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Harford
county,  Md.,  11  July,  1771 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  1  Aug.,  1838.  flis  father  was  a  Scotchman,
and  served  as  colonel  of  militia  in  the  war  of  inde-
pendence. The  son  entered  the  merchant  marine
when  he  was  thirteen  years  old,  and  was  a  captain
in  1789.  He  entered  the  navy  as  lieutenant,  9
March,  1798,  and  was  executive  of  the  "  Constella-
tion "  at  the  capture  of  the  French  frigate  "  L'ln-
surgente  "  off  Nevis,  W.  I.,  9  Feb.,  1799,  receiving
a  silver  medal  and  vote  of  thanks  to  Capt.  Trux-
tun  and  his  officers  for  this  capture.  He  took  the
"  Insurgente  "  to  port  and  suppressed  an  attempt
of  the  captured  crew  to  rise  against  his  prize  crew
of  eleven  men.  Obtaining  leave,  he  bought  a  ves-
sel and  sailed  to  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  saved
many  lives  in  an  insurrection  of  slaves.  He  was
promoted  to  captain,  5  March.  1799,  and  in  March,
1801,  carried  despatches  to  France.  He  was  as-
signed the  "John  Adams"  in  1802,  sailed  to  Trip-
oli, and  in  May,  1803,  captured  the  Moorish  ship
"  Meshonda"  in  an  attempt  to  run  the  blockade.
On  21  July,  1803,  he  destroyed  a  Tripolitan  corsair,
after  engagement  with  nine  gun-boats,  in  which
the  "  Enterprise  "  co-operated.  He  returned  home
in  December,  1803,  but  in  July,  1804,  again  sailed
to  Tripoli  in  command  of  the  "Congress,"  joining
the  souadron  under  Com.  Barron,  whom  he  suc-
ceeded in  command  on  22  May,  1805.  Rodgers
continued  the  oiwrations,  and  on  3  June,  1805,  ob-
tained a  treaty  with  Tripoli  abolishing  the  tribute


RODOERS


RODOKItS


297


that  hud  been  exacted  of  European  powers  and
forbiddinj;  t^lavery  of  Christ  ian  captives.  In  Sep-
toinlHT,  IHOT).  he  c<iiniM'lle<l  the  Im'V  of  Tunis  to
«ijfn  a  similar  tn'afy,  after  which  he  returned  home.
He  was  then  in  charpe  of  pun-l>oHts  at  New  York
until  1H<M).  From  February.  IMOtt.  till  1H12  I^Hl-
gers  commanded  the  home  s4]ua«lron,  cruising  on
the  Atlantic  coast  to  prevent  impressment  of
Americans  by  Ilritish  cruisers.  At  8  p.  M.,  on  Ifl
May.  IHll.  in  his  fla|;-ship.  the  "President,"  near
New  York,  he  haiUnl  a  strange  vessel,  who  repeAte<l
the  hail  and  Hnnl  a  gun,  the  shot  from  which  struck
the  "  President's  "  nmiii-mast.  The  shot  was  an-
swered and  sevenil  bntmlsides  were  exchanged,
which  demonstrated  the  stranger's  inferiority.
At  daylight  Koilgers  lioardetl  the  cripple<l  vessel,
which  wjLs  the  Kritish  ship  "  Little  licit,"  whose
captain  di-cliniMl  assistance.  This  epistxie  widened
the  bri'ach  l»etween  the  countries,  and  contra-
dictory re|)orts  were  maiie,  but  a  regidar  court  ac-
quitted Ko<lgers  of  all  blame.  The  British  made
no  investigation.  Three  davs  after  the  declaration
of  war  in  1812  he  saile<l  in  the  "  President."  in
command  of  a  squatlron.  to  intercept  the  British
West  India  fleet,  an«l  on  23  June.  1815,  he  met  the
British  frigate  "  Bel videra,"  which  escape<l  after
a  nuining  fight  of  eight  hours.  Rcxlgers  was
wounded  in  the  engagement  by  the  bursting  of  a
gun  on  the  "  President."  The  captain  himself  fired
the  first  gun — the  first  shot  in  the  war.  He  made
four  cruises,  searching  for  British  men-of-war,  in
the  "  President,"  and  on  the  third  visited  Irish
channel,  capturing  twelve  vessels,  including  the
"Highflyer.'  His  prizes  numl)ere«l  twenty-three
In  all.  and  applause  and  honors  greeted  his  return.
In  June,  1814,  he  went  to  assist  in  the  defence  of
Baltimore,  where  he  rendered  valuable  service  in
command  of  the  sailors  and  marines  that,  co-oper-
ating with  the  military,  defeated  the  British  in  the
battle  of  North  Point  and  the  attack  on  Fort
McIIenrv.  The  naval  forces  under  Ro<lgers  de-
fended tlie  water  battery,  the  auxiliary  forts  Cov-
ingtfin  and  Babcock,  and  the  barges  of  the  naval
flotilla.  At  a  critical  moment  several  vessels  wei-o
sunk  in  the  chanpel  to  prevent  the  larger  British
frigates  from  passing.  After  the  war  he  dwlined
the  office  of  secretary  of  the  navy,  but  was  aj>-
pointe<l  presidentof  the  naval  commissioners,  which
office  he  held  from  1815  till  18:{7,  except  for  the
years  1824-'7,  when  he  commanded  the  Me<liter-
ranean  squmlron.  His  father's  male  descendants
are  numerous,  and,  as  a  rule,  have  entered  the  army
or  navv.  —  His  son,  John,  naval  ofliccr,  b.  in
Harford  county,  Md,,  8  Aug.,  1812;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, I).  C,  5  Mav,  1882,  entereil  the  navy  as
midshipman,  18  April,  1828,  servwl  in  the  "Con-
stellation" in  the  Mediterranean  in  1829-'32,  at-
tend«^l  the  naval  school  at  Norfolk  in  1832-'4,  and
became  passed  midshipman  in  the  last-named  vear.
After  a  j'ear's  leave,  during  which  he  attende*!  the
University  of  Virginia,  he  was  in  the  brig  "  Dol-
phin," on  the  Brazil  station,  in  1830-'9,  and  com-
manded the  s<'hfM>ner  "Wave"  on  the  coast  of
Florida  in  18139.  He  was  commissione<l  lieutenant,
22  Jan.,  1840,  had  charge  of  the  schooner  "Jeffer-
son "  in  8tir>*eying  the  Florida  Keys,  and  in  hos-
tilities with  the  Seminoles  in  1840-'3,  and  was
again  surveying  on  the  coast  of  Florida  in  1849-'52,
Ine  charts  and  sailing  directions  for  this  coast
bear  witness  to  his  faithful  work.  He  commandtHl
the  steamer  "John  Hancock"  and  the  U,  S,  sur-
vering  and  exploring  ex|>e<lition  in  the  North  Pa-
cific and  China  seas  m  IKVi-'S.  In  April.  1855,  he
took  the  "  Vincepnes"  into  the  Arctic  ocean,  and
obtained  valuable  commercial  and  scientifio  in-


formation. He  WM  commiffiioned  commander,  14
S<'pt.,  1855.  and  continuinl  on  K[>e<-ial  duty  in  con-
nection with  the  re|M>rt  of  the  exploring  ex|tedition.
In  18«n  he  was  among  the  first  to  ank  for  dutr  in
the  civil  war.  and  in  May.  18<J1.  was  orden-«i  to
sujH'rintend  the  building  df  the  "  Ih-nton  "  clam  of
western  river  iron-clails.  In  Novemljcr  he  joined
the  ex|KyIition  to  Port  Royal,  where  he  hoisted  the
flag  on  Fort  Walker  after  the  engagement.  In
May,  18(J2,  he  commande<l  an  ex[ie4litii>n  In  James
river,  leading  in  the  attack  on  Fort  I)arling.  15
May.  1802.  during  which  his  ve«s<-l,  the  "Galena,"
an  inm-dad  steamer,  was  hit  129  times,  two  thirds
of  his  crew  were  killed  or  wounded,  and  all  his  am-
munition was  expende<l,  when  he  withdrew.  lie  was
commissi(med  ca[>tain.  16  July.  1862.  and  in  1868
saiknl  in  command  of  the  monitor  "  Weehawken"
from  New  York,  encoimtering  a  heavy  rale  off
the  Delaware  breakwater,  wh<-re  he  dechned  to
take  refuge  hiecause  he  wished  to  test  the  s«-a-going
oualities  of  monitors.  On  17  June,  18«W,  he  fought
tne  powerful  Confe<lerate  iron-cla<l  "Atlanta,"
which  he  captured,  after  an  engagement  of  fifteen
minutes,  in  War-
saw sound,  Ga.,
during  which
the  "  Weehawk-
en "  fired  only
five  shots.  Con-
gress gave  him
a  formal  vote  of
thanks  for  his
"eminent  zeal
and  ability."  and
he  was  promoted
to  commodore
from  17  June,
186:3.  the  date  of
his  victory.  He
commandinl  the
monitor  "  Dicta-
tor" in  1864-'5,
on  special  ser-
vice. In  1866  he
to<ik  the  double-
turret  monitor  "  Monadnock  "  through  the  Straits
of  Magellan  to  San  Francisco.  He  stopped  at  Val-
paraiso just  befon?  its  iKtmbardment  by  the  Sjxan-
ish,  which,  ^th  Gen.  Kilpatrick.  the  L'.  S.  min-
ister, he  strove  to  prevent.  He  proposed  joint
arme<l  interference  to  the  English  admiral,  but  the
latter  refuse<l  to  co-operate.  These  negotiations
added  to  his  reputation  as  a  diplomatist.  He
had  charge  of  the  B<iston  navy-yard  in  1866-'9,
was  commissioned  rear-admiral.  31  Det!..  1869.  and
commandetl  the  Asiatic  fleet  in  1870- '2.  when  he
rendered  great  service  by  suppressing  outrages  on
American  commen-e  by  the  Coreans.  Admiral
Rtnlgers  was  commandant  of  Man»  island  navy-
vartl,  Cal.,  in  187;3-'7.  and  siii)crintendeiit  of  the
IJ.  S.  naval  ol)servatory  at  Wasnington  from  1  May,

1877,  until  his  death.  His  services  at  the  ol»serva-
torv  contributed  to  the  mlvancemetit  of  science,
and  under  his  administnition  Prof,  .\saph  Hall
discovered  the  mo<ins  of  Mars.  Admiral  Rtnlgers
was  also  successful  in  his  efforts  to  have  a  new
site  selecte<l  for  a  future  observat<ir>'.  He  waa
president  of  the  transit  of  Venus  commission.  In
1803  he  had  lx?en  one  of  the  fifty  coqH>rate  mem-
bers of  the  National  iwademy  of  sciences  that
were  named  bv  coni;ress  in  that  year. On  23  June,

1878,  he  was  elected  to  succe«'d  Pn»f.  Joseph  Henry
u»  chairman  of  the  light-hous(>  iMuinl.  and  |>er-
sonally  superintended  and  ^uirtieipated  in  experi-
ments in  optics  and  acoustics  to  improve  the  ser-


^y/Ti^  /cJ^


C^C^


298


RODGERS


RODMAN


vice.  His  able  counsels  were  in  constant  demand
on  advisory  lK)ards,  especially  for  reconstructing
the  navy,  and  for  the  "  Jeannette  "  relief  expedition,
for  which  his  personal  knowledge  of  the  Polar  sea
was  valuable.  See  a  memoir  by  Prof.  J.  Russell
Soley,  U.  S.  navy  (printed  privately,  Annapolis,
1882). — The  first  John's  brother,  tjeoi^e  Wash-
inrton,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Harford  county,  Md.,  22
Feb.,  1787;  d.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  South  America,  21
May.  1832.  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  2
April,  1804,  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  24  April,
1810,  and  served  in  the  sloop  "  Wasp"  in  the  cap-
ture of  the  "  Frolic,"  18  Oct.,  1812,  for  which  he
was  included  in  a  vote  of  thanks  by  congress,  and
received  a  silver  medal.  He  commanded  the  brig
"  Firefly"  in  the  Algerine  war  in  1815,  was  com-
missioned master-commandant,  27  April,  1816,  and
had  charge  of  the  ship  "Peacock"  ni  1816-'18  in
the  Mediterranean.  lie  was  commissioned  cap-
tain, 3  March,  1825,  was  on  the  board  of  examiners
in  1828-'30,  and  at  his  death  was  commodore  com-
manding the  Brazil  squadron.  His  wife,  Anna
Maria,  sister  to  Com.  Perry,  d.  in  New  London,
Conn.,  7  Dec,  1858,  aged  sixty.— Their  son,  Chris-
topher Raymond  Perry,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  14  Nov.,  1819,  was  appointed  a
midshipnuin  on  5  Oct.,  1833,  and  while  serving  on
the  schooner  "Flirt"  in  1839  and  in  command
of  the  schooner  "Phoenix"  in  1840-'l,  was  active-
ly engaged  in  the
Seminole  war.  He
was  promoted  lieu-
tenant on  4  Sept.,
1844,  was  engaged
in  blockading  the
coast  of  Mexico  in
1847,  and  was  in  the
trenches  at  the  siege
of  Vera  Cruz  and
the  capture  of  Ta-
basco and  Tuspan.
In  1856-'7  he  com-
manded the  steamer
"  Bibb "  and  the
schooner  "Gallatin"
in  the  coast  sur-
vey. He  was  com-
missioned as  com-
mander on  15  Oct.,
1861,  and  served  with  distinction  on  the  "  Wabash,"
and  as  fleet-captain  of  Rear-Admiral  Samuel  F.
Du  Pont's  fleet  at  the  battle  of  Port  Royal  and  in
command  of  the  naval  force  in  the  trenches  at  the
capture  of  Fort  Pulaski.  He  directed  the  move-
ments of  a  fleet  of  gun-boats  that  was  engaged  in
occupying  strategic  points  on  the  coast  south  of
Port  Royal,  commanding  an  expedition  to  St.
Augustine  and  up  St.  Mary's  river  in  March,  1862,
and  was  fleet-captain  in  the  "  New  Ironsides "  in
the  attack  of  7  April,  1863,  on  the  defences  of
Charleston  and  in  the  subsequent  operations  of
the  South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  till  in  the
autumn  of  1863  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of
the  steam  sloop  "  Iroquois,"  in  which  he  was  em-

Eloyed  on  special  service  till  the  end  of  the  war.
[e  was  commissioned  as  captain  on  25  July,  1866,
commanded  the  "Franklin'  in  the  Mediterranean
in  1868-'70,  became  a  commodore  on  28  Aug.,
1870,  was  on  special  service  in  Europe  in  1871,
then  chief  of  tne  bureau  of  yards  and  docks  till
1874,  was  commissioned  as  rear-admiral  on  14
June,  1874,  and  was  superintendent  of  the  naval
academy,  except  in  1878-'80.  when  he  commanded
the  naval  forces  in  the  Pacific,  until  on  14  Nov.,
1881,  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list. Rear-


/^./^,.P./Z</'cL^^Ut^


Admiral  Rodgers  presided  over  the  international
conference  at  W^ashington  in  1885  for  the  purpose
of  fixing  a  prime  meridian  and  universal  day. —
Another  son,  (ieorffc  Washingrton,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  30  Oct.,  1822;  d.  oflf  Charles-
ton harbor,  S.  C,  17  Aug.,  1863,  entered  the  navy
as  midshipman,  30  April,  1836,  became  i)assed  mid-
shipman, 1  July,  1842,  and  was  in  the  steamer  "Col.
Harney  "  and  the  frigate  "  John  Adams "  during
the  Mexican  war,  at  Vera  Cruz,  Tuspan,  Alvarado,
and  other  points  on  the  Gulf  coast,  where  he  served
as  acting  master  from  4  Nov.,  1846.  He  was  on
the  U.  S.  coast  sun-ey  in  1849-'50,  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant,  4  June,  1850,  cruised  in  the
"  Germantown  "  on  the  home  station  in  1851-'3,
and  was  at  the  naval  academy  in  1861-2.  In
April,  1861,  he  saved  the  "Constitution"  from  a
threatened  attack  by  secessionists  at  Annapolis,
and  took  the  naval  academy  to  Newport,  R.  I.  He
was  commissioned  commander,  16  Jan.,  1862,  and
in  October  commanded  the  monitor  "  Catskill,"  in
which  he  participated  in  the  attacks  on  Charles-
ton. On  7  April,  1863,  he  impetuously  took  her
almost  under  the  walls  of  Fort  Sumter.  Admiral
Dahlgren  appointed  him  chief  of  staff,  4  July,
1863,  and,  still  commanding  the  "  Catskill,"  He
was  distinguished  by  the  cool  and  deliberate  man-
ner in  which  he  fought  his  ship.  In  the  attack  on
Fort  Wagner,  17  Aug.,  1863,  he  took  command
of  his  vessel  as  usual,  and  while  in  the  pilot-house
he  was  instantly  killed  by  a  shot  that  struck  the
top  of  the  house  and  broke  it  in.  It  was  of  Com-
mander Rodgers  that  Miles  O'Reilly  wrote  one  of
his  most  admired  stanzas :

"  Ah  me  !  George  Rodgers  lies
With  dim  and  dreamless  eyes,
He  has  airly  won  the  prize
Of  the  sthriped  and  starry  shroud."
RODMAN,  Isaac  Peace,  soldier,  b.  in  South
Kingston,  K.  I.,  18  Aug.,  1822;  d.  in  Sharpsburg,
Md.,  30  Sept.,  1862. He  received  a  comnjon^school
education,  entered  into  partnership  with  his  father,
and  became  a  prominent  woollen-manufacturer.
He  sat  in  both  houses  of  the  legislature  for  several
terms. At  the  first  call  for  troops  in  1861  he
raised  a  company,  which  was  incorporated  in  the
2d  Rhode  Island  regiment,  and  was  engaged  at
Bull  Run. For  gallantry  in  that  action  he  was
made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th  Rhode  Island
volunteers,  25  Oct.,  1861,  and  soon  afterward  was

1)romoted  colonel.  He  served  with  great  credit  at
ioanoke  island  and  New  Berne,  and  in  the  capture
of  Fort  Macon,  and  in  July,  1862,  was  commis-
sioned as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  to  date
from  28  April.  At  the  Antietam  he  commanded
the  3d  division  of  the  9th  corps,  and  was  mortally
wounded  while  leading  a  charge.

RODMAN,  Thomas  Jefferson,  soldier,  b.  in
Salem,  Ind.,  30  July,  1815 ;  d.  in  Rock  Island,  III,  7
June,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1841,  assigned  to  the  ordnance  de-
partment, and  served  at  Alleghany  arsenal  till  1848,
going  to  Richmond,  Va.^  in  1845  to  prepare  machin-
ery for  testing  gun-metal  and  supervise  the  manu-
facture of  cannon,  and  to  Boston  in  September,
1846,  for  the  purpose  of  experimenting  with  Col.
George  Bomford's  columbiads  of  12-inch  calibre.
He  invented  a  method  of  casting  guns  on  a  hollow
core,  through  which  a  stream  of  cold  water  is  kept
running,  greatly  improving  their  tenacity.  In  1847
he  supervised  the  manufacture  of  columbiads  on
this  system  at  Pittsburg,  Pa  During  the  Mexican
war  he  served  as  ordnance  officer  at  tfamargo  and
Point  Isabel  depots.  Returning  to  Alleghany  ar-
senal, he  continued  his  experiments. lie  was  in


RODNEY


RODNEY


command  of  the  anienal  in  18A4,  ami  of  the  one  at
Itaton  Koujre.  Im.,  in  IHWfi.  Althmijfh  coluin-
l>ia<is  mn«lt«  liy  his  inrthcMi  sh<)wt><l  ^jronttT  |M»Wfr  of
resistunec  ttian  IIjom*  that  wt-re  c*st  solid,  yt't  tliey
failed  iuuUt  Ht'vore  testn,  an«l.  a«  the  rt'sull  of  a
8orit'j»of  i»x|K'rimcntsat  Pittsburg  in  IH.'itJ,  he  recom-
mvndod  that  no  more  guns  of  large  calihre  should
\ki  ma<le  of  that  |>attt'rn.  In  lH.57-'8  he  exi»eri-
montwl  with  a  pri'ssun'-gaufje  of  his  invention,  con-
sisting of  a  piston  working  in  a  hole  l)on*<l  into  the
wall  of  a  gun  and  a^-ting  on  an  indenting  tool,  for
the  puriMiM'  of  determining  the  pressure  in  the
bore  at  difTen'nt  |H)ints.  lie  devise«l  a  new  form  of
cohunbiad  which  wjis  determined  «>n  the  hypothesis
that  the  pressure  is  inversely  as  the  stpiare  root  of
the  sjiace  behind  the  shot.  Yhe  first  15-inch  Hod-
man gun  was completeil  in  May,  1H(K).  In  the  trials,
manmioth  (or  very  large-grained)  iM)wder.  and  [>ow-
der  in  jterforate*!  cakes,  were  als4i  teste<l.  and  in  the
following  year  the  mammoth  jjowder  whs  adopted
for  heavy  ordnance.  Tlie  j)erf()ratiMl  cake  powder
for  rifletl  cannon  of  large  calibre  was  at  once
8<lopted  by  the  Itussian  government,  which  ob-
taincil  specimens  from  Fortress  Monroe  in  18G0.
and  soon  afterward  came  into  use  in  Prussia,  and
more  recently  the  military  authorities  in  England
decided  on  using  the  mammoth  powder,  there
called  pebble  powder,  in  their  big  rifled  guns.
K(Mlman,  who  had  reuchwl  the  grade  of  ca[)tain  of
ordnance  on  1  July,  18.55.  and  w»is  nnmioted  major
on  1  June,  18<W,  was  in  command  of  Watertown
arsenal  during  the  civil  war,  beinjj  detached  at  in-
tervals for  various  services,  especially  to  supervise
the  manufacture  and  trials  of  12-inch  rifled  and
20-inch  sm<x)th-bore  cannon.  Many  13-  and  15-inch
Rodman  guns  were  made  during  the  war  for  the
monitors  and  the  forts  along  the  CH)ast.  The  meth-
od of  casting  ai>out  a  hollow  core  and  cooling  the
metal  from  the  inside  was  applied  to  shells  as  well
as  to  cannon,  and  from  27  Sept.,  1804,  he  was  en-
gaged in  supervising  the  manufacture  of  onlnance
aiui  projectiles  by  this  methcxl.  He  originated  the
idea  of  making  heavy  guns  without  pre|)onderance
at  the  breech,  on  which  nlan  all  the  heavy  cjLst-iron
cannon  were  subsecjuently  constructctl  in  the  Unit-
ed States.  In  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  lieu-
tenant-colonel, colonel,  and  brigadier-general  for
his  services  in  the  onlnance  department.  He  was
placed  in  command  at  lUx-k  Island  on  4  Aug.,  1865,
and  j)romoted  lieutenant-colonel  on  7  March,  1867,
8erve<l  on  various  boards  for  testing  inventions  in
fire-arms,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  engaged
in  completing  the  arsenal  at  Rock  Island,  which
was  constructiHl  at  his  suggestion  and  under  his
superintendence.

RODNEY,  t'aB.»tar,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
IndejH'ndeiice,  b.  in  Dover,  Del.,  7  Oct..  1728;  d.
there,  21)  June,  1784.  An  old  family  manuscript
says:  "It  hath  lx»en  a  const^mt  tnuiition  that  we
came  into  England  with  Maud,  the  empress,  from
foreien  parts;  and  that  for  service  done  by  Hmle-
ney,  in  her  wars  against  King  Stephen,  the  usurper,
she  gave  them  land  within  this  kingdom."  A
{Hiinted  monument  in  the  village  of  K<MVney-Stoke,
S<mierset  co.,  Ix-ars  the  arms  of  this  family. His

f:randfather,  William  R<Hlney  (1(W>2-1708),  came
roin  Bristol,  England,  to  Philadelphia  soon  after
William  Penn  had  settled  Pennsylvania,  located  at
Ijewes  on  the  Delaware,  where  in  UWl)  he  waselect-
e«l  sheriff  of  Sussex  county,  and  removed  to  Dover,
Kent  CO.,  Del.,  when*  he  held  lo«-al  ofllces.  In
16!»H-*9  he  was  a  memU'r  of  the  assi-mbly  and  again
in  17t)(>-'4.  wrving  as  siH'aker  in  the  last  year,  when
he  was  made  justice  of  the  peace.  In  16y8-'U  he
was  a  member  of  William  Penn's  council,  and  in


1707  WHM  a[)i>oint«d  justice  of  Now  Cutle.  Cmtmr
inherit«Hl  a  large  estate  fmm  his  father,  C'a>Mr
(1707-'45).  In  1755- '8  he  wh.h  high  sheriff  of  Kent
county,  and  at  the  expiratloD  of  his  term  be  was
mailo  a  justice  of  the
[H'tu'e  and  judge  of
all  the  lower  courts.
In  1756  he  was  a  ca[>-
tain  in  the  county
militia.  In  1751)  he
was  a  sufH-rintendent
for  the  printing  of
£27.000  of  Delaware
currency,  and  commis-
sioner for  the  8up[K)rt
of  a  company  raise<l
forthe  French  and  In-
dian war.  In  IWi-'H
he  represented  Kent
county  in  the  assem-
bly, was  reconler  in
1 764,  and  just  ice  of  the
p<»ace  in  1764-'6.  In
1765  he  was  sent  as  a
delegate  to  the  stamr>-
act  congress  at  New  York,  and  on  the  rei)eal  of  that
act  he  was  one  of  three  commissioners  that  were
apiKuntwl  by  the  legislature  of  Delaware  to  frame
an  address  of  thanks  to  the  king.  In  1766  he  was
made  register  of  bills,  and  in  1767,  when  the  tea-
act  was  pn)posed  by  the  British  {parliament,  the
Delaware  assembly  appointed  him.  with  Thomas
McKean  and  George  neatl,  to  formulate  a  second
address  to  the  king,  in  which  armitl  resistance  to
tyranny  was  foreshadowed.  In  1761)  he  was  super-
intendent of  the  loan  office,  and  from  1761)  till  1773
was  an  associate  justice.  In  1770  he  was  clerk  of
the  peace,  an<l  in  1770-'4  Detlimus  potestatimus.
In  1772  he  was  a  wmimissioner  to  ennrt  the  state-
house  and  other  public  buildings  in  Dover.  A  bill
having  been  introduced  into  the  cf>lonial  assembly
for  the  l)etter  regulation  of  slaves,  Mr.  RtHlney
warmly  supfx)rted  a  motion  that  the  bill  l)e  .so
amended  as  to  prohibit  the  importation  of  slaves
into  the  province.  The  amendment  was  negatived
by  only  two  votes.  When  fresh  aggressions  of  the
British  ministry  disap|H>inted  the  ex|x'ctations  of
the  colonists,  Mr.  luxlney  and  his  former  col-
leagues were  assignwl  the  task  of  presenting  the
complaints  of  the  freemen  of  Delaware  to  the  sov-
ereign. These  pacific  measures  failing  to  secure  a
redress  of  grievances,  the  colonies  cntennl  into  a
corres{K»ndence  reganling  their  common  defence.
Mr.  Rodnev  i)ecame  chairman  of  the  committee  of
safety  of  Delaware,  and  in  1774.  meetings  of  the
people  having  l)een  held  at  New  Castle  and  Dover
to  uemand  the  assembling  of  a  convention,  he
issued  a  call  as  spi'aker  of  the  assembly  for  the
representatives  of  the  neople  to  meet  at  New  Castle
on  1  Aug.  He  was  chosen  chairman  of  the  con-
vention, and  was  elected  a  delegate  to  the  Conti-
nental congress,  in  which  he  was  a  member  of  the
general  committee  to  make  a  statement  of  the
rights  and  grievances  of  the  ctdonists.  In  Mareh,
1775.  he  was  again  elected  to  congress  after  the
a.sseinbly,  by  a  unanimous  vote,  hatl  approved  of
his  action,  and  that  of  his  colleagues,  at  the  Ist
congn*ss.  In  May  he  wa.s  apiH>inted  a  colonel,  and
in  September  he  Ufame  briga<lier-genenil.  of  lK>la-
ware  militia.  In  1776  he  was  alteniately  in  his
seat  in  ct)ngress,  and  at  work  in  Delaware,  stimu-
lating the  jttitriots  and  repressing  the  royalists.
When  the  question  of  inde|H>inleiice  was  intn'xluced
in  ctmgress.  Mr.  Rodney,  having  obtained  lea%-e  of
absence,  went  through  the  soutnem  part  of  Dela-


300


RODNEY


RODNEY


ware  preparing:  the  people  for  a  change  of  govern-
ment. I  lis  colleagues,  Thomas  McKean  and  George
Read,  were  divided  on  the  question,  and  the  former,
knowing  Rodney  to  be  favorable  to  the  declaration,
urged  him  by  special  message  to  hasten  his  return.
He  did  so,  and  V)v  great  exertion  arrived  just  in
season  for  the  final  discussion.  His  affirmative  vote
secured  the  consent  of  the  Delaware  delegation  to
the  measure,  and  thus  effected  that  unanimity
among  the  colonies  that  was  so  essential  to  the
cause  of  independence.  The  opposition  of  the  roy-
alists, who  abounded  in  the  lower  counties,  pre-
vented his  election  the  succeeding  year ;  but  as  a
member  of  the  councils  of  safety  and  inspection  he
displayed  great  activity  in  collecting  supplies  for
the  troops  of  the  state  that  were  then  with  Wash-
ington in  Morristown,  N.  J.  He  went  to  Trenton,
where  Lord  Stirling  made  him  post  commandant,
and  then  to  Morristown,  but,  by  Washington's
permission,  he  returned  home  in  February,  1777.
He  refused  the  appointment  as  a  judge  of  the  su-
preme court,  organized  in  February,  1777,  and  on
5  June,  1777,  was  chosen  judge  of  admiralty,  but
retained  his  military  office,  suppressed  an  insurrec-
tion against  the  government  in  Sussex  county,  and
when,  in  August,  the  British  advanced  into  Dela-
ware, he  collected  troops,  and,  by  direction  of  Gen.
Washington,  placed  himself  south  of  the  main
army  to  watch  the  movements  of  the  British  at  the
head  of  Elk  river,  Md.,  and,  if  possible,  to  cut  them
off  from  their  fleet.  During  this  period  he  was  in
correspondence  with  Gen.  Washington,  with  whom
he  had  long  been  on  terms  of  friendly  intimacy.
In  September  he  became  major-general  of  militia,
and  in  December  he  was  again  elected  to  congress ;
but  he  did  not  take  his  seat,  as  in  the  mean  time
he  had  been  elected  president  of  Delaware,  which
office  he  held  for  four  years,  till  January,  1782,
when  he  declined  re-election.  He  was  then  chosen
to  congress,  and  again  in  1783,  but  did  not  take  his
seat.  He  had  been  suffering  for  many  years  from
a  cancer  on  the  face,  which  ultimately  caused  his
death.  As  a  public  man  he  displayed  great  integ-
rity and  elevation  of  character,  and,  though  a  firm
Whig,  never  failed  in  the  duties  of  humanity  toward
those  that  suffered  for  adhering  to  opinions  that
differed from his  own.  —  His  brother,  Thomas,

i'urist,  b.  in  Sussex  county,  Del.,  4  June,  1744;  d.  in
lodney,  Mis.s.,  2  Jan.,  1811,  was  a  justice  of  the
peace  in  1770  and  again  in  1784,  a  member  of  the
assembly  in  1774  to  elect  delegates  to  the  first  Con-
stitutional congress,  and  in  1775  a  member  of  the
council  of  safetv.  He  was  colonel  of  the  Delaware
militia  and  rendered  important  services  to  the  Con-
tinental army  during  the  Revolutionary  war. In

1778  he  was  chief  justice  of  Kent  county  court,  in

1779  register  of  bills,  and  was  a  delegate  from
Delaware  to  the  Continental  congress  in  1781-'3
and  in  1785-'7.  In  1787  he  was  made  speaker  of
the  assembly,  and  in  1802  was  appointed  superin-
tendent of  the  Kent  county  almshouse  and  Dedi-
mus  potestatimus.  He  was  appointed  in  1803  U.  S.
judge  for  the  territory  of  Mississippi,  and  became  a
land-owner  in  Jefferson  county,  where  the  town  of
Rodney  was  named  in  his  honor. — Thomas's  son,
Caesar  Augustus,  statesman,  b.  in  Dover,  Del.,  4
Jan.,  1772;  d.  in  Buenos  Avres,  South  America,  10
June,  1824,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1789,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the'  bar  in  1793,  and  practised  at  Wilmington,
Del.  He  was  elected  to  congress  from  Delaware  as
a  Democrat,  serving  from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  3  March,
1805,  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  ways  and
means,  and  one  of  the  managers  in  the  impeach-
ment of  Judge  Samuel  Chase. In  1807  he  was  ap-


pointed by  President  Jefferson  attorney-general  of
the  United  Slates,  which  place  he  resigned  in  1811.
During  the  war  with  Great  Britain  in  1812  he  com-
manded a  rifle  corps  in  Wilmington  which  was
afterward  changed  to  a  light  artillery  company,
which  did  good  service  on  the  frontiers  of  Canada,
In  1813  he  was  a  member  of  the  Delaware  commit-
tee of  safety.  He  was  defeated  for  congress  and  in
1815  was  state  senator  from  New  Castle  county.
In  1817  he  was  sent  to  South  America  by  President
Monroe  as  one  of  the  commissioners  to  investigate
and  report  upon  the  propriety  of  recognizing  the
independence  of  the  Spanish-Americaa  republics,
whicn  course  he  strongly  advocated  on  his  return
to  Washington.  In  1820  he  was  re-elected  to  con-
gress, and  in  1822  he  became  a  member  of  the  U.  S.
senate,  being  the  first  Democrat  that  had  a  seat  in
that  body  from  Delaware. He  served  till  27  Jan.,

1823,  when  he  was  appointerl  minister  to  the  United
provinces  of  La  Plata.  With  John  Graham  he  pub-
lished "  Reports  on  the  Present  State  of  the  United
Provinces  of  South  America"  (London,  1819).

RODNEY,  Daniel,  senator,  b.  in  Delaware  in
1764:  d.  there,  2  Sept.,  1846.  He  was  the  great-
grandson  of  William  Rodney,  the  first  of  the  fam-
ily to  come  to  this  country,  and  a  second  cousin
of  Caesar  Augustus  Rodney.  He  was  a  presiden-
tial elector  in  1809,  and  governor  of  Delaware  in
1814-'17.  He  received  the  electoral  vote  of  that
state  for  vice-president  in  1821.  was  elected  to
congress,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1822,  till  3  March,

1824.  He  was  appointed  United  States  senator
from  Delaware,  to  fill  the  uncompleted  term  of
Nicholas  Van  Dvke,  deceased,  and  served  from  4
Dec,  1826.  till  23  Jan.,  1827.

RODNEY,  George  Brydges,  Baron,  English
naval  officer,  b.  in  Walton-upon-Thames,  Surrey,
19  Feb.,  1718;  d.  in  London,  21  May,  1792.  At
the  age  of  twelve  he  left  Harrow  school  and  en-
tered the  navy,  becoming
a  lieutenant  in  1739,  cap-
tain in  1742.  and  in  1748
governor  and  command-
er-in-chief of  the  station
of  Newfoundland.  On
his  return  to  England  in
1752  he  was  elected  to
parliament  for  Saltash,
and  he  was  promoted  rear-
admiral  in  1759,  and  ap-
pointed in  1761  com-
mander-in-chief of  Bar-
bad  oes  and  the  Wind-
ward islands,  capturing
St.  Pierre.  Grenada,  and
St.  Lucia.  He  was  pro-
moted vice-admiral  in  the
following  year,  created  a
baronet  in  1764,  appoint-
ed master  of  Greenwich
hospital  in  1765,  and  re-
turned to  parliament  for  Northampton  in  1768.
He  resigned  his  governorship  of  Greenwich  in  1771,
on  being  appointed  commander-in-chief  at  Jamaica,
which  post  he  held  till  1774,  when  he  returned  to
England,  but,  failing  to  make  arrangements  with
his  creditors,  he  sought  refuge  from  them  in
France.  Obtaining  money  to  pay  his  debts,  he  re-
turned to  England  in  1779,  was  promoted  admiral,
and  when  Spain  joined  France  in  the  war  against
England  he  .sailed  to  the  West  Indies  as  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  station,  with  a  fleet  of
twenty-two  ships-of-the-line  and  eighKrigates.  On
16  Jan.,  1780,  off  Cape  St.  Vincent  he  fell  in  with
a  Spanish  division  of  eleven  ships  and  two  frigates


RODRIGUEZ


RODRIOUra


301


under  Juan  do  Sangnra,  and  after  an  olwtinate
action  nipturt'd  flvp  v»!swls  and  destroyed  two.
After  n>lievin>;  Oihndtar  and  Minon-a,  he  sjiileil
a>;Hin  for  this  count rv,  and  met  the  French  flin-t.
under  Count  de  (Juii-hen,  near  Martinique,  15  and
17  April.  Althou);h  no  gnnural  liattle  was  fought,
he  broke  through  the  enemy's  line  and  wiw  re-
wanled  by  pnrlinnient  with  a  vote  r>f  thanks  and
a  p«'Msion  of  i,'2,0(M).  Me  was  elected  to  [xirlianient
for  Westminster,  creat^Ml  n  K.  H..  and  in  IhrcniU'r,
ITHO,  made  an  unsuccessful  Htta<-k  on  St.  Vincent,
but  in  17M1  captunnl  the  Dutch  colonies  of  St.
Kustatius,  Demerani,  Kss«»quilK(,  and  B<'rbice.  Re-
tuminjr  to  Knj^lund  in  the  autumn  of  1781,  he  was
appointed  vicf-mlmiral  of  England,  and  assigned
to  command  in  the  West  Indies.  In  April.  17H2,
he  met,  in  the  channel  of  Dominica,  with  Count
<Io  Grasse,  who  was  escorting  a  convoy  of  150  sail
that  carried  an  invH4ling  army  to  Jamaica.  t)n  U
April  a  partial  engagement  was  fought,  and  on  12
April,  Ro<lney,  having  the  advantage  of  the  wind,
attiu-kcil  the  French.  The  battle  lasted  nearly
twelve  hours,  and  was  one  of  the  most  obstinate
that  was  ever  fought  in  those  waters.  As  Vau-
dreiiil's  division  was  unable,  on  account  of  the
wind,  to  co-operate  in  the  action,  and  De  Grasse's
flag-ship  wius  sinking,  the  latter  was  comfH'lled  to
lower  his  flag,  the  French  losing  seven  ships  and
two  frigates,  and  the  English  three  vessels.  Vau-
dreuil  abandonwl  theexpetlition  to  Jamaica,  owing
to  subsequent  onlers,  ana  a  truce  was  signed,  which
led  to  the  |)eace  of  1785i,  The  Whigs,  who  had
meanwhile  come  into  ofTice,  had  despatched.  l)efore
the  victory  was  known,  an  ofllcer  to  suj)ersede
RiKlney,  who  arrivc<l  in  England,  21  Sept.,  1782.
He  was  greeted  with  enthusiasm,  elevated  to  the
peenige  as  Baron  Rodney,  and  received  an  addi-
tional pension  of  £2,000,  made  revertible  to  his
heirs.  Owing  to  infirmities,  he  retired  from  active
service.  Jamaica,  which  he  saved,  voted  £1.000
for  the  erection  of  a  monument  over  his  grave,  and
his  portrait,  by  Sir  Joshua  Revnolds,  is  at  Green-
wich. Rotlney's  son-in-law.  Gen.  Godfrey  liasil
Mundv,  published  "Life  and  Correspondence  of
Lonl  l{<>(lnev  "  (2  vols..  London,  IHJiO).

RODRK.VKZ,  Cayetano  Jo86  (ro-dre-ffeth ),
Argentine  clergyman,  b.  in  Rincon  de  San  I'edro
in  1761 ;  d.  in  fiuenos  Ayres,  21  Jan.,  1823,  He
entered  the  Franciscan  onler  in  1777,  and  was  or-
dained priest  in  178;J.  During  twenty  years  he
was  director  of  the  convents  of  Santa  Catalina  and
Santa  Clara,  and  he  also  taught  {)hilosophy  and
theology  in  the  convent  of  Buenos  Avres  and  the
University  of  Cordova,  Fn)m  the  beginning  of
his  career  as  a  teacher  he  foresaw  the  future  inde-
pendence of  his  country,  and  when  the  Spanish
j'oke  was  thrown  off  in  1810  he  was  one  of  the
most  ardent  followers  of  the  patriotic  cause.  As
s  representative  of  his  native  province  he  was  a
member  of  the  congress  of  Tucuman  in  181G,  and
as  secretary  of  that  Ixxlv  signed  the  act  of  inilc^
pendence  on  25  July  of  that  year.  When,  in  1822,
the  ecclesiastic  reform  was  initiateil,  Rodriguez
defended  the  rights  of  the  church  in  the  t>a[>er
"  Oficial  del  Dia "  with  great  force,  and  lie  is
considered  one  of  the  most  powerful  writers  of
that  period.  He  was  also  a  jxx>t  of  great  merit,
and  many  of  his  compositions  ap|)ear(Hl  in  maga-
zines, but  no  collection  has  been  i.ssued.

RODRIGTEZ.  Diego.  Mexican  mathematician,
b.  in  Atitatl  in  15»7;  d.  in  Mexico  in  ItMW.  He
entered  the  military  order  of  Merce«l.  in  Mexico,
on  8  April,  lUi:},  and  rose  to  lie  commander  of
that  onier  and  profe<*sor  of  theology  in  its  college.
In  1687  he  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics


in  the  Literary  academy.  He  wrot«  "  Tratado
etheorologico  s«»brt>  el  Cometa  aparecido  en  Mi'xico
en  H152"  (Mexico.  1052);  "Tnutatus  Prnu'mia-
lium  disciplinurum  Mathematicarum.  ct  de  Com-
mendatione  Elementonim  Euclidis";  "Geometria
es|M'<-ulati\'a";  "  D«'  Aritmttica":  "Trata<io  de
l<>uaciones,  c«»n  Tabia  Algebniicadiscumva'*;  and
"  Arte  de  fabricar  Relojcs  horizontales,  verticalen,
etc.,  con  declina<-iones  y  sin  ellas."  All  but  the
first  are  in  manuscri|>t.  Thev  were  taken  from  the
convent  of  Merce<l  to  the  National  library,  and
they  are  to  Ix*  pul>lishe<l  soon  to  show  the  early
development  of  mnthematics  in  Mexico.

RODRKa'EZ.  Manuel.  Chilian  |>atriot,  b.  in
Santiago  in  17H<5;  d.  in  Tiitil.  26  May.  1818.  In
1811  he  began  to  take  part  in  the  struggle  for  in-
def)endence,  and  during  the  gf)vemment  of  Gen.
Carrera  in  1814  he  served  as  secretary  of  the  lat-
ter. After  the  disa.sterof  Rancagua  he  cmignited
to  the  Argentine,  and  was  secretly  sent  to  Chili  to
foment  the  revolution  there.  The  province  of  Col-
chagua  was  the  centn*  of  his  oi>erations.  and  the
Spanish  government  vainly  tritHi  to  surprise  him,
offering  large  rewards  for  his  capture,  .\fter  the
triumph  of  San  Martin  in  Chacabuco,  R(xlriguez
continue<l  to  serve  the  cause  of  the  republic  till
the  defeat  of  Cancha  Rayada.  when  he  pntciaimed
himself  chief  of  Santiago.  The  reorganiz*-*!  forces
obtained  the  victory  of  Maypu.  in  which Rmlri-

fuez  took  part  as  chief  of  the  Husares  de  la
.luerte.  The  other  chiefs.  esi»ecially  O'Higgins,
began  to  be  jealous  of  the  popularity  of  HtMlriguez,
and,  in  order  to  rtMnove  him,  he  was  offered  the
mission  to  the  United  States.  On  his  refusal  his
death  was  decreed  by  the  I^autaro  secret  .society,
and  soon  afterward  he  was  imprisom*d  and  sent. to

S'uillota,  to  l)e  trie<l  by  a  court-martial.  He  was
elivered  to  an  ofllcer.  Navarro,  who  on  the  road
ordere<l  him  to  be  shot  without  any  trial.  On  the
place  of  his  execution  a  granite  column  has  Ijeen
erecte<l.  which  was  de«licated  on  2*i  Mav,  18<13.

ROURUUIEZ.  Manuel  del  Socorro.  Cuban
scientist,  b.  in  Bayamo,  Culm,  in  1758;  d.  in  liogo-
ta,  Colombia,  in  1818. Ik'ing  of  jK>or  {utrentage,
he  was  oblige<l  to  work  for  a  living  from  early  life,
and  receivetl  only  a  scanty  education  ;  but  he  sup-
plie<l  this  deficiency  by  "liis  energy  ami  love  for
study,  and  without  any  teacher  obtained  a  pro-
found knowletlge  of  science,  history,  and  literature.
j  He followed J()se  de Ez{)eleta in 178t) to  New
I  Granada,  and,  being  ap|K)iiited  director  of  the  pub-
,  lie  library  of  Bogota,  l>egan  at  once  to  aid  the  in-
tellectual development  of  the  country,  associating
I  his  name  with  many  literary  and  scientific  enter-
!  prises for  that iiur|K>sc. At his  suggestion  the
I  viceroy  founded  the  "  I'ajK*!  |>eri(Hlico  de  Santa  Fe
[  de  liogota,"  the  first  news|>»i|)er  in  the  colony,  the
j  editorship  of  which  was  assigned  to  Rodriguez  in
January, 1791. He suggested also  the  idea of
I  creating  an  astronomical  and  meteorological  ob-
;  servatfiry,  and  was  a{)iM)inti>d  one  of  its  directors.
j  He  founded  several  s<-ienlific  and  literary  news|>a-
I  pers  and reviews. When the country revoltwl
1  against  the  Spanish  rule  in 1810,  HcHlriguez  sidtnl
I  with  the  patriots  and  shared  their  fortunes. Al-
though he  wrote  much,  es|)ecially  on  scientific  sub-
I  jects,  many  of  his  works  are  lost. The  princi|>al
I  manuscript  that  is  pn*serve<l is  "Historia  de  la
Fundaci»')n  tie  la  Ens»>ftanza" HumU)ldt  praises
him  in  several  i>arts  of  his  numerous  writings.

RODRIGrEZ.  Manuel  Uoniingo.  Argentine

statesman,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  in  1780;  d.  theri»  in

1840. lie  served  in  the  war  of  inde|>endeiice,  and

was  a  colonel  at  the  time  of  the  establishment  of

,  the  republic  by  the  congress  of  Tucuman,  9  July,


302


BOB


ROE


1816.  After  the  fall  of  the  last  director.  Rondeau,
in  January,  1820,  the  municipality  of  Buenos
Ayres  gave  the  military  command  successively  to
various  chiefs,  but  anarchy  reigned  everywhere,  so
that  the  governors  of  Santa  Fe  and  Entrerios
easily  routed  the  forces  of  Buenos  Ayres  in  Cafiada
de  la  Cruz,  and  occupied  the  city.  In  this  emer-
gency Rodriguez  was  elected  governor  of  Buenos
Ayres,  9  May,  1820,  and,  re-establishing  order,
signed  a  treaty  of  peace  with  Lopez,  governor  of
Santa  Fe,  by  which  the  independence  of  the  prov-
inces was  recognized.  In  1821  he  called  to  his  cabi-
net Bernardino  Rivadavia  {q.  v.)  as  secretary  of  the
interior,  and  Dr.  Manuel  Garcia  as  secretary  of  the
treasury,  and  with  their  co-operation  many  reforms
were  introduced  in  the  administration.  Liberty
of  the  press  and  separation  of  church  and  state
were  decreed,  convents  were  suppressed,  with  the
exception  of  two  in  Buenos  Ayres,  the  emigration
of  foreigners  was  promoted,  and  numerous  savings
banks,  the  national  bank,  an  academy  of  sciences,
and  the  University  of  Buenos  Ayres  were  estal>-
lished  in  1823.  Rodriguez  was  a  member  of  the
cabinet  of  both  his  successors.  When,  after  the
proclamation  of  a  unitarian  constitution  by  con-
gress, 24  Dec,  1826,  there  was  general  discontent
and  revolt  in  the  interior  provinces.  President  Riva-
davia resigned  with  his  cabinet,  29  June,  1827,  and
Rodriguez  retired  to  private  life.

ROE,  Azel  Stevens,  author,  b.  in  New  York
citv,  10  Aug.,  1798  ;  d.  in  East  Windsor  Hill,  Conn.,
1  Jan.,  1886.  He  received  an  academic  education,
and,  after  serving  as  a  clerk  in  a  mercantile  house
in  New  York,  Ijecame  a  wine-merchant  in  that  city.
He  finally  retired  from  business  and  settled  at
Windsor,  Conn.  Having  lost  most  of  his  property
by  freely  indorsing  for  persons  that  subsequently
failed,  lie  applied  himself  successfully  to  literature.
He  published  "James  Montioy,  or  I've  been  Think-
ing (New  York,  1850);  "lo  Love  and  be  Loved"
(1852);  "Time  and  Tide,  or  Strive  and  Win"
(1852) ;  "  A  Long  Look  Ahead  "  (1855) ;  "  The  Star
and  the  Cloud  "  (1856) ;  "  True  to  the  Last "  (1859) ;
"How  could  He  Help  it?"  (1860);  "Looking
Around"  (1865);  "Woman  our  Angel"  (1866);
"  The  Cloud  in  the  Heart "  (1869) ;  and  "  Resolu-
tion, or  the  Soul  of  Power"  (1871).  Most  of  his
works  were  republished  in  London.

ROE,  Edward  Payson,  author,  b.  in  Moodna,
New  Windsor,  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  7  March,  1838;

d.  in  Cornwall,  N.
Y.,  19  July,  1888.
He  was  educated
at  Williams,  but
not  graduated,
owing  to  an  affec-
tion of  the  eyes.
In  after  years
the  college  gave
him  the  degree  of
B.  A.  He  studied
at  Auburn  and
at  Union  theo-
logical seminary,
New  York  city,
and  in  1862  be-
came a  chaplain
in  the  volunteer
service,  where  he
remained  till  Oc-
tober, 1865.  He
then  became  pas-
tor of  a  Presbyterian  church  at  Highland  Falls.
N.  Y.,  where  his  lectures  on  topics  connected  with
the  civil  war,  to  raise  funds  for  a  new  church,  first


C^Ulytrttyi.  (4. / . /C ^


^-C^^


brought  him  into  notice  as  a  successful  speaker.
He  visited  the  ruins  of  Chicago  after  the  great  flre,
and  wrote  "  Barriers  Burned  Away,"  a  novel,  which
was  published  as  a  serial  in  the  New  York  "  Evan-

felist,"  and  afterward  apj)eared  in  l)ook-form  (New
ork,  1872).  Of  the  cheap  edition  (1882),  87,500
copies  were  sold.  The  great  success  of  his  book,
together  with  impaired  health,  induced  Mr.  Roe  to
resign  his  pastorate  and  to  settle  at  Cornwall-on-
the-Hudson  in  1874.  At  this  place  he  devf)ted  his
time  to  literature  and  the  cultivation  of  small  fruits.
He  was  a  very  prolific  writer,  and  the  sales  of  his
books  in  this  country  alone  have  largely  exceeded
one  million  copies,  "they  have  been  republished  in
England  and  other  countries,  where  also  the  sales
have  been  large.  In  addition  to  the  work  already
mentioned,  Mr.  Roe  published  "  Play  and  Profit  in
My  Garden"  (New  York,  1873);  "What  can  She
Do?"  (1873);  "Opening  a  Chestnut  Burr"  (1874);
"  From  Jest  to  Earnest  (1875) ;  "  Near  to  Nature's
Heart "  (1876) ;  "  A  Knight  of  the  Nineteenth  Cen-
tury "  (1877) ;  "  A  Face  Illumined  "  (1878) ;  "  A  Day
of  Fate"  (1880):  "Success  with  Small  Fruits'*
(l'880);  "Without  a  Home"  (1880);  "His  Sombre
Rivals  "  (1883) ;  "  A  Young  Girl's  Wooing  "  (1884) ;
"Nature's  Serial  Story'  (1884);  "An  Original
Belle  "  (1885) ;  "  Driven  back  to  Eden  "  (1885) ;  "  He
fell  in  Love  with  his  Wife  "  (1886) ;  and  "  The  Earth
Trembled  "  (1887).

ROE,  Francis  Asbury,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Elmira,  N.  Y.,  4  Oct.,  1823.  He  entered  the  navy
as  midshipman,  19  Oct.,  1841,  and  was  at  the  naval
academy  at  Annapolis  in  1847-'8.  He  left  the  ser-
vice for  eleven  months  from  June,  1848.  In  1851-2
he  served  in  the  mail-steamer  "  Georgia,"  on  the
New  York  and  West  India  line.  He  was  attached
to  the  brig  "  Porpoise "  in  the  North  Pacific  ex-
ploring expedition.  He  was  commissioned  master,
8  Aug.,  1855,  and  lieutenant,  14  Sept.,  1855.  In
1857-'8  he  served  in  the  coast  survey.  In  1862  he
was  executive  officer  of  the  "  Pensacola "  in  Far-
ragut's  squadron,  and,  on  account  of  the  illness  of
his  commanding  officer,  took  charge  of  the  ship  in
passing  Fort  Jackson  and  Fort  St.  Philip.  He  was
commissioned  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1862,
had  charge  of  the  steamer  "  Katahdin  "  in  1862-'3
in  the  operations  on  Mississippi  river,  defeated  Gen.
John  C.  Breckinridge's  attack  on  Baton  Rouge,  and
assisted  in  the  destruction  of  the  Confederate  ram
"  Arkansas,"  7  Aug.,  1862.  In  1864  he  commanded
the  steamer  "  Sassacus  "  in  the  North  Atlantic  block-
ading squadron,  and  captured  and  destroyed  sev-
eral blockade  runners  in  the  sounds  of  North
Carolina,  and  co-operated  in  the  defeat  of  the  Con-
federate iron-clad  ram  "  Albemarle,"  5  May,  1864.
In  this  engagement  Roe  gallantly  rammed  the
iron-clad,  which  then  fired  a  100-pound  rifle-shell
through  the  "  Sassacus,"  killing  and  scalding  many
of  the  crew  by  exploding  in  the  boiler.  In  the  con-
fusion that  was  caused  by  escaping  steam.  Roe
skilfully  handled  his  ship  and  compelled  the  "  Al-
bemarle's "  consort,  the  "  Bombshell,"  to  surrender.
After  the  war  he  commanded  the  steamer  "  Michi-
gan "  on  the  lakes  in  ll^WH-'e.  He  was  commis-
sioned commander.  25  July,  1866,  and  in  186(}-'7
commanded  the  steamer  "Tacony"  on  a  special
mission  to  Mexico.  His  firmness  as  senior  officer
prevented  a  bombardment  of  Vera  Cruz.  On  3
Aug.,  1867,  he  was  detached,  and  in  recognition  of
his  services  was  ordered  as  fieet-captain  of  the  Asi-
atic station,  where  he  served  until  December,  1871.
He  was  commissioned  captain,  1  April,  1872,  and
was  attached  to  the  Boston  navy-yard  in  1872-'3.
His  last  cruise  was  in  command  of  the  '*Lancast-er  "
on  the  Brazil  station  in  1873-'5. He  was  attached


ROK


ROERLINO


808


to  th«'  naval  station  at  Now  Ii«>nflnn  in  187.Vfl,  on
BINMUul  tlutv  at  Washingtim  in  IHTW-'MO,  an<l  pn>-
niotiMl  t«)  f«)*Muno«l»re.  26  Nov..  18«0.  In  \HKi-4  he
was  f^>vcnii>r  of  the  Naval  aNjrliiin  at  Philiulrliihia.
}!(>  waM  (■(tmniis.siumMl  rt'ar-mlnunil,  3  Nov.,  1884,
and  niaccMl  on  tlu'  rt'tinil  list,  4  Oct,.  1HH5.

ROK,  Henry,  Canadian  (iliu-utnr,  I),  in  Ilenrv-
villo.  Missi.-wiiKii  (•<»..  UiicInh-,  22  Fel).,  1829.  lie
was  odm-utcd  at  MKiill  colU'^^  and  Bishop's  col-
lege, an«l  was  gnwluat4Hl  at  the  latter  in  IKM.  lie
was  tmlaineil  a  priest  in  the  Anglican  church  in
1852,  became  rector  of  St.  Matthew's  church,  (Que-
bec in  ItWi.  and  of  St.  Ann's,  Kiclunontl,  in  iHtW,
and  was  apfiointed  examining  chaplain  to  the
bijihop  of  Quebec  in  1804.  Ho  becanie  pn)fessor
of  divinity  in  the  University  of  Bishop's  college
in  IHTy,  and  is  now  vice-principal  antl  dean  of  the
faculty  of  divinity  in  that  institution.  In  1H79
he  received  the  degree  of  I).  I),  from  Bi-shop's  col-
lege. Dr.  Roe  has  l)een  for  twenty-five  years  the
Canadian  corresjKindent  of  the  Ijondon  "(iuard-
ian."  Ik'sides  sundry  sermons,  he  has  publishtnl
*'  Pamphlet  on  Episcopal  Veto"  (1859);  "Treatise
on  I'urgntorv,  TransuiJStHntiation,  and  the  Mass"
(18«2):  "Pamphlet  on  Clerical  Studies"  (1H(>4);
"Tract  on  the  Place  of  IU>ligious  CJiving  in  the
Christian  Economy"  (1880);  and  "Pamphlet  on
the  Place  of  liaym'cn  in  the  Spiritual  Work  of  the
Church  "  (1887).

ROKRLINO,  John  An^nntns  (ray -hling).  civil
engineer,  h.  in  .MQhlliausen,  Prussia,  12  June,  1806;
d. in Bmoklyn. N.  Y.,  22  July, 18«9. He  was

f:nuluatwl  at  ihe  lioyal  polytechnic  school  in  Ber-
in  with  the  degree  of  C.  E.  in  1820,  paid  si>e-
oial  attention  to  suspension-bridges  during  nis
course,  atul  wrote  his  graduating  thesis  on  this  sulv
iect.  After  sjtending  the  three  years  requin-d  by
law  in  government  service,  during  which  time  he
was  engaged  chiefly  as  an  a^istanton  the  construc-
tion of  military  roads  in  Westphalia,  he  came  to  the
Unite«l  States.  Hesettled  near  Pittsburg,  Pa., where
he  devoted  himself  to  agricultural  pui-suits,  and
determinwl  to  build  a  village  of  frontiersmen.  The
vari(tus  systems  of  canal  improvements  and  slack-
water  navigation  were  then  in  course  of  develop-
ment, and  to  these  his  services  were  attracted.
Later  his  attention  was  given  to  new  milniad  en-
terprises. One  of  his  earliest  engagtMuents  was  in
surveying  the  lines  of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad
acrose  the  Alleghany  mountains  trom  Harrisburg
to  Pittsburg,  lie  then  entere<i  ujxin  the  manu-
facture of  iron  and  steel  wire,  from  which  he
Caine<l  the  valuable  knowledge  of  the  nature,  capa-
ilities,  and  re<|uirements  of  wire  that  enabled  him
to  revolutionize  the  construction  of  briilges.  The
first  specimens  of  that  wire  that  was  ever  producetl
in  the  United  States  were  nuule  by  him.  and  his
belief  in  its  efficacy  for  bridge-construction  was
soon  put  to  the  test.  During  the  winter  of  1844-'5
he  hjul  charge  of  the  building  of  a  w«MKlen  a«|ue-
duct  across  the  Alleghany  river  at  Pittsburg,  and
proposed  that  it  should  consist  of  a  woo«len  trunk
to  hold  the  water,  supfxirted  on  each  side  by  a
continuous  wire  cable  seven  inches  in  diameter.  In
spite  of  rirlicule  from  the  engineering  profession,
he  8Ucce<Hled  in  completing  his  bridge,  which  com-
prised seven  spans,  each  of  102  feet.  11  is  next
undertaking  was  the  constniction  in  1840  of  a
8Usjx'nsion-T)ri<lge  over  Monongahela  river  at  Pitts-
burg. In  1848  he  built  four  similar  works  on  the
line  of  the  Delaware  and  Hudson  canal.  t>n  the
completion  of  these  bridges  he  settle<l  in  Trenton,
N.  J.,  whither  he  remove<i  his  wire-manufactory.
In  18,51  he  was  called  to  build  a  sus|>ension-bridge
across  the  Niagara  river  to  connect  the  New  York


Central  railrr>ad  with  the  Camulian  railway gjrfteint.
This  structure,  the  flrxt  of  the  ^«t  nispension-
bridgex  with  which  his  name  m  connected,  wm
built  in  four  years,  and.  when  it  was  finishinl.  wan
regarded  as  one  of  the  wondern  of  the  world.  It
was  the  flrxt  sus|M>nsion-bri<lge  that  was  callable  of
lH>aring  the  weight  of  niilroa^l-trains.  Tne  sjwn
was  82')  feet  clear,  and  it  was  siipiNirted  by  four
10-inch  cables.  His  next  undertaiong  was  a  wire-
cable  bridge  for  common  travel  over  Alleghany
river  at  Pittsburg,  which  Is  <-onsidercd  one  of  the
lxn*t  pieces  of  bri«lge  engineering  in  existence.  In
18.')6  he  U'giin  the  building  r)f  the  gn-at  bridge  be-
tween Cincinnati  and  Covmgton.  but  the  work  was
not  finisheil  until  1807.  Its  suct-ess  showe<l  engi-
neers throughout  the  country  that  the  problem  of
susiM-nsion-bridge  making  was  solvi><l  u|M)n  a  prin-
ciple that  could  not  Ik-  suiK-rsetli-d.  According  to
Oen.  John  O.  Barnard,  "to  Mr.  Koebling  must  be
concedeil  the  claim  of  practically  establishing  the
sufficiency  of  the  suspension  principle  for  railroad
bridges  and  of  developing  the  manner  of  their  con-
stniction." His  eminent  succevs  in  this  line  of
work  led  in  18(J8  to  his  l)eing  chosen  chief  engineer
of  the  East  river  bridge.  conne<-ting  Brooklyn  and
New  York.  He  at  once  prepared  plans  /or  the
structure,  which  receive*!  the  approval  of  the  Na-
tional authorities,  and  in  1809  the  company  for  the
construction  of  the  bridge  was  duly  organizes]  and
work  was  at  once  begun.  While  he  was  making
ol)sen'ation8  his  foot  was  crushetl  Ijctween  the  pil-
ing and  ruck  of  one  of  the  ferrv-slins  during  the
abrupt  entry  of  a  ferry-boat.  Mr.  litH-bling  was
then  removed  to  his  residence,  but,  in  spite  of  medi-
cal skill,  his  death  occurred  from  lockjaw  sixt«>en
days  later.  Mr.  Roebling  published  "  Ixmg  and
Short  Span  Railway  Bridges"  (New  York.  1809).
—His  son,  Washington  AngustuH,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  Saxenburg,  Pa.,  20  May.  1837.  was  gradu-
ated as  a  civil  engineer  at  Rensselaer  jKilytechnic
institute  in  1857,  and  began  his  professional  work
at  <mce  under  his  father  on  the  Alleghany  susj^n-
sion-bridge.  In  1801  he  enliste<l  as  a  private  in
the  0th  New  York  artillery,  and  serv«Kl  a  year  with
that  lottery  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  In  1802
he  wa-s  transfernnl  to  the  staff  of  (Jen.  Ir\-in  Mc-
Dowell, and  a.ssigned  to  various  engineering  duties,
notably  the  construction  of  a  susj>ension-bridge
across  Rappahannock  river.  I^ater  he  served  on
Gen.  John  Pope's  staff,  and  was  present  at  South
Mountain.  Antietam.  and  the  campaign  that  ended
in  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  during  which  time
he  built  a  suspension-bridge  across  .Sheiuindoah
river  at  Harpers  Ferry.  He  was  also  engage<l  on
Imlloon  duty,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  ascending
every  morning  in  onler  to  reconnoitre  the  ConfwP
erate  army.  By  this  means  he  discoveretl.  and  was
the  first  to  announce,  the  fact  that  (len.  I^ee  was
moving  toward  Pennsylvania.  From  -\ugust.  1808,
till  March,  18<i4.  he  was  attacheil  to  the  2d  corps,
serving  on  engineering  duty  and  then  on  staff  duty
with  the  5th  corps  during  the  overland  cam|)aign.
He  att«ine<l  the  rank  of  major  on  20  April.  1804,
also  receiving  three  brevets,  including  that  of  colo-
nel, and  resignetl  in  January.  1805.  Col.  RiH-bling
then  assisting  his  father  on  the  Cincinnati  and  Cov-
ington bridg«*.  of  which  he  had  almost  the  entire
charge.  He  then  went  abroad  to  study  pneumatic
foundations  liefon*  sinking  thos«>  of  the  VmsI  river
bri«lge.  to  the  charge  of  which  he  was  called  on  the
death  of  his  father,  but  liefore  any  of  the  details
had  been  dei-ide<l  «m.  In  1809  he  settled  in  Brook-
Ivn.  an<I  gave  his  attention  almost  exclusively  to
the  sinking  of  the  caisstms.  His  devotion  to  the
work,  with  the  fact  that  he  s|>ent  more  hours  of  the


304


ROEBUCK


ROEMER


twenty-four  in  the  compressed  air  of  the  caissons
than  any  one  else,  led  to  an  attack  of  caisson  fever
early  in  1872.  He  soon  rallied  and  resumed  his
work,  but  he  was  so  weak  that  he  was  unable  to
leave  his  room. Nevertheless,  he  prepared  the  most

minute  and  ex-
act directions
for  making  the
cables,  and  for
the  erection  of
all  the  compli-
cated parts  of
the  superstruc-
ture. In  1873
he  was  com-
pelled to  give
up  work  entire-
ly, and  spent
several  months
in  Europe,  but
on  his  return
he  resumed
charge  of  the
bridge,  which
he  held  until
its  completion
in  1883.  The
structure  he
built,  which  is
the  longest  sus-
pension-bridge
in  the  world,  cost  about  $13,000,000.  The  picture
shows  it  before  completion.  Its  total  length,  in-
cluding approaches,  is  5,989  feet,  of  which  the
middle  span  takes  up  1,596  feet,  while  the  length
of  the  suspended  structure  from  anchorage  to  an-
chorage is  3,456  feet.  He  has  since  spent  his
time  m  directing  the  wire  business  in  Trenton,
N.  J.,  and  in  the  recuperation  of  his  health.  Be-
sides various  pamphlets  on  professional  subjects,
he  is  the  author  of  "  Military  Suspension-Bridges  "
(Washington,  1862).

ROEBUCK.  John  Arthur,  English  politician,
b.  in  Madras,  India,  29  Dec,  1802;  d.  in  England,
30  Nov.,  1879.  His  grandfather,  Dr.  John  Roe-
buck, wrote  "  An  Inquiry  on  the  War  in  Ameri-
ca "  (London,  1776).  From  1815  till  1824  the  son
resided  in  Canada;  then  going  to  London,  Eng-
land, he  studied  law,  and  in  1831  he  was  admit-
ted as  a  barrister.  In  1832  he  was  elected  to  par-
liament, And  became  prominent  as  a  radical  re-
former. In  1835  he  was  appointed  agent  for  the
Lower  Canada  assembly  during  the  contest  between
that  house  and  the  executive.  His  advocacy  of  the
Confederate  states  and  his  opposition  to  trades-
unions  led  to  his  defeat  in  1868.  In  1877-'8  he
vigorously  supported  the  policy  of  Earl  Beacons-
field,  and  was  sworn  a  privy  councillor  in  1878.
He  was  one  of  the  stanchest  supporters  of  the
rights  of  Canada  against  what  he  regarded  as  the
aggressions  of  the  crown.  Besides  numerous  arti-
cles in  the  "  Westminster  Review  "  and  the  "  Edin-
burgh Review,"  he  wrote  "  Existing  Difficulties  in
the  Government  of  the  Canadas"  (London,  1836);
"  Plan  for  the  Government  of  the  English  Colo-
nies" (1849):  and  "  History  of  the  Whig  Ministry
of  1830"  (1852).

ROELKER,  Bernard,  lawyer,  b.  in  OsnabrQck,
Hanover,  Germany,  24  April.  1816 ;  d.  in  New  York
city.  5  March,  1888.  He  was  graduated  in  1835  at
the  University  of  Bonn,  where  he  had  devoted  hinj-
self  to  the  study  of  law  and  philology.  Later  he
came  to  this  country,  and  after  teaching  German
and  music  in  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  was  appointed  to
a  tutorship  at  Harvard  in  1837,  was  admitted  to


the  bar,  and  practised  for  several  years  in  Boston.
In  1856  he  removed  to  the  city  of  New  York,  and
entered  the  firm  of  Laur  and  Roelker.  He  80on
established  a  large  practice  among  the  Germans,
and  when  his  partner  died  he  had  gained  a  repu-
tation as  an  authority  on  wills  and  contracts.  In
1863  he  won  the  suit  of  Meyer  V8.  Roosevelt,  the
first  of  the  legal-tender  cases  before  the  U.  S.  su-
preme court,  which  attractetl  general  attention,
lie  continued  to  practise  until  advancing  age  com-

B;Iled  him  to  relinquish  a  large  part  of  his  business,
is  last  important  argument  was  made  before  the
New  York  court  of  appeals  in  October,  1887.  Mr.
Roelker  was  a  personal  friend  of  Samuel  J.  Tilden,
and  was  associated  with  him  in  the  organization
of  the  Prairie  du  Chien  railroad.  He  published
"  Constitutions  of  Prance  "  (Boston,  1848) :  "  Argu-
ment in  Favor  of  the  Constitutionality  of  the  Le-
gal-Tender Clause  in  the  Act  of  Congress,  Feb.  25,
1862  "  (New  York.  1863) ;  and  "  Manual  for  the  Use
of  Notaries  Public  and  Bankers  "(3d  ed.,  1853;
edited  by  J.  Smith  Homans.  New  York,  1865).  He
also  translated  from  the  Swedish  "  The  Magic
Goblet,"  a  novel,  and  raa<le  a  German  adaptation
of  Cushing's  "  Manual  of  Parliamentary  Practice."
ROEMER,  Jean,  author,  b.  in  England  about
1815.  He  was  taken  in  infancy  to  Hanover,  and
afterward  to  Holland.  His  early  education  was
conducted  by  private  tutors  under  the  guardian-
ship of  William  I..  Hing  of  the  Netherlands,  and
Frederica  Louisa  Wilhelmina,  Princess  of  Orange,
and  wife  of  Charles  George  Augustus,  heir-apparent
of  the  crown  of  Brunswick.  He  was  destined  for
the  army,  and  served  on  the  Dutch  side  throughout
the  war  of  secession  between  Holland  and  Belgium,
at  the  close  of  which  he  visited  the  great  military
establishments  of  France,  Prussia,  and  Austria,
and  completed  his  studies  in  Lombardy  under  the
guidance  and  auspices  of  Field -Marshal  Count
Radetzky.  Subsequently  he  resided  in  Naples,
where  a  close  intimacy  with  the  Prince  of  Syracuse,
ex-viceroy  of  Sicily,  and  some  articles  that  were
attributed  to  him,  caused  much  comment.  They
gave  umbrage  to  King  Ferdinand  II.,  whose  dis-
trust of  the  liberal  tendencies  of  his  brother  lent
to  this  friendship  a  political  significance.  It  be-
came the  subject  of  diplomatic  correspondence,
and  led  to  the  visitor's  recall  from  Italy  early  in
1845.  Some  time  after  the  death  of  William  1.,
whose  successor  on  the  throne  appears  to  have  been
influenced  by  a  different  spirit  from  that  of  his
father  concerning  Mr.  Roemer.  the  pretensions.of
the  latter  began  to  take  a  definite  form,  setting
forth  claims  to  titles  and  estates,  the  right  to  which
was  denied  him  on  special  grounds,  which  ever  since
have  been  maintaineil  against  him.  Strong  efforts
made  in  his  behalf  have  not  availed,  and  even  at  the
congress  of  German  sovereigns,  held  in  Frankfort
in  1863,  a  well-supported  attempt  at  compromise
and  conciliation  remained  without  result.  Since
1846  he  has  resided  in  the  United  States.  In  1848
he  accepted  the  f)ost  of  professor  of  the  French
language  and  literature  in  the  New  York  free
academy,  and  in  1869  -he  was  appointed  vice-presi-
dent of  the  College  of  the  city  of  New  York,  which
place  he  occupies  at  present  (1888).  In  addition
to  articles  and  pamphlets  on  agriculture,  etlucation,
and  linguistics,  he  has  published  a  '*  Dictionary  of
English- French  Idioms ''  (New  York,  1853) ;  "  Poly-
glot Readers"  (5  vols,,  1858);  "Cavalry:  its  His-
tory, Management,  and  Uses  in  War  "  (1863) ;
"  Cours  de  lecture  et  de  traduction  "  (3  vols.,  1884) ;
"Principles  of  General  Grammar"  (1884);  and
"  Origins  of  the  English  People  and^f  the  English
Language"  (1888).


ROORR


ROGERS


805


ROiiKR.  Juan,  Sniinlsh  miwinnnry,  h.  in  Pam-  '
nlona,  S|miii.  iilxiut  iKn);  «1.  in  Vera  ('ruz,  Mexico,  .
in  161H.  ili<  WHS  a  Jiv«<uit.  ami  .sHil(><l  from  San
Liicar  for  this  t«ountrv  in  l.VKl.  Tho  v«'.s.s«»|  on  |
which  he  hH<l  enilmrketf  was  driven  on  the  c^MMt  of  i
Kioritlii  an<l  several  of  his  coin|>anionH  were  kille<I
by  the  nattvi^  but  he  eM?a|HHl  and  went  to  Havana,
whert^  he  !i|)ent  sovfral  months  in  studyinff  the
lan);uaf;t' of  tlie  fwrt  of  Flori<la  near  ("ape  ("aOa-
venil.  With  the  aid  of  natives  that  wore  then  in
Havana,  wiiom  he  fonverte<l.  he  <lrew  up  v<'x»bu-
laries  and  then  returne<l  to  the  province.  The  In-
dians HiDonf;  whom  he  laltored  wen*  a  branch  of
the  Creeks  and  of  a  very  degrathnl  type,  and,  not
mei'tine  with  much  8ucc«\ss.  he  went  to  Havana,
where  he  establishes!  an  Indian  school.  In  HUWi  he
Kailenl  n^ain  for  Florida,  landing  at  the  |)08t  of
Santa  Helena,  on  Port  Il«)yal  harlior,  and  no  was
the  first  ri'sident  priest  in  South  Carolina.  Here
he  attended  to  the  religious  wants  of  the  garris«jn
for  some  time,  and  then  tulvancod  about  forty  miles
into  the  interior,  finding  a  race  of  Indians  that
were  superior  to  any  he  ha«i  previously  encountereii,

8rol)ably  the  Chemikees.  lie  entcre<I  their  town  of
•rista  and  was  well  received;  but,  although  he  per-
suaded the  natives  to  plant  com,  which  he  dis-
tributiil  among  them,  and  to  build  houses,  he  did
not  make  nianv  converts.  His  visits  to  other  trilx»8
were  e<{ually  fruitless,  and  he  returned  to  Santa
Helena  in  1570.  He  then  went  to  Havana  to  ol>-
tain  relief  for  the  colony,  which  was  suffering  from
hunger,  taking  with  him  Indian  boys  fmm  the
various  triU^s  to  eilucate.  He  was  again  in  Florida
in  1572,  and  his  last  missionary  act  in  the  country
was  to  convert  eight  In«lians  that  had  been  con-
demne<l  to  death  for  murder.  He  then  returned
with  the  other  missionaries  of  his  order  to  Havana,
and  afterward  went  to  Mexico,  where  he  labored
for  manv  venrs  with  great  success.

RO(t fells,  Ebenezer  Piatt,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  18  Dec.,  1817;  d.  in  Montclair,
N.  J.,  23  Oct.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1837,  and,  after  si)endi ng  a  year  at  Princeton  theo-
logical seminary,  finished  his  studies  in  Ilartfonl,
Conn.  In  June,  1840,  he  was  licensi'd  to  nrcach  in
Litchfield  county,  (Jonn.,  and  he  was  omained  in
November.  He  )ield  Congregational  pastorates  in
Chicopee  Falls,  Mass.,  in  1840-*3,  in  Northampton
in  1843-'6,  and  had  charge  of  Presbyterian  churches
in  Augusta,  Ga.,  till  1854,  and  Philatlelphia  till
1856.  He  then  became  {vastorof  the  1st  Reformed
Dutch  church  of  Albany,  and  in  1802  accented  the
charge  of  the  South  Iieforme<l  church  in  New  York
city,  where  he  continued  until  a  few  months  before
his  death.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Oglethor|)e  college  in  1853.  Besides  various  minor
publications,  he  was  the  author  of  "  Earnest  Words
to  Young  Men  in  a  Series  of  Discourses"  (Charles-
ton. S.  ('.,  18:37).  and  "Historical  Discourse  on  the
Reformwl  Pn)testant  Dutch  Church  of  Albany"
(New  York,  1858).

RO<fKRS.  Ezeklel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wethers-
field.  K.ss<'x,  Fngland,  in  151K);  d.  in  Rowley,  Mass.,
23  Jan.,  K'tiiO.  He  was  graduated  at  Cambridge,
England,  in  1R()4,  and  became  chaplain  to  Sir
Francis  Harrington,  who  bestowed  on  him  the
benefice  of  Rowley  in  Yorkshire.  He  exercised  his
ministry  there  for  al)out  twenty  years,  when  he  was
silencetl  for  non-conformity,  and  in  16:i8  came  with
many  of  his  Yorkshire  friends  to  this  country.  He
was  urge<l  to  settle  in  New  Haven,  but  preferred  to
begin  a  new  plantation,  which  he  named  Rowley.
He  was  ordained  in  December,  16!^,  and  attained
great  reputation  as  a  preacher.  In  1043  he  deliv-
ered a  sermon  on  election  that,  aooording  to  Cotton

VOL. V. — 20


Mather,  made  him  "  famoun  through  the  ooun'rj.**
It  adrcK-atinl  that  the  name  man  f^hould  not  be
chomn  chief  mn;ristrato  for  two  sunt'ivtive  yean;
but,  in  spite  «»f  his  effortji.  iinv.  John  Winthrop  waa
re-elwtiNl.  The  demands  ui»on  his  time  were  w>
great  that  he  soon  re<:'eivo<I  an  amiKtant.  He  be-
queatheil  his  library  to  Harvard  college,  and  his
house  and  lands  to  tW  town  of  Rowley.

RO(JERS,  Fairman,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Phila-
del|>hia.  Pa,  15  Nov.,  IKW.  He  wim  i;mduate4l  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  185^3.  an<I  two
years  later  b«M'ame  iirofessor  of  civil  engineering,
which  chair  he  hela  until  1M70,  also  lecturing  on
mechanics  in  the  Franklin  institute  from  1858  till
1865.  Prof.  Rogers  «erve<I  as  a  volunteer  in  the
National  cavalry  in  1861,  and  then  liecame  a
volunteer  officer  in  the  IJ.  S.  enginwrs.  Under  the
auspices  of  the  U.  S.  coast  survey  in  1862  he  com-

eleted  the  survey  of  Potomac  river  north  wanl  from
lakiston  islanJ.  In  1871  he  was  elected  a  trustee
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  he  is  a
member  of  the  American  society  of  civil  engineers
and  of  the  American  philosophical  society.  He
was  one  of  the  original  memliers  of  the  National
aca<lemy  of  sc-iences,  and  has  serveil  on  its  com-
mittees and  its  council.  Among  his  more  impor-
tant scientific  paj^iers  are  "  Combinations  of  Mech-
anism representing  Mental  Processes"  (1874);
"Notes  on  Grant's  Difference  F^ngine"  (1874);
and  "Terrestrial  Magnetism  and  the  Magnetism
of  Iron  Ships"  (New  York.  18a3).

ROOERH,  FrankUn  Whiting,  artist,  b.  in
Cambridjje.  Mass.,  27  Aug.,  1854.  He  l^ecame  a
pupil  of  J.  Foxcroft  Cole  in  1874.  and  later  studied
also  with  Wm.  M.  Hunt  and  Thomas  Robinson.  He
has  devoted  himself  especially  to  the  |>ainting  of
dogs.  AmoAg  his  works  are  "  The  Two  Frien«Is,"
"Steady,"  "Resignation,"  "  I/oo,"  and  "  Mischief."

RCHilERS,  George  Clarke,  soldier,  b.  in  Pier-
mont,  Grafton  co.,  >.  II.,  22  Nov.,  ISiiS.  He  was
educated  in  Vcnnont  and  Illinois,  whither  he  re-
moved in  early  life,  Ijegan  the  study  of  the  law
while  teaching,  and  was  admitted  to  the  l>ar  in
1860.  He  earnestly  supporte<l  Stei)hen  A.  Douglas
during  the  presidential  canvass  of  184K),  in  which
he  made  a  reputation  as  an  extemporaneous  speaker.
He  was  the  first  to  raise  a  comj^any  in  Ijake  county,
111.,  at  the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  U-came  1st
lieutenant,  24  May.  1861,  and  soon  afterward  cap-
tain. At  the  battle  of  Shiloh  he  receive<i  four
wounds,  but  refused  to  leave  the  field,  an«l  led  his
regiment  in  the  final  charge.  He  was  at  once  pro-
mote<l  to  lieutenant-colonel  for  his  gallant  conduct,
and  soon  afterwaril  was  commissionetl  colonel  for
gallantry  at  the  battle  of  the  Hatchie.  At  Cham-
pion Hills  he  received  three  wounds,  from  one  of
which  he  has  never  fully  recovered.  To  the  engi-
neering skill  of  Col.  Rogers  were  due  the  works  at
Allatoona,  Ga,  where  Gen.  John  M.  Corse  (q.  v.)
checketl  Gen.  Hood  in  his  flank  movement  after
the  capture  of  Atlanta  He  commande<l  a  brigade
nearly  two  years,  including  the  .Atlanta  cam(>aign,
and  on  13  "March,  18(W,  was  brevet te<l  brijfadier-
general  of  volunteers.  He  has  practise<l  law  in
Illinois  and  Kansas  since  the  war.  ami  was  three
times  a  delegate  to  National  Democratic  conven-
tions. He  was  mmle  chairman  of  the  board  of
pension  appeals  on  15  June,  1885.

RO(iEKS,  Henry  J.,  inventor,  b.  in  lialtimore,
Md..  in  1811  ;  d.  there,  20  Aug.,  1879.  He  devised
the  code  of  signals  by  means  of  flags  that  is  known
by  his  name,  which  was  adopted  by  the  United
States  navy  in  1846  and  niodifieil  in  1861.  Mr.
Rogers  also  devis<^>4l  a  code  of  signals  by  means  of
colored  lights,  which  was  the  first  pyrotechnic  sya-


806


ROGERS


ROGERS


tem  in  the  United  States.  He  was  one  of  the  prac-
tical advisers  of  Samuel  F,  B.  Morse  in  the  con-
struction of  the  first  electro-magnetic  recording
telegraph-line  in  the  United  States  which  was  es-
tablished in  1844  between  Washington  and  Balti-
more. When  the  experiment  had  reached  a  suc-
cessful issue  he  was  appointed  su{)erintendent  of
the  line,  with  his  office  in  Baltimore,  and  there
made  numerous  improvements  in  the  system.  Sub-
sequently he  invented  several  important  telegraphic
instruments,  and  he  was  one  of  the  incorporators,
on  15  March,  1845,  of  the  Magnetic  telegraph  com-
pany, the  first  telegraph  company  in  the  United
States.  lie  was  associated  in  1848  in  the  incorpo-
ration of  the  American  telegraph  company,  and  had
charge  of  its  lines  from  Boston  to  New  York.  Mr.
Rogers  was  its  first  superintendent,  and  was  like-
wise superintendent  or  the  Western  union.  Bank-
ers and  brokers',  and  Southern  and  Atlantic  lines.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  acting  master  in  the
volunteer  navy,  and  he  afterward  returned  to
Baltimore,  where  he  spent  the  remaining  years  of
his  life.  Mr.  Rogers  published  "  Telegraph  Diction-
ary and  Seaman's  Signal-Book  "(Baltimore,  1845);
"American  Semaphoric  Signal  -  Book  "  (1847) ;
"  American  Code  of  Marine  Signals  "  (1854) ;  and,
with  Walter  F.  Larkins.  edited  "  Rogers's  Commer-
cial Code  of  Signals  for  all  Nations  "  (1859).

ROGERS,  Horatio,  lawyer,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  18  May,  1836.  His  grandfather,  John  Rogers,
and  two  of  his  great-uncles,  were  officers  in  the
Revolution.  The  grandson  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1855,  admitted  to  the  bar,  served  with
great  credit  during  the  civil  war,  and  was  brevetted
brigadier  -  general  of  volunteers,  13  March,  1865.
Gen.  Rogers  has  served  for  several  years  as  attor-
ney -  general  of  Rhode  Island.  He  is  a  prolific
newspaper  and  magazine  writer,  and  has  delivered
several  orations  on  public  occasions,  the  most  nota-
ble being  at  the  unveiling  of  the  equestrian  statue
of  Gen.  Bumside  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  4  July.  1887.
He  also  piiblished  "  The  Private  Libraries  of  Provi-
dence "  (Providence,  1878),  and  annotated  and  pub-
lished the  "  Journal  of  Lieut.  James  M.  Hadden,
Chief  of  the  English  Artillery  during  the  Burgoyne
Campaign"  (Albany,  1884),  the  prefatory  chapter
and  the  notes  to  which  work  are  characterized  by
great  research.

ROOERS,  James,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Mount  Charles,  Donegal,  Ireland,  11  July,  1826.
He  was  ordained  a  priest  in  1851,  became  professor
at  St.  Mary's  college,  Halifax,  in  1859,  and  was
consecrated  the  first  Roman  Catholic  bishop  of
Chatham,  New  Brunswick,  in  1860.

ROGERS,  James  Blythe,  chemist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  11  Feb.,  1802;  d.  there,  15  June,  1852.
He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Patrick  Kerr  Rogers,  who
was  gratluated  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1802,  and  in  1819
was  elected  professor  of  natural  philosophy  and
mathematics  at  William  and  Mary,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death.  James  was  educated  at
William  and  Mary,  and,  after  preliminary  studies
with  Dr.  Thomas  E.  Bond,  received  the  degree  of
M.  D.  from  the  University  of  Maryland  in  1822.
Subsequently  he  taught  in  Baltimore,  but  soon
afterward  settled  in  Little  Britain,  Lancaster  co..
Pa.,  and  there  practised  medicine.  Finding  this
occupation  uncongenial,  he  returned  to  Baltimore
and  became  superintendent  of  a  large  manufactory
of  chemicals.  He  devoted  himself  assiduously  to
the  study  of  pure  and  applied  chemistry,  and
became  professor  of  that  branch  in  Washington
medical  college,  Baltimore,  also  lecturing  on  the
same  subject  at  the  Mechanics'  institute. In  1835


he  was  called  to  the  same  chair  in  the  medical
department  of  Cincinnati  college,  where  he  re-
mained until  1839,  spending  his  summer  vacations
in  field-work  and  chemical  investigations  in  con-
nection with  the  geological  survey  of  Virginia,
which  was  then  under  the  charge  of  his  brother
William.  In  1840  he  settled  permanently  in
Philadel|)hia,  where  he  became  an  assistant  to  his
brother  Henry,  at  that  time  state  geologist  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  in  1841  he  was  ai)jK)inteu  lecturer  on
clieraistry  in  the  Philadelphia  medical  institute,  &
summer  school.  He  was  elected  professor  of  gen-
eral chemistry  at  the  Franklin  institute  in  1844,
and  held  that  chair  until  his  election  in  1847  to
succeed  Robert  Hare  as  professor  of  chemistry  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Prof.  Rogers  was
a  representative  at  the  National  medical  conven-
tion in  1847,  and  a  delegate  to  the  National  con-
vention for  the  revision  of  the  U.  S.  PharmacopoeiA
in  1850,  and  a  member  of  various  learned  societies.
He  contributed  papers  to  scientific  journals,  and
with  his  brother  Robert  prepared  the  seventh  edi-
tion of  Edward  Turner's  "  Elements  of  Chemis-
try "  and  William  Gregory's  "  Outlines  of  Organic
Chemistry,"  in  one  volume  (Philadelphia,  1846).
See  "  Memoir  of  the  Life  and  Character  of  James  B.
Rogers,"  by  Dr.  Joseph  Carson  (Philadelphia.  1852).
— His  brother,  William  Barton,  geologist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa..  7  Dec.,  1804;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  30  May,  1882,  was  educated  by  his  father
and  at  William  and
Mary.  In  1827  he
delivered  a  series  of
lectures  on  science
before  the  Maryland
institute,  and  in
1828  he  succeeded
his  father  in  the
chair  of  physics  and
chemistry  at  Will-
iam and  5lary,where
he  remained  for
seven  years.  At  this
time  he  carried  on
investigations  on
dew  and  on  the  vol-
taic battery,  and
prepared  a  series  of

marl  of  eastern  Vir-
ginia and  their  value  as  fertilizers.  He  then -ac-
cepted the  professorship  of  natural  philosophy
and  geology  in  the  University  of  Virginia,  where
he  remained  until  1853.  attaining  a  high  reputa-
tion as  a  lecturer.  In  1835  he  was  called  upon  ta
organize  the  geological  survey  of  Virginia,  mainly
in  consequence  of  his  printed  papers  and  addresses.
His  brother,  Henry  1).  Rogers,  was  at  that  time
state  geologist  of  Pennsylvania,  and  together  they
unfolded  the  historical  geology  of  the  great  Appa-
lachian chain.  Among  their  joint  special  investi-
gations were  the  study  of  the  solvent  action  of
water  on  various  minerals  and  rocks,  and  the  dem-
onstration that  coal-beds  stand  in  close  genetic
relation  to  the  amount  of  disturbance  to  which
the  inclosing  strata  have  been  submitted,  the  coal
becoming  harder  and  containing  less  volatile  mat-
ter as  the  evidence  of  the  disturbance  increases.
Together  they  published  a  paper  on  "  The  Laws  of
Structure  of"  the  more  Disturbed  Zones  of  the
Earth's  Crust,"  in  which  the  wave  theory  of
mountain-chains  was  first  announced.  This  was
followed  later  by  William  B.  Rogers's  statement  of
the  law  of  distribution  of  faults. In 1842  the


ROOKKS


ROGBRS


807


I


work  of  the  Kurver  clo«ei1,  and  mpanwhilo  he  had
publi8ho<l  six  *'  Ki«|K)rt«  of  tho  (Ji-olnjfii-nl  Survey
of  tho  State  of  Virffinin"  (Uu-hmoiul,  lH:ift-*40),
which  have  xiiK-e  Ix-eii  wlitcd  aiul  if«<ucHl  in  one
Toluiiie  a»  "  Paj»ei«  on  the  (h-olojfjr  of  Virginia "
(Now  York.  1884).  Ho  reaifcnwl  his  profetworship
at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  18.W,  and  removed
to  Ikwton.  when>  he  lie(*aino  active  in  tlie  scientiflc
movements  under  the  auspices  of  the  lioston  so-
ciety of  natural  history  and  the  American  acade-
my of  art-H  and  sciorices,  in  whose  prin-eetlings  ami
thCAniericjin  .lournnl  of  Science  "  his  mjjers  of
this  [H'HtNl  were  pulilishi**!.  Atiout  18<')U  ne  lN>gan
to  interi'st  the  |K>ople  of  lioston  in  his  scheme  for
technical  e<lucati<m,  in  which  he  desired  to  have
associatetl,  on  one  side  research  and  investigation
on  the  largest  scale,  and  on  the  other  agencies  for
the  popular  diffusion  of  useful  knowle<lge.  This*
project  continu«Ml  to  occupy  his  attention  until  in
1805  it  culminate*!  in  the  organization  of  the
Massachusetts  institute  of  technology,  of  which  he
l)ecame  first  president.  Three  years  later,  failing
health  made  it  necessary  for  him  to  relinquish  that
office,  which  he  resumetl  in  1878;  but  he  gave  it  up

Xin  in  1881.  and  was  made  prt)fessor  emeritus  of
sics  and  gj'ology,  which  chair  he  had  held  in
conne*'tion  with  the  presi<lencv.  He  delivered  a
course  of  lit'tures  l)efore  the  fx)well  institute  on
"The  Application  of  Science  to  the  Arts"  in  1862,
and  in  1801  ha<i  been  appointed  inspetitor  of  gas
and  gas-meters  for  the  state  of  Massachusetts.
Harvanl  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1800.
Prof.  Itogers  was  chairman  of  the  American  as-
sociation of  geologists  and  naturalists  in  1845
and  again  in  1847,  also  calling  to  order  the  first
meeting  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science,  of  which  Ixnly  he  was
president  in  1875,  and  elected  its  first  hf)norary
fellow  in  1881,  as  a  special  mark  of  distinction.
He  was  active  in  founding  the  American  social
science  association  and  its  first  president ;  also  he
was  one  of  the  corporate  meml)ers  of  the  Na-
tional academy  of  sciences,  and  its  presidetit  from
1878  until  his  death.  Besides  numerous  pa-
pers on  geology,  chemistry,  and  physics,  contrib-
ut<Hi  to  the  proceo<lings  of  s<HMeties  and  techni-
cal journals,  he  was  the  author  of  "Strength
of  Materials"  (Charlottesville,  1888)  and  "  Ele-
ments of  Mechanical  Philosophy  "  (Boston,  1852).
— Another  brother,  Henry  Darwin,  geologist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  Aug.,  1H()H;  d.  near  Glas-
gow, Scotland,  29  Mav.  1800,  was  e<lucated  in  Bal-
timore, Md.,  and  Williamsburg,  Va..  and  in  185K)
was  elected  professor  of  chemistry  and  natural  phi-
losonhy  at  Dickinson  college,  Pa.  In  18^51  he  went
to  huro[>e  and  studied  science  in  Ijondon.  During
the  winter  of  1833-'4  he  delivered  a  course  of  lectures
on  ge<ilogy  at  the  Franklin  institute,  and  in  1835  he
was  elected  professor  of  geology  and  mineralogy  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  remained
until  1840.  in  18ii5  he  was  chosen  to  make  a  geo-
logical and  mineralogical  survey  of  New  Jersey,
and.  in  a<l<lition  to  a  preliminary  report  in  18510,  he
jinhli^h.-d  ••  lK>s«Tij>tion  of  the  Geology  of  the  State
of  New  Jersey"  (I'hilatlelphia,  1840).' On  the  or-

?:anization  of  the  geological  survey  of  the  state  of
Vnnsylvania  in  1886,  he  was  appointed  geologist
in  charge,  and  engage<l  in  active  field-work  until
1841,  when  the  appropriations  were  disct)ntinued.  i
During  the  ten  ensuing  years  his  services  were  re-  '
taine*!  as  an  expert  l>y  various  coal  com[Hinies,  but  \
the  field-work  of  the  survey  was  resume*!  in  1851  j
and  continue*!  until  1K54. ^»ix  annual  ri'jiorts  were
published  between  !H30  and  1842,  and  in  1855  the  '
preparation  of  a  final  report  was  confided  to  him.  |


Finding  that  the  work  c«>uld  be  done  lew  expen-
sively aoroad,  he  transferr*-*!  his  renidenco  to  Kdin-
burglt  and  issu«il  "  The  Geology  of  Pennsylvania,
a  (loverninent  .Survt'j"  (2  v<»ls..'  F>linburgh.  1858).
In  1858  he  was  ap|H)int«'4l  pn)fess<ir  of  natural  hii»-
torv  in  the  University  of  (lla^gow.  an«l  he  mntin*
ueJ  in  that  chair  until  his  death.  Prof.  Rogera
also  delivere*!  a  series  t)f  hn-tures  on  geology  in
Boston  during  1844.  He  n-ceivwl  the  degree  of
A.  M.  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1884,
and  that  of  liL.  D.  fn)m  the  University  of  Dublin
in  1857.  During  his  n-sidenw  in  Phira*lelphia  he
was  m-tive  in  the  American  |)hilosf*phica]  society
and  in  the  I'hilatlelphia  academy  of  natural scienoM,
and  he  was  a  meml)er  of  other  Americ>an  eocietiea,
and  of  the  Ge<^>logical  .so«'iety  of  London,  a  fellow
of  the  Koval  society  of  FkiinburKh.  an*l  president
of  the  I'hilo8oi)hical  s<H.'iety  of  (tlas(;ow  in  18C4-'6.
He  e*lited  "Tne  Messc-nger  of  Useful  Knowltnlge"
in  1880-'l.  and  later  was  one  of  the  conductors  of
the  "  Fklinburgh  New  I'hilos4^>phical  Journal."  His
publisheil  pai)ers  an-  alx)Ut  fiftv  in  numU'r,  and
j>ertain  chiefly  to  geology.  In  aildition  to  his  geo-
logical re|K)rts.  he  uublis'hed  "  A  Guide  to  a  t'ourse
of  Lectures  in  Geologj',"  and  is  the  author  of  a  geo-
logical map  of  the  Lnited  States  and  a  chart  of
the  arctic  regions  in  the  "Physical  Atlas."  In
conjunction  with  William  and  Alexander  K.John-
son, he  published  a  g«-ographical  atlas  *if  the  Unit-
ed States  (K<linburgh.  1857).— Another  brother,
Robert  Empie,  chemist,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  29
March.  1813;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  0  Sept..  1884,
was  educated  first  uiuler  the  care  of  his  father,  and
then  by  his  elder  bmthers.  It  was  intended  that
he  should  be  a  civil  engineer,  and  for  a  time  he
acted  as  assistant  in  the  survey  of  the  Itoston  and
Providence  railnmd,  but  healtandoned  this  in  1838,
and  was  graduated  at  the  medical  deitartment  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  18510,  where  he
followed  a  full  course  of  chemistry  un*ler  Roliert
Hare.  The  active  practice  of  medicine  not  being
congenial  to  him,  he  was  ap|K)inted  chemist  to  the
gtHjloKical  survey  of  Pennsj-lvania  in  1830,  and  con-
tinuea  so  for  six'  years.  In  1841-'2  he  was  tempo-
rary instructor  in  chemistry  at  the  University  of
Virginia  and  was  electitl.  in  March.  1842,  to'the
chair  of  general  and  applied  chemistry'  and  ma-
teria medica  in  that  institution.  He  continued  in
this  nlace  until  1852,  when  he  was  called  to  suc-
ceed nis  brother  James  as  i)rofessor  of  chemistry  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  became
dean  of  the  metlical  faculty  in  1850.  In  1877  he
resicrned  these  ap|>«>intments  to  accept  the  profes-
sorsnip  of  chemistry  and  toxicology  in  Jefferson
me*lical  college,  which  he  then  retainetl  till  1884,
when  he  was  made  professor  emeritus.  During  the
civil  war  he  served  as  acting  assistant  surgeon,  in
1802-'3,  at  the  West  Philadelphia  military  hospital.
Prof.  Rogers  was  appointed  in  18?2  by  the  U.S.
treasury  der)artment  one  of  a  commissi*)!!  to  exam-
ine the  melters'  and  n>ftners'  deptirtment  of  the
U.  S.  mint  in  Philadelphia.  He  visittnl  the  mint
in  San  Francisco  in  187J},  and  in  1874  the  assay-
office  in  New  York,  and  subsequently  until  1871*  he
was  frefjuently  engage*!  on  goveniment  commis-
sions for  the  various  mints,  making  valuable  re-
ports, in  additi*)n  to  which  he  served  on  the  annual
assay  commissions  in  1874- '9.  Fr*>m  18?2  until  his
deatli  he  was  one  of  the  chemists  that  were  em-
ployed by  the  gas-trust  of  Philadelphia  to  make
analyses  ant!  «lailv  photometric  tests  *>f  the  gas.
The  degree  of  LL.  I>.  was  conferre*!  on  him  by
Dickinson  in  1S77.  He  was  a  f«»llow  of  the  Colle^
of  physicians  and  surgeons,  member  of  various  sci-
entific societies,  one  of  the  incorporators  of  the


806


ROGERS


ROGERS


National  academy  of  sciences,  and  president  of  the
Franklin  institute  in  1875-'9.  Besides  various  arti-
cles in  the  transactions  of  the  societies  of  which  he
was  a  member,  and  in  scientific  journals,  he  was  as-
sociated with  his  brother  James  (o.  v.)  in  editing
"  Elements  of  Chemistry  "  (Philadelnhia,  1840),  and
edited  Charles  G.  Lehman's  "  Physiological  Chemis-
try "  (2  vols.,  1855).  See  "  The  Brothers  Kogers,"  by
William  S.  W.  Ruschenberjjer  (Philadel{)hia,  1885).

ROGERS,  James  Webb,  lawyer,  b.  in  Hills-
borough, N.  C.  11  July,  1823.  He  was  gratluated
at  Princeton  in  1841,  and  then  studied  for  the
ministry.  After  taking  orders  in  the  Pi"otestant
Episcopal  church,  he  Ijecame  pastor  of  St.  Paul's
parish  m  Franklin,  Tenn.,  and  while  in  that  state
was  instrumental  in  buihling  six  churches.  He
was  a  partisan  of  the  south  at  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war,  and  served  in  the  Confederate  army
under  Gen.  Leonidas  Polk.  Subsequently  he  went
to  England,  remaining  there  for  some  time,  and  in
1878  he  V)ecame  a  Roman  Catholic,  but  could  not
be  admitted  to  the  [)riesthood  on  account  of  his
being  riuirried.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States
he  settled  at  first  in  New  York  city,  afterward  in
Indianapolis,  Ind.,  where  he  edited  "The  Central
Catholic,"  and  then  removed  to  Washington,  where
he  studied  law.  After  being  admitted  to  practice,
he  became  associated  with  his  son  as  attorney  in
the  protection  and  sale  of  the  hitter's  inventions.
His  publications  include  "  Lafitte,  or  the  Greek
Slave  "  (Boston,  1870) ;  "  Madame  Surratt,  a  Drama
in  Five  Acts"  (Washington,  1879);  "Arlington,
and  other  Poems  "  (1883) ;  and  "  Parthenon  "  (Bal-
timore, 1887). — His  son,  James  Harris,  electrician,
b.  in  Franklin,  Tenn.,  13  July,  1850,  was  educated
in  this  country  and  abroad.  In  1877  he  was  ap-
pointed electrician  at  the  U.  S.  capitol  in  Wash-
mgton,  1).  C,  and  he  continued  in  that  office  until
1883.  He  was  the  inventor  of  the  secret  telephone
that  was  sold  in  New  York  for  $80,000,  also  of  the
national  improved  telephone,  and  of  the  pan-elec-
tric system,  comprising  patents  on  electric  mo-
tors, lights,  telegraphs,  telephones,  and  teleraorphs,
which  attracted  greater  attention  from  the  circum-
stance that  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  Senator  Au-
gustus II.  Garland,  Senator  Isham  G.  Harris,  and
other  government  officials  capitalized  the  inven-
tions at  $15,000,000,  and  secured,  it  was  alleged  at
the  time,  the  interposition  of  the  government  to
defend  some  of  the  patents.  He  has  lately  devised
what  he  calls  "  visual  synchronism."

ROGERS,  John,  founder  of  a  sect,  b.  in  New
London,  Conn.,  in  1648 ;  d.  there  in  1721.  He  be-
came a  dissenter  from  the  Congregational  church,
assumed  the  ministerial  offices  of  preaching  and
baptizing,  and,  having  gained  a  few  disciples,
founded  a  sect  whose  members  were  called  Roger-
enes,  and  also  Rogerene  Baptists  or  Quakers.  He
and  his  followers  were  frequently  fined  and  im-
prisoned for  profanation  of  the  Sabbath,  for,  al-
though they  worshipped  on  that  day,  they  regard-
ed themselves  free  to  labor.  Rogei"s  was  put  in
the  stocks  for  an  insult  to  the  assembled  congrega-
tion, and  upon  his  release  from  prison  rushed  into
the  meeting-house  and  disturbed  the  services,  for
which  he  was  sent  to  Hartford  for  trial  and  was
seated  on  a  gallows  with  a  halter  around  his  neck
for  several  hours.  He  frequently  came  into  collision
with  the  town  authorities,  and  his  aggressive  spirit
did  not  cease  with  his  old  age,  for  in  1711  he  was
fined  and  imprisoned  for  misdemeanor  in  court,
contempt  of  its  authority,  and  vituperation  of  the
judges.  Upon  his  release  he  was  charged  with  in-
sanity and  confined  in  a  dark  prison.  The  popu-
lace became  enraged,  and  several  English  officers


applied  to  the  town  authorities  to  mitigate  his  treab-
ment.  He  finally  escaped  in  a  t)oat  to  Long  Island,
went  to  New  York,  and  l)egged  the  protection  of
Gov.  Hunter.  On  his  return  to  New  London  he
prosecuted  his  judges,  but  was  nonsuited  and
charged  with  a  heavy  fine.  He  wrote  many  books
on  theology,  including  "  The  Midnight  Cry.

ROGERS,  John,  congressman,  u.  in  Annapolis,
Md.,  23  Sept.,  1789.  His  parentage  and  the  date
of  his  birth  are  unknown.  He  was  a  member  of
the  committee  of  safety  in  1774-'5,  a  trustee  of  the
Lower  Marlborough  academy  in  1775,  a  delegate  to
the  Continental  congress  in  1775-'0,  one  of  the
executive  council  on  the  organization  of  the  state

fovemment  in  February,  1777,  and  chancellor  of
laryland  from  10  March,  1778,  until  his  death.
ROGERS,  John,  sculptor,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
30  Oct.,  1829.  He  received  his  education  at  the
Boston  high-school,  and  afterward  worked,  first  in
a  dry-goods  store  and  later  in  a  machine-shop,  at
Manchester,  N.  H.  While  at  this  latter  place  his
attention  was  first  drawn  to  sculpture,  and  he  be-
gan to  model  in  clay  in  his  leisure  hours.  In  1856
he  sought  work  in  Hannibal,  Mo.,  and  in  1858  he
visited  Europe.  On  his  return  in  1859  he  went  to
Chicago,  where  he  modelled,  for  a  charity  fair,
"  The  Checker-Players,"  a  group  in  clay,  which  at-
tracted much  attention,  lie  produced  also  some
other  groups,  but  "  The  Slave  Auction,"  which  was
exhibited  in  New  York  in  1860,  first  brought  him
to  the  notice  of  the  general  public.  This  was  the
forerunner  of  the  well-known  war  series  of  statu-
ettes (1800-'5),  which  included,  among  others,  the
"  Picket  Guard,"  "  One  more  Shot "  (1864), "  Taking
the  Oath  and  drawing  Rations"  (1865),  and  "  Union
Refugees,"  "  Wounded  Scout,"  and  "  Council  of
War  (1867-'8).  His  works  on  social  subjects,  most
of  which  have  been  produced  since  the  war,  have
also  been  very  popular.  Among  these  are  "  Com-
ing to  the  Parson"  (1870);  "Checkers  up  at  the
Farm";  "The  Charity  Patient";  "Fetching  the
Doctor";  and  "Going  for  the  Cows"  (1873).  He
has  produced  also  several  statuettes  in  illustration
of  passages  in  the  poets,  particularly  Shakesr)eare.
They  include  "Ha!  I  like  not  that,  from  "Othel-
lo " ;  "  Is  it  so  nominated  in  the  Bond  t "  from  the
"  Merchant  of  Venice  "  (1880) ;  "  Why  don't  You
speak  for  Yourself  ?  "  from  "  Miles  Standish  " ;  and
a  series  of  three  groups  illustrating  Irving's  "  Rip
Van  Winkle  "  (1870).  These  statuette  groups,  about
fifty  in  number,  and  each  from  eighteen  to  twenty
inches  in  height,  have  nearly  all  oeen  reprodnceti
in  composition,  and  have  had  large  sales.  He  has
been  most  successful  in  illustrating  every-day  life
in  its  humorous  and  pathetic  aspects,  and  "  Rogers's
Groups"  have  had  a  large  share  in  elevating  the
artistic  taste  of  the  masses.  Mr.  Itogers  has  also
executed  an  equestrian  statue  of  Gen.  John  F.  Rey-
nolds (1881-'3),  which  stands  before  the  city-hall,
Philadelphia,  and  in  1887  he  exhibited  "  Ichabod
Crane  and  the  Headless  Horseman,"  a  bronze  group.
ROGERS,  Mary  Cecilia,  b.  about  1820;  d.
in  Weehawken.  N.  J.,  25  July,  1841.  She  was
the  daughter  of  a  widow  that  kept  a  boarding-
house  in  Nassau  street,  and  was  engaged  by  John
Anderson  as  a  shop-girl  in  his  tobacco-store  on
Broadway,  near  Duane  street,  where  young  men  of
fashion  bought  their  cigars  and  tobacco.  No  sus-
picion had  ever  been  attached  to  her  character,  and
much  excitement  was  manifested  when  she  sud-
denly disa{)peared.  A  week  later  she  reappeared  at
her  accustomed  place  behind  the  counter,  and  in
reply  to  all  inquiries  said  that  sjje  had  been  on
a  visit  to  her  aunt  in  the  country.  Several  years
afterward  she  left  her  home  one  Sunday  morning


ROORRS


RCXiKRS


90fl


to  risit  a  relative  in  another  part  of  the  city.  She
requenUxl  licr  at*c<«pt4Ml  tiuitor,  who  boanli'il  with
her  mother,  to  come  for  her  in  the  evening ;  but,  hm
it  raine«l,  he  eonriiuled  that  she  wouiil  remain  over
uight,  and  diil  not  call  fur  her.  The  next  day  Khe
failed  tu  return,  and  it  was  afvertained  that  xhe
had  not  visitwl  her  n'lntivi».  Four  days  later  her
Ixjdy  wa.<4  found  lloatiu);  in  Hudson  river,  near
Weehawlcen,  with  marks  that  showi>il  beyond  doubt
that  she  hiul  l)e«'n  n>unlere<l.  Kv^ry  effort  was
made  to  det4*rmine  by  whom  she  hatl  Itet-n  killtnl,  but
without  success.  A  few  weeks  later,  in  a  thicket
on  the  New  Jersey  shore,  part  of  her  clothing
was  found,  with  every  evidence  that  a  des|>t«rate
struggle  ha^l  t^iken  pla(*e  there ;  but  these  apfiear-
anc(«  were  IxMievwl,  on  olosu  ins|)ection,  t«)  have
been  arrani;e<l  to  give  it  that  asjH.<ct.  Subse«iuent-
ly  it  was  shown  that  she  hail  been  in  the  hauit  of
meeting  a  young  naval  ofTlcer  secrt'tly,  and  it  was
alleged  that  she  was  in  his  company  at  the  time  of
her  first  disappearance.  He  was  able  to  account
for  his  wheroal)outs  from  the  time  of  her  leaving
home  until  the  finding  of  her  btnly,  and  the  munler
would  have  l)ei'n  forgotten  had  not  F^lgar  Allan
Poe  revived  the  incident  of  the  crime  in  his  "  Mys-
tery of  Marie  Roget."  With  remarkable  skill  he
analyzed  the  evidence,  and  showed  almost  conclu-
sively that  the  murder  had  been  accomplished  by
one  familiar  with  the  sea,  who  had  dragged  her
Ixxly  to  the  water  and  there  deposited  it.  Many
persiins  were  susjjectetl  of  the  crime,  and,  among
others,  John  Anders4in,  whose  last  yeai"s,  he  claimed.
Were  luiunted  by  her  spirit.

RO(jKRS,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Haver-
hill, Kngland,  in  15!».S;  d.  in  Ipswich,  Ma.s.s.,  3  July.
lOTw.  lie  was  the  son  of  the  Kev.  John  Rogers,  of
Dedham,  who  has  been  supposed,  but  on  insufTicient
evidence,  to  have  been  a  grandson  of  John  the  mar-
t\T,  was  cducute<l  at  Cambridge,  and  preachetl  in
liocking,  Essex,  and  Assington,  Suffolk.  Through
the  influence  of  Thomas  Hooker  he  came  to  Massa-
chusetts, 10  Nov.,  Ift5(!.  In  KKH  he  was  a  meml)er
of  the  synfnl  that  met  in  Cambridge  to  settle  the
Antinomian  coutniversy.  He  was  invitetl  to  Dor-
chester, but  found  his  followers  could  not  lieaccom-
mtxlate<l  there,  and  went  to  Ipswich,  where  he  was
ordainetl  on  20  Feb.,  1GJJ8,  with  Rev.  John  Norton
as  colleague,  serving  until  his  death.  Cott«)n  Mather
said  that  Mr.  Rogers  "might  be  comparetl  with  the
very  best  of  the  true  ministers  which  made  the  l)est
days  of  New  Kngland,"  and  his  s«in-in-law,  Thomas
Uubbanl,  said  "he  had  eminent  learning,  singular
piety,  and  zeal."  He  i)ublLsheil  a  letter  on  the
"Cause  of  Go<l'8  Wnith  against  the  Nation"  (Ix)n-
don,  1044),  and  left  in  manuscript  n  vindication  in
Latin  of  the  Congregational  form  of  church  gov-
ernment, of  which  Cotton  Mather  has  preserved  a
considerable  extract. — His  son,  John,  clergyman,
b.  in  Coggeshall,  Kngland,  in  January,  KWl ;  d.
in  Cambridge,  Mass..  2  July.  16S4,  came  with  his
father  to  New  Kngland,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1049,  and  stuciied  both  me<licine  and  theology.
He  first  preached  in  Ipswich  in  10.50,  and  sut)se-

Juently  share<l  the  duties  of  the  ministry  there,
'rora  1082  till  10H4  he  was  president  of  Harvard.
The  provincial  nn-ords  say  that  in  DetvmlxT,  1705.
the  legislature  ordere<l  two  [lamphlets,  that  were
sent  them  by  John  Riigers  and  his  son  John,  to  l)o
bunied  by  the  hangman  in  lioston.  These  prf)b-
ably  expri'-vH'd  disapproval  of  the  op|>osition  of  the
legislature  in  n*gard  to  the  governors  salary.

ROilERS,  Nathaniel,  artist,  b.  in  bridge-
hampton,  li.  I.,  in  1788;  d.  0  Dec.,  1844.  He  was
apprenticetl  to  a  shi|>-caqienter  when  he  was  a
boy,  but,  having  been  dis^iualified  by  an  accident


for  such  a  trade.  tume«I  his  attention  to  art,  for
which  he  had  always  had  a  prcdilectioo.  After
painting  by  himseff  for  some  time,  he  went  to
New  York  in  1811  ami  became  a  pupil  of  Jowph
\V^k1.  Not  long  afterwanl  he  o|iene<l  a  studio
for  himself,  and  Mwrn  took  high  rank  as  a  |ieinter
of  miniatures.  Among  these  were  admirable  por-
traits of  the  friends  nnd  litenuy  partners,  Fitx-
(iriH-ne  Halleck  and  Josi-ph  Rodman  I>rake.  liis
professional  life  was  six-nl  princi|>ally  in  New  York,
and  he  whs  one  of  the  founders  of  the  National
acailemv  in  that  city.

R<Ni>:RS,  Nathaniel  Peahody.  editor,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  3  June.  1794:  d.  in  Concorti,
N.  H.,  10  Oct.,  1840.  He  was  gratluatetl  at  Dart-
mouth in  1810,  and  practised  law  until  18.S8,  when
he  established  in  Conconl,  N.  H.,  the  "  Herald  of
Freedom,"  a  pionwr  anti-slavery  newsim|»<'r.  He
also  wrote  for  the  New  York  "Tribune  umler  the
signature  of  "  The  Old  Man  of  the  Mountain."  His
fugitive  writings  were  publishe<l,  with  a  memoir,  by
the  Rev.  John  I'ierwnt  (Conconl,  1847).

KO(<ERS,  Randolph,  sculptor,  b.  in  Waterloo,
near  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  0  July,  1825.  I'ntil  the  age
of  twenty-three  he  was  engaged  in  mercantile  pur-
suits in  Ann  ArlH)r,  Mich.,  and  in  New  York  city.
He  then  went  to  Italy  and  studied  with  Lorenzo
Bartolini,  at  Rome,  from  1848  till  IWO.  On  his
retuni  he  o{)ened  a  studio  in  New  York,  where  he
remained  until  1855.  In  that  year  he  returned  to
Italy,  where  he  has  reside<l  since  that  time.  Among
his  earlier  works  are  "  Ruth,"  an  ideal  bust  (1851);
"Nydia"  (1850);  "Hoy  Skating,"  "Isaac,"  full-
length,  and  the  statue  of  John  Adams,  in  Mt.
Auburn  cemetery  (1^)7).  One  of  his  liest-known
works,  the  bas-reliefs  on  the  doors  of  the  capitol
at  Washington,  representing  scenes  in  the  lire  of
Columbus,  was  designed  in  18.')8,  and  cast  in  bronze
at  Munich.  In  1801  hecomnlete<l  the  Washington
monument  at  Richmond,  which  had  been  left  un-
finished by  Thomas  Crawford,  adding  the  statues
of  Marshall,  Mason,  and  Nelson,  for  which  Craw-
ford had  made  no  design,  as  well  as  some  allegori-
cal figuri»s.  His  other  works  include  "  Angel  of
the  Resurrection."  on  the  monument  of  Col.  Samuel
Colt,  Hartford,  Conn.  (1801-*2);  "Isaac,"  an  ideal
bust  (1805);  memorial  monuments  for  Cincinnati
(1803-'4),  Providence  (1871),  Detroit  (1872),  and
Worcester,  Mass.  (1874):  "  Ix»st  Pleiad"  (1875);
"Genius  of  Connecticut."  on  the  capitol  at  Hart-
fonl  (1877);  and  an  e^juestrian  group  of  Indians,  in
bronze  (1881).  He  liasalsoexecute<l  intrtrait  statues
of  Abraham  Lincoln,  for  Phila<lelpnia  (1871),  and
William  H.  Sewanl,  for  New  York  (1870).

ROdlKRS,  Robert,  soldier,  h.  in  Ijondonderry,
N.  H..  in  1727:  d.  in  Kngland  altout  1800.  He  en-
tered the  military  servii-e  during  the  old  French
war,  for  which  he  raise<l  and  comnwiuded  "  Rogers's
rangers,"  a  company  that  ac«iuinHl  reputation  for
activity,  particularly  in  the  region  of  l>ake  (»eor^.
His  name  is  jHTjietuated  there  by  the  precipice
that  is  known  as  "  Rojjers's  slide,"  near  which  he
escaped  from  the  Indians,  who,  believing  that  he
had  slid  down  the  steep  defile  of  the  mountain
under  the  protection  of  the  Great  Spirit,  made  no
attempt  at  further  pui-suit.  l>n  13  .March.  1758,
with  170  men.  he  fought  100  Fn-nch  and  000  In-
dians, and,  after  losing  lOU  men  and  killing  150,
he  retreated.  In  1759  he  was  sent  by  Sir  JelTrey
Amherst  from  Cn)wn  Point  to  d»>stroy  the  Indian
village  of  St.  Francis  near  St.  I^wn-nce  river,  which
st>rvice  he  performiHl,  killitig  200  Indians,  and  in
17((0  he  was  ordertnl  by  Amherst  to  take  pooeeorioD
of  Detroit  and  other  western  |iosta  that  were  ceded
by  the  French  after  the  fall  of  (Quebec. Ascending


810


ROGERS


ROGERS


the  St.  Lawrence  with  200  rangers,  he  visited  Fort
Pitt,  hat!  an  interview  with  Pontia<;\  and  received
the  submission  of  Detroit.  He  visited  England,
and  suffered  from  want  until  he  borrowed  money
to  print  his  journal,  which  he  presented  to  the
king,  who  in  1765  appointed  him  governor  of
Mackinaw,  Mich.;  but  while  holding  this  office  he
was  accused  of  plotting  to  plunder  his  own  fort  and
to  deliver  it  to  the  h  rench,  and  was  consequent-
ly sent  to  Montreal  in  irons  and  tried  by  court-
martial.  In  1769  he  revisited  England,  but  was
soon  imprisoned  lor  debt.  Afterward  he  returned
to  this  country.  Dr.  John  Wheelock,  of  Dart-
mouth college,  wrote  at  this  period  :  "The  famous
Maj.  Rogers  came  to  my  house  from  a  tavern  in  the
neighborhood,  where  he  called  for  refreshment.  I
had  never  before  seen  him.  He  was  in  but  an  ordi-
narv  habit  for  one  of  his  character.  He  treated  me
with  great  respect ;  said  he  came  from  London  in
Julv,  and  had  spent  twenty  days  with  the  congress
in  Philadelphia,  and  I  forget  how  many  at  New
York ;  had  been  ofifered  and  urged  to  take  a  com-
mission in  favor  of  the  colonies,  but,  as  he  was  on
half-pay  from  the  crown,  he  thought  it  proper  not
to  accept  it " ;  and  also  "  that  he  had  got  a  pass,  or
license  to  travel,  from  the  Continental  congress."
Maj.  Rogers's  accounts  of  himself  were  probably
not  accurate,  but  he  had  been  a  prisoner  of  con-

fress,  and  was  released  on  parole,  promising  that
e  would  bear  no  arms  against  the  American  colo-
nies. Soon  after  leaving  Dr.  Wheelock  he  wrote
to  Gen.  Washington:  "1  love  America;  it  is  my
native  country,  and  that  of  my  family,  and  I  in-
tend to  spend  the  evening  of  my  days  in  it."  It  is
believed  that  at  this  very  moment  he  was  a  spv.
Being  suspected  by  Washington,  he  was  secured  m
1776,  and  during  his  examination,  pretending  that
he  had  business  with  congress,  was  sent  to  Phila-
delphia under  the  care  of  an  officer.  That  body
decided  that  he  should  be  disposed  of  by  the  Pro-
vincial congress  of  New  Hampshire.  Notwith-
standing his  parole,  he  accepted  the  commission  of
colonel  in  the  British  army,  for  which  he  raised
the  Queen's  rangers,  a  corps  that  was  celebrated
throughout  the  contest.  To  encourage  enlistments
he  issued  a  printed  circular  promising  to  the  re-
cruits "their  proportion  of  all  rebel  lands."  On
21  Oct.,  1776,  he  escaped  being  taken  prisoner  by
Lord  Stirling  at  Mamaroneck.  Soon  afterward  he
went  to  England,  and  in  1778  he  was  proscribed
and  banished.  His  subsequent  history  is  lost.
Rogers  was  the  author  of  "  A  Concise  Account  of
North  America"  (London,  1765);  "Journals,"  giv-
ing an  account  of  his  early  adventures  as  a  ranger
(1765;  Dublin,  1770);  and  "  Ponteach,  or  the
Savages  of  America,"  a  tragedy  in  verse  (1766).
This  was  printed  anonymously,  and  is  now  very
rare.  His  "  Diary  of  the  Siege  of  Detroit  in  the
War  with  Pontiac  "  was  published,  with  other  nar-
ratives and  with  notes,  by  Franklin  B.  Hough
(Albany,  1860 ;  new  ed.,  1883).  The  names  of  the
officers  of  Rogers's  rangers  are  given  in  the  "  Re-
port of  the  Adjutant-General  of  New  Hampshire,"
and  his  exploits  are  chronicled  in  Gen.  John  Wins-
low's  unpublished  "Journal,"  and  in  manuscript
letters  in  the  Massachusetts  archives.  The  "Jour-
nals'' mentioned  above  are  condensed  in  "Remi-
niscences of  the  French  War,"  edited  by  Caleb
Stark  (Concord,  1831),  and  also  appear  in  an
abridged  form  in  a  "  Memoir  of  John  Stark "  by
the  same  author  (1860).  The  best  edition  is  that
edited  bv  Franklin  B.  Hough  (Albany,  1883).

R0G£RS,  Thomas  J.,  congressman,  b.  in
Waterford.  Ireland,  in  1781 ;  d.  in  New  York  citv,
7  Dec.,  1832. He  came  to  the  United  States  in


1784,  learned  printing,  and  for  many  years  pub-
lished and  edited  a  political  newspaj)or.  He  wa.s
elected  to  congress  from  Pennsvlvania  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  from  24  March,  1818,  till  26  April,
1824,  when  he  resigned,  having  l)een  appointed
recorder  of  deeds  for  Northampton  county.  Pa.
He  was  the  author  of  "A  New  American Bio-

fraphical Dictionary;  or.  Remembrancer  of  the
)eparted  Heroes,  Sages,  and  Statesmen  of  Ameri-
ca ^  (Easton,  Pa.,  1813 ;  last  ed.,  1829).

ROGERS,  William,  clergyman  and  educator,
b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  22  July,  1751 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  7  April,  1824.  He  was  graduated  in
1769  at  Rhode  Island  college  (now  Brown),  where
he  was  the  first  and  for  several  davs  the  only  stu-
dent, lie  afterward  became  principal  of  an  acad-
emy at  Newport,  and  in  1772-'5  wa.s  pastor  of  the
1st  Baptist  church  in  Philadelphia.  In  April,
1776,  he  was  chosen  chaplain  to  Col.  Samuel
Miles's  Pennsylvania  rifle  regiment,  and  served
until  June,  1778,  when  he  was  made  brigade  chap-
lain in  the  Continental  army,  retiring  from  the
service  in  June,  1781.  After  quitting  the  army  he
received  calls  from  three  churches,  of  different
denominations,  to  settle  in  the  ministry.  In  1789
he  was  chosen  professor  of  oratory  and  English
literature  in  the  College  of  Philadelphia,  and  in
1792  to  the  same  {X)st  in  its  successor,  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania,  which  place  he  resigned  in
1811.  He  was  chosen  in  1790  vice-president  of
the  Pennsylvania  society  for  the  gra^Uial  alx)lition
of  slavery,  in  1797  vice-president  of  the  Philadel-
phia society  for  alleviating  the  miseries  of  public
prisons,  in  1802  one  of  the  correspondents  and
editors  of  the  London  "  Evangelical  Magazine,"  in
1805  chaplain  to  the  Philadelphia  militia  legion,
in  1816-'17  to  the  legislature  of  Pennsylvania,  and
in  1819  vice-president  of  the  Religious  historical
society  of  Philadelphia.  He  received  the  degree
of  A.  M.  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1773,  Yale  in  1780,  and  Princeton  in  1786,  and  in
1790,  from  the  first  named,  the^degree  of  D.  D.
He  published  "  A  Circular  Letter  on  Justification  "
(1785;  reprinted  in  London,  1786);  "An  Introduc-
tory Prayer,"  at  the  request  of  the  Pennsylvania
society  of  the  Cincinnati  (1789) ;  "  A  Sermon  on  the
Death  of  Rev.  Oliver  Hart "  (1796) ;  "  An  Introduc-
tory Praver,  occasioned  by  the  Death  of  General
Washington  "  (1800) ;  "  A  Circular  Letter  on  Chris-
tian Missions  " ;  and  various  moral,  religious,  and
political  articles  in  newspapers  and  magazines.

ROGERS,  William  Augustus,  astronomer,- b.
in  W^aterford,  Conn.,  13  Nov.,  1832.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Brown  in  1857,  taught  in  Alfred  academv,
where  he  had  been  prepared  for  college,  and  in
1858  was  given  its  criair  in  mathematics  and  as-
tronomy, which  he  held  for  thirteen  years.  Mean-
while, during  leaves  of  absence,  he  passed  a  year
at  the  Sheffield  scientific  school  of  Yale  as  a  stu-
dent of  theoretical  and  applied  mechanics,  one  year
as  a  special  student  of  astronomy  in  the  Harvard
observatory,  which  was  followed  by  six  months'
experience  as  an  assistant,  and  spent  fourteen
months  in  the  V.  S.  naval  service  during  the  civil
war.  The  observatorv  at  Alfred  was  built  and
equipped  by  him.  In  1870  he  was  appointed
assistant  in  the  Harvard  observatory,  and  he  be-
came in  1877  assistant  professor  of  astronomy.  In
1886  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  astronomy  and
physics  at  Colby  university.  His  special  work  at
the  Harvard  observatory  consisted  in  observing
and  mapping  all  the  stars  down  to  the  ninth  mag-
nitude in  a  narrow  belt,  a  little  ^north  of  our
zenith.  The  observations  on  this  work  extended
over  a  period  of  eleven  years,  and  required  fifteen


ROGERS


ROLANDKR


811


yean  for  their  recliiction.  Four  volumw  of  the«e
observationii  have  aln*H(ly  IxH-ri  iaMuvd.  and  two
mopo  art'  in  |m*paration.  While  l*n>f.  Roj^rs  han
aeverwl  hi.s  connection  with  ilnrvanl.  he  still  re-
t«in!i  8U|H>rvi!iion  of  his  unflni.shed  work  at  the
ohservHtopk-.  One  of  the  earliest  ilifTlcultici;  that
he  met  with  was  the  flndinj;  of  niicnmieter  spider-
webs  that  were  suitahle  for  his  work.  After  nu-
inerous  exiM*rinients  he  succeetU«d  in  etchinp  jjlass
plates  with  the  moist  fumes  of  hydrofluoric  acid
«o  satisfactorily  that  the  U.  S.  government  ordere«l
the  plates,  which  were  used  oy  the  ex|MHlitions
that  were  sent  out  from  this  country  to  obs*»rve
the  transit  of  Venus.  His  study  of  this  subject,
•exten«linj»  over  sixteen  years,  has  made  him  a
universally  acknowledged  authoritv  in  all  that  |M*r-
tains  to  micrometrical  work,  ife  has  s[H>ciHlly
«tudie<l  the  constnu-tion  of  comi)arat«>rs  for  the
determination  of  differences  in  leuf^h,  and  has
established  useful  working  standartls  of  mea.surc-
ment  for  practical  me<-hanical  work,  result  inj;  in
the  Ropers-Hond  universal  comparator,  built  bv
the  Pratt  and  Whitney  comimny  of  Hartford,
who  were  thus  enable<l  to  muKe  their  system  of
standard  ptu^^s.  In  I8K0  he  was  sent  abroad  to
obtain  authorized  copies  of  the  English  and
French  standanls  of  length.  These  were  used  as
the  basis  of  comparison  for  the  l«rs  that  he  con-
structetl  and  that  now  serve  j»s  standards  of  length
for  Harvanl,  Yale,  Columbia,  Princeton,  the  L.  S.
signal  service,  the  Lick  oljservatory,  and  other  im-
portant institutions.  Prof.  Itogers's  micrometer
rulings,  both  on  metal  and  glass,  are  known  to
microscopists  for  their  accuracy  as  regards  divis-
ions, and  also  for  the  character  and  beauty  of  the
lines.  In  1880  he  was  made  a  fellow  of  the  Royal
society  of  Ix>ndon,  and  he  has  since  been  advanced
to  the  grade  of  honoraiT  fellow.  He  was  elected
in  1885  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences,  and
was  vice-president  of  the  American  a.ssociation  for
the  advancement  of  science  in  1883-'3,  presiding
over  the  section  in  mathematics  and  astronomy.
In  1886  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  American
society  of  microscopists.  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Yale  in  1880,  and  that  of
Ph.  D.  in  1886  by  Alfred  university.  His  pul>-
lished  papers,  nearly  fifty  in  numl)cr.  n-late  to
his  specialties,  and  have  been  published  in  scien-
tific journals  or  in  the  transactions  of  the  learned
societies  of  which  he  is  a  member.

ROGERS,  Woodes,  English  navigator,  b.  in
Derbyshire.  England,  ulxjut  IGCi;  d.  in  London
in  1732.  He  was  a  commander  in  the  navy  when
he  was  chosen  in  1708  as  captain  of  an  expedition
that  was  sent  bv  merchants  of  Bristol,  at  the  sug-
gestion of  William  Dampier,  to  explore  the  Pacific
ocean,  lie  sailed  from  Bristol  on  1  Aug.,  with
twoshi|>s,  with  Dumpier  as  pilot.  After  advancing
far  to  the  south,  disaprK)int(><i  in  not  finding  a  great
aouthem  continent,  tney  steered  to  the  north,  and
Unding,  1  Feb.,  1700,  at  Juan  Fernandez  island,
rescued  Alexander  Selkirk  (q.  v.).  On  the  southern
coast  of  Peru,  Rogers  secured  some  rich  SjMinish

firizcs,  attacked  the  city  of  Guaya^iuil,  exacting
rem  the  citizens  an  enormous  ransom,  and  sailed
along  the  coast  as  far  as  CaiKj  Siin  Lucas  in  Ix)wer
California.  After  visiting  Batavia  ho  passed  the
Cape  of  U<K)d  Hope,  and  anohon'd  in  tne  Downs,
2  OcL,  1711.  In  1717  he  was  commissioiuHl  gov-
ernor of  New  Providence  in  the  Bahamas,  and
was  sent  with  a  division  against  the  pirates  that
had  ravaginl  the  neighlioring  islands.  He  published
"Narralivo  <.'■  around  the  World"  (Ijon-

don,  171'.?).  ok,  who  commanded  one  of  '

the  ships  in  1;  .^v.  - ..  ^\|>edilion,  published  "  Voy-  '


age  in  the  South. Sea  and  Arriund  the  World,  made  in
the  Years  170K-'«-'U)-'H"  (1712).

ROM  III-:,  I/ewin  Jttnren(roHleh).  WeM  Indian
naval  »(\Uvr.  b.  in  St.  Tlloma^  28  (Kt.,  1786;  d.
in  ('()(M-nhagen,  Di>nmark.  2  Aug..  18A7.  He  was
the  son  of  a  govt-nior  of  St.  Thomas,  entered  the
('o|M*nhagen  naval  s«h<Kil  in  18U;{.  and  srrve<l  cred-
itably at  the  >M>iiil)ardment  of  that  citv.  In  1821
he  was  promotiNl  liar Ixir- master  of  St.  Thomas,  and
si>nt  to  make  a  nautical  survey  of  the  coant  of  the
colony.  His  charts  are  still  considennl  standards.
In  18;W  he  was  retinnl  with  the  rank  <if  cai>tain.
His  works  include  "  Ilistorie  og  befolkning  ai  Oeen
St.  Thomas"  (2  vols..  Co[K>nhagcn,  1H22).  and  "  Ful-
staendig- Signal  Svstem  til  Bnig  for  alle  nationera
Ski»K-"  (IKW;  rvYiMHl  «h1.,  1846).  which  ha»  lieen
trurisliitcd  into  all  Euro[»ean  languages.

ROJ  AS,  (jabriel  de  (ro  -has).  Sjtanish  soldier,  b.
In  Cuellar  in  the  15th  centurv;  d.  m  Charcas,  Peru.
17  Dec.,  1548.  He  came  to  .'iouth  America  in  1514
with  Pedrarias  Davila,  in  1524  t<xjk  jwrt  in  the  con-
qui»stof  Nicaragua  with  Conlova, com mande<l  in  the
campaign  against  (iil  Gonzales  Davihi,  and  assisted
in  the  discovery  of  the  I>esaguatlen>,  and  the  foun-
dation of  Gracias  a  Dios.  In  irtiiii  his  old  friend.
Francisco  Pizarro.  solicited  his  ai<l.  and  Roias
armed  two  ships  and  200  men :  but  Pe<lro  Alvarado,
who  was  planning  an  ex[)edition  of  his  own.  took
possession  of  the  shifts  and  the  forces.  Rojas  es-
caped with  only  a  few  followers  and  sailed  to  Peru,
landing  at  San  Miguel  de  Piura.  With  an  escort
that  was  provided  by  S<-ba>tian  «lc  Velalcazar,  he
joinetl  Pizarro  in  the  valley  of  Pachacamac.  took
i>art  in  the  foundation  of  Jauja,  and  wasap(iointed
lieutenant-governor  of  the  town.  He  assisted  after-
ward in  the  defence  of  Cuzco,  during  the  siege  by
Manco  Inca  Yupanqui  (o.  v.),  and  in  the  civil  wars
between  the  Pizarms  and  the  Almagn>s.  He  was
then  commissioned  by  Vaca  de  Castro  to  settle
Charcas,  and  when,  on  his  retuni  to  Cuzco,  he
found  Gonzalo  Pizarro  at  the  head  of  a  reb«'llion,
he  fled  to  Lima.  On  his  arrival  the  viceroy  Nufiez
de  Vela  was  already  imprisoncnl.  and  Kojas  narrow-
ly escaped  being  killed  by  Francisco  de  CarAaial,
but  Gonzalo  Pizarn>  itardiitie<l  him  on  account  of  his
former  services.  When  President  De  la  Gasca  ar-
rive<l,  Rojas  joined  the  royal  forces,  and  was  ap-
pointed commander  of  the  artillery,  which  he  di-
rcctedat  thebattlesof  Huarinasand  Xaquixaguana.
In  recomiK'nso  he  was  ap[K>intetl  magistrate  of
Potosi,  but  he  diwl  shortly  afterwanl.

ROJAS,  Juan  Rani6n,  Argentine  poet,  b.  in
Buenos  Avres  in  1784:  dietl  at  sea,  9  Sept..  1824.
He  studieil  in  the  College  of  San  Carlos,  and  as  an
officer  of  artiller)'  was  jtresent  at  the  siegi-sof  Mon-
tevideo in  1812  and  1816.  In  1813  he  was  pro-
mote«l  commander  of  the  stpiadron  of  grenadiers,
and  as  such  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Si|>e-Sipe.
He  served  in  the  staff  of  the  armies  of  the  United
Provinces  in  1818.  In  the  first  days  of  the  n*volu-
tion  he  liegan  to  write  poetry,  and  published  "Can-
cion  hen'>icaal  sitiode  Montevideo "(1811), and  "  A
laaperturadelaSociedad  |>atriotica  "  (1812).  In  the
collection  of  "  Poesias  |»atrias"  (Buenos  Ayn«s,
1820)  his  best  patriotic  cttmpositions  were  published.
He  |H>rislied  in  a  sliipwn'i'K.

ROLANDKR.  Daniel  (ro -lan-<lair),  Swe<lish
naturalist,  b.  in  the  province  of  .Smaaland  in  1?20:
d.  in  Lund  in  1774.  After  receiving  his  eilui-ation
in  Upsala  he  became  preceptor  of  the  children  of
Linnanis,  and  engaged  later  in  Ix^tanical  resean-hes
under  the  dire<-tion  of  the  great  naturalist.  At
Linna*us's  suggestion,  he  a<>com|ianie4l  to  Surinam
a  wealthy  citizen  of  the  colony,  and  on  his  arrival,
20  June,  175o,  began  immediately  to  explore  the


312


ROLPE


ROLLINS


country.  After  studying  the  flora  of  the  province
of  Paramaribo,  he  sojourned  several  months  on
the  banks  of  Commewyn  river,  where  he  engaged
in  ge<il<)gical  and  Imtanical  researc-hes.  Being  de-
feated in  an  attempt  to  explore  the  interior  of  Gui-
ana, through  an  uprising  of  the  slaves,  he  went  to  St,
Eustatius,  in  Februarj',  1756,  and  made  a  thorough
study  of  the  flora  of  the  ishind,  returning  to  Stock-
hohn,  20  Oct.,  with  rich  collections  and  a  herbari-
um of  1,500  plants.  As  he  had  difficulties  with
Linnaeus,  who  wished  to  make  free  use  of  the  col-
lections, and  the  privilege  of  printing  his  works
having  meanwhile  oeen  refused  by  the  government,
Rolander  sold  his  manuscripts  and  collections
to  Prof.  Rottboell,  of  Copenhagen,  and  retired  to
private  life.  His  works  include  "  Desorijjtio  et
iconura  rariorium  et,  pro  maxima  parte,  novas
plantas,  illustrium  "  edited  by  Prof.  Rottboell  (Co-

Senhagen,  1773);  "  Observationes  ad  genera  quie-
am  rariora  exoticarum  piantarum"  (1776):  and
"  Descriptiones  rarium  piantarum  in  Guiana  cres-
centium"  (1776).  The  two  last  works  were  pub-
lished by  the  Medical  society  of  Copenhagen.  The
Danish  government  afterward  bought,  from  the
heirs  of  Prof.  Rottboell,  Rolander's  manuscripts
and  collections,  which  are  now  preserved  in  the
museum  at  Copenhagen.  His  journal  has  been
published,  "  Diarum  Surinamense  "  (2  vols.,  1840).
ROLFE,  William  James,  editor,  b.  in  New-
buryport,  Mass.,  10  Dec,  1827.  His  youth  was
spent  in  Lowell,  Mjiss.,  and  in  1845  he  entered  Am-
herst. Although  he  was  not  graduated,  the  college
authorities  afterward  enrolled  his  name  among  the
regular  graduates  of  1849.  On  leaving  college  he
taught  in  Maryland  and  ^lassachusetts,  finally
settling  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1862,  as  master  of
the  high-school,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1868.
Since  1869  he  has  been  an  editor  of  the  "  Popular
Science  News,"  formerly  the  "  Boston  Journal  of
Chemistry,"  and  for  several  years  he  has  had
charge  of  the  Shakespeariana  in  the  "  Literary
World."  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on
him  bv  Harvard  in  1859  and  by  Amherst  in  1865,
and  that  of  Litt.  D.  by  Amherst  in  1887.  With
Joseph  H.  Hanson  he  published  a  "  Hand-Book  of
Latin  Poetry  "  (Boston,  1865) ;  "  Selections  from
Ovid  and  Virgil"  (1866;  2d  ed.,  1867);  and  with
Joseph  A.  Gillet  "The  Cambridge  Course  of  Phys-
ics," including  "Chemistry,"  "  Natural  Philosophy,"
and  "  Asti-onomy"  (6  vols.,  1867-8).  In  1867  he  pub-
lished an  edition  of  George  L.  Craik's  "  English  of
Shakesi)eare,"  which  led  to  the  preparation  of  "  The
Friendly  Edition  "  of  Shakespeare  (40  vols.,  New
York,  1870-83).  Mr.  Rolfe  has  also  edited  "  Select
Poems  of  Goldsmith "  (1875) ;  "  Select  Poems  of
Gray  "  (1876) ;  Tennyson's  "  Select  Poems  "  (1884) ;
"  Young  People's  "Tennyson  "  (1886) ;  "  Select
Poems  of  Browning  "  (1887) ;  "  Enoch  Arden,  and
other  Poems"  (1887);  Scott's  "Complete  Poems"
(1887) ;  "  Blot  in  the  Scutcheon,  and  other  Dramas
of  Browning"  (1887);  Byron's  "Childe  Harold"
(1887);  "Minor  Poems  of  Milton"  (1887);  "Tales
of  Chivalry,  from  Scott "  (1888) ;  "  Tales  from  Eng-
lish History"  (1888):  "Select  Poems  of  Words-
worth" (1888);  and  Thomas  Babmgton  Macaulay's
"Lays  of  Ancient  Rome"  (1888).

ROLLE,  Dennis,  colonist,  b.  in  Devonshire,
England,  about  1730;  d.  in  England  in  1707.  in
1766  he  purchased  a  district  in  Florida,  and  led
there  1,000  persons  to  form  a  colony ;  but,  owing  to
the  unhealthfulness  of  the  climate  and  the  deser-
tion of  those  that  escaped  disease,  he  soon  was  left
without  colonists  and  without  money,  and  was
compelled  to  work  his  passage  back  to  England  in
an  American  vessel. He  then  settled  on  his  in-


herited estate,  was  elected  to  the  house  of  com-
mons, was  high  sheriff,  and  devoted  much  time  to
improving  the  condition  of  the  lower  classes.

ROLLIN,  Ambroise  Lncien  (rol-lang).  West
Indian  historian,  b.  in  Trois  Rivieres,  Guadeloupe,
in  1692;  d.  in  l\)inte  k  Pitre  in  1749.  His  family
was  among  the  early  settlers  in  Guadeloupe  and
contributed  much  to  the  improvement  of  the  colo-
ny. In  1725  he  was  appointed  deputy  lieutenant
of  the  king  in  the  colony,  which  post  he  retained
till  his  death.  Devoting  his  leisure  time  to  re-
searches upon  the  Caribes  and  other  Indians,  who
formerly  inhabited  the  We«t  Indies,  he  wrote  some
remarkable  works,  which  are  yet  considered  as
authorities.  They  include  "Hisloire  des  Indiens"
(2  vols.,  Paris,  1739);  "  Les  Indiens  et  la  conquete
Espagnole"  (1740);  "  Histoire  et  description  des
Caralbes,  leur  condition  avant  la  conquete  "  (1743) ;
"  De  la  civilisation  Indienne  comparee  k  leur  ^tat
social"  (1745);  and  "  Les  incas  du  P^rou  et  la  con-
quete Espngnole"  (1748).

ROLLINAT,  Andr6  (rol-le-nah),  French  his-
torian, b.  in  Bordeaux  in  1741 ;  d.  in  Nantes  in
1793.  He  was  early  appointed  librarian  of  the  city
of  Nantes  and  devoted  himself  to  researches  upon
the  early  navigators  that  have  been  credited  with
the  discovery  of  America  before  Columbus.  His
works  include  "  Recherches  sur  les  precurseurs  de
Christophe  Colomb  en  Amerique"  (Nantes,  1785);
"  Les  Sagas  norvegiennes  et  les  navigateurs  scan-
dinaves  (1788);  "Tableau  des  dimes  payees  au
denier  de  Saint  Pierre  pendant  le  treizieme  et  le
quatorzieme  siecle  par  le  pays  du  vin"  (1790);
"  Histoire  des  navigateurs  normands"  (1791);  and
"  Recherches  sur  la  decouverte  du  Bresil  par  un
navigateur  dieppois  du  xv.  siecle  "  (1791).

ROLLINS,  Alice  Wellington,  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  12  June,  1847.  She  was  taught  by
her  father,  Ambrose  Wellington,  and  completed
her  studios  in  Europe.  She  taught  for  several
years  in  Boston,  and  married  Daniel  M.  Rollins,
of  New  York,  in  1876.  She  is  the  author  of  "  The
Ring  of  Amethyst,"  poems  (New  York,  1878) ;  "  The
Story  of  a  Ranch  "  (1885) ;  "  All  Sorts  of  ChUdren  "
(1886) ;  and  "  The  Three  Tetons  "  (1887).

ROLLINS,  Daniel  G.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Great  Falls,
N.  H.,  18  Oct..  1842.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1860,  studied  law  in  his  native  place  and
at  Harvard,  and  practised  for  some  time  in  Port-
land, Me.,  but  afterward  removed  to  New  York
city.  He  was  assistant  U.  S.  attorney  for  the
southern  district  of  New  York  in  1866-'9,  assistant
district  attorney  of  New  York  county  in  1873-'80,
then  district  attorney  till  1  Jan.,  1882,  and  then
surrogate  of  the  county  till  1  Jan.,  1888.  In  1887
he  was  Republican  candidate  for  a  supreme  court
judgeship.  Mr.  Rollins  has  won  reputation  as  a
lawyer.  He  has  been  associated  in  practice  for
some  time  with  James  C.  Carter.

ROLLINS,  Edward  Henry,senator,  b.  in  Sora-
ersworth  (now  Rollinsford),  N.  II., 3  Oct.,  1824;  d.  on
Isle  of  Shoals,  N.  H.,  31  July,  1889.  Several  of  his
ancestors,  of  New  Haippshire,  served  in  the  Revolu-
tionary army,  and  his  great-grandfather,  Ichabod,
was  an  active  patriot  and  a  member  of  the  state
convention  that  resolved  itself  into  an  independent
government  on  5  Jan.,  1776.  His  name  was  given
to  the  portion  of  Somersworth  in  which  he  resided.
Edward  Henry  was  educated  in  Dover,  N.  H.,  and
South  Berwick,  Me.,  became  a  druggist's  clerk  in
Concord  and  Boston,  and  subsequently  entered
business  there  on  his  own  account.  In  1855-'7  he
was  a  member  of  the  legislature,  serving  in  the  last
year  as  sj)eaker,  and  he  was  chairman  of  the  New
llampshire  delegation  to  the  National  Republican


ROLLINS


ROMANS


818


convention  of  1860.  He  served  in  iinngw  (lt>m  |
4  .Tilly,  1H61,  till  8  Marrh.  1867.  and  wm  a  ftnn
cpiNMU'iit  of  the  mpaMuro  that  was  adontcnl  in  Jutv.
iWU.  di»ul)linfr  th«  land-Kmnt  of  (ho  tiiion  Paoirfc
niilnxul  (-niniMiiiy,  nixl  innkin);  th«>  ^ivcmmeiU
liceuritv  a  (Irst  instt'ml  of  a  MTond  inortptKi'  U|>on
the n>ail.  From  1868  till  !87rt  he  was  »«Hn>tary  ami
treaBiinT  of  the  coinimny,  and  fn>in  4  Mart-h,  1877,
till  4  Man-h,  188ii.  he  wa«  l'.  S.  s«>iiator.  He  wim
a  fmuider  of  the  Kin<t  national  Iwink  in  (.'oiu'ord.
an  owner  of  Fort  (ieorp?  island,  Fla.,  an<l  was  for
several  years  pn^sident  of  the  liiwtoii,  ("oneonl,  and
Moiiln-Ml  niilroad  comimny.

ROLLINS,  Ellon  Chapman,  author,  l>.  in
Wiik.rteld.  N.  H.,  80  Ai)ril.  ISJil ;  d.  in  Philadel-

fhia,  I'a,,  29  May,  1881.  Her  maiden  name  was
lohiis,  and  in  183A  she  marrie<l  F^lward  Ashton
Rollins  (brother  of  Daniel  U.),  who  was  L'.  S.  com-
missioner of  internal  revenue  from  1864  till  18<{y.
and  afterward  president  of  the  Centennial  national
bank  of  lMiila<u'l|>liia.  She  wrote  under  the  jr'H-
uame  of  "  K.  H.  Arr,"  and  her  chief  publications
are  "  New-England  Rvgones"  (Philadelphia,  1880),
and  "  Old-Time  Child'  Life  "  (1881).

ROLLINS,  James  Sidney,  lawyer,  b.  in  Rich-
mond, Ma<lison  co.,  Ky.,  19  April,  1812;  d.  near
Columbia,  Mo.,  9  Jan.,  1888.  After  graduation  at
the  University  of  Indiana  in  IKW  and  at  the  law-
schtxil  of  Transylvania  university.  Ky..  in  1834,  he
practised  law  in  It<H>no  county,  Mo.  He  serve<l  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  Kichanl  Gentry  during  the  Black
Hawk  war.  and  in  1836  In-came  an  editor  of  the
Columbia  "  I'atriot,"  a  Whig  journal.  From  IHUH
till  1844,  and  again  in  1854-'6,  he  servetl  in  the
Missouri  house  of  representatives,  and  he  was  a
meml>er  of  the  state  senate  from  1846  till  1850,
boldly  op|K>sing  the  extension  of  slavery  into  the
territories.  He  was  defeated  as  the  Whig  candi-
date for  governor  in  1848  and  18o7.  Mr.  Rollins
was  a  delegate  to  the  Baltimore  convention  of
1844,  which  nominated  Henry  Clay  for  president,
and  was  active  in  the  canvass  that  followed.  He
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Conservative,  taking
his  seat  in  the  special  session  that  was  called  by
President  Lincoln,  serving  from  4  Julv,  1861.  till
8  March,  186.5.  In  1862  he  introduced!  a  bill  to
aid  in  the  construction  of  a  railroad  and  telegra[>h
line  from  the  Miss<iuri  river  to  the  Pacific,  which,
with  a  few  amendments,  became  a  law  in  July,
1882,  and  under  it,s  provisions  the  Union  Pacific,
Central  Pacific,  and  Kansas  Pacific  railroads  were
built.  He  voted  for  the  adoption  of  the  thirteenth
amendment  to  the  constitution,  although  at  the
time  he  was  one  of  the  largest  slave -owners  in
Boone  county.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Phila-
delphia Union  convention  in  1866.  and  in  that  vear
served  again  in  the  legislature  of  Missouri,  where
he  intrtxTuced  and  secure<l  the  passage  of  a  bill  to
establish  a  normal  department  in  the  state  uni-
versity. He  was  appointed  a  director  of  the  Union
Pacific  railroad  comj)any.  but  resigned,  and  again
9ervi><l  in  the  state  senate,  intHxlucing  a  bill  to
establish  an  agricultural  and  mechanical  college.
He  was  also  the  author  of  many  ini|K)rtant  meas-
varts  that  were  passe<l  by  the  legislature  toa<lvHnce
the  interests  of  the  state  university,  and  fnmi  1869
till  1887  was  president  of  its  board  of  curators,
which  in  1872  declared  him  "Pater  Universitatis
Missouriensis."

ROLPH,  John.  Canadian  physician,  b.  in Thorn-
burv,  Kiigland.  4  Man-h,  ITSri;  d.  in  Toronto.  Can-
aiiai  19  (k't.,  1870.  Hoemigrateil  to  Canada,  prac-
tised as  a  physician  in  Toronto,  and  took  [wirt
in  the  insurre<'tit.n  of  182^7.  On  18  Nov.  of  that
year  Rolpli, William L. Mackenzie  {q.  v.),  and


others  determined  at  a  secret  mMtlng  to  oaptura

Ton>nto  on  7  lu-i'.,  and  then  to  mimmon  a  [KipuUr
convention  to  which  would  )h>  subinitt<-«l  a  consti-
tution that  ha<l  aln'wly  U-cn  dnifte<I.  In  carrying
out  thes«>  plnns  I>r.  Uolph  wat  to  Im<  the  sole  ex-
ecutive atithoritv,  while  .Miu-kenzie  was  to  arrange
the  details.  Roluh,  fancying  that  the  government
hail  heani  of  tlie  proiMised  attack  on  Toronto.
changtHl  the  date  to  4  I>e<>.,  which  so  disarranged
Mackenzie's  plans  that  the  atiat^-k  on  the  citv
utterly  faile*!.  In  the  mean  time  Dr.  Rolfih.  though
susjHK-t*^!,  was  sent  by  the  gfiveriior  as  one  of  the
In-an-rs  of  a  flag  of  tnice  to  the  insurgents.  At
the  same  time  Holph  induced  Mackenzie  to  delay
the  attack  until  nightfall,  when  he  pn>niised  that
the  disaffected  in  the  city  would  join  them.  After
the  failure  of  the  attempt  ufmn  Tonmto,  Dr.
Kol{)h,  despairing  of  success,  fled  to  the  United
States,  and  sutiseouently  went  to  Russia,  where  he
reside*!  for  several  years.  He  returned  to  Canada
after  the  amnesty  ha<l  l)een  dj-clare*!,  and  prac-
tised law  and  nie<licine  in  Toronto.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Canadian  f>arliament,  am!  founded
the  "  People's  schfK)l  of  medicine,"  which  is  now
(1888)  a  (lej)nrtmeiit  of  Victoria  college,  Colx)urg.

ROLPH,  Thoma.H,  Canadian  author,  b.  about
1820;  d.  in  Kngland  in  188.3.  He  practised  as  a
physician  at  Ancaster,  Up|icr  Canada,  and  was  ap-
pointee! emigration  commussioner  for  the  govern-
ment of  Canada.  He  wr<»te  "  A  Brief  Account  of
the  West  Indies  and  Unitet!  States"  (Dumlas,
1836);  "Emigrant's  Manual"  (1843);  and  "Emi-
gration and  (  olonization  "  (1844).

ROMAN,  Andrew  HIenTeniie,  governor  of
Louisiana,  b.  in  Oiwlous^is,  I>a.,  5  March,  178.'5;  d.
in  New  Orleans.  \m.,  26  Jan.,  1866.  His  ancestors
eniiBrrated  from  Provence.  France.  After  his
graduation  at  St.  Mary's  college,  Md..  in  1815,  he
settled  asa  sugar-planter  in  St.  James's jiarish, and
represented  it  many  years  in  tlie  legislature,  of
which  he  was  speaker  for  four  terms,  and  (tarish
judge  in  1826- '8.  He  wa.s  govenior  of  Ixmisiana
in  1831-'5,  and  again  in  18:^1>-'41.  and  during  his
administration  founded  Jefferson  college,  cleared
the  state  water- courses  of  rafts,  and  forme<!  a
company  to  drain  the  swamp  lands  around  New
Orleans  and  protect  it  from  overflow.  He  was  a
niendxT  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
184.5,  and  was  sent  to  Europe  in  1848  as  agent  of  a
financial  company.  He  was  a  meml>er  of  the  Con-
stitutional convention  of  18.52.  and  of  the  Swession
convention  of  1861.  He  had  l»cen  a  Whic  in  ptdi-
tics  throughout  his  career,  and  usetl  all  his  influ-
ence to  prevent  disunion.  With  John  Forsyth
and  Martin  J.  Crawfort!  he  was  ap|Niinte<l  by  the
Confederate  provisional  coneri'ss  to  confer  with
the  U.  S.  govemraent  in  Wasnington  for  the  pur-
|x)se  of  securing  a  peaceable  separation.

ROMANS,  Bernard,  engineer,  b.  in  Holland
alniut  1720;  d.  prolwbly  at  sea  in  1784.  He  was
educated  in  England,  and  sent  to  this  country  by
the  government  as  a  civil  engineer  alntut  175.5.  He
was  also  itsbotani.st  in  Florida,  receiving  a  pension
of  £.50  a  year  for  his  8»>rvices.  He  was  early  im-
bue<!  with  the  Revolutionary  spirit,  and  enjoye<l
the  acquaintance  of  Washington,  who  suggested
that  the  New  York  committee  of  safety  enga^
him  as  their  engineer.  He  enteretl  that  service  in
1775  in  the  ho|)o  of  obtaining  a  c»jmniissi«»n  in  the
C<intinental  army,  and  on  18  Si'pt,  submitted  his
plans  and  estimates  of  the  ex|H'nsfs  of  en-cting  the
nrofMised  fortifications  on  the  Highlands,  opposite
\V«>st  Pi>int,  offering  to  ctunplele  the  same  for
$5,000,  the  ordnance  onlv  exwptc«l.  The  cona-
mittcc  decided  to  employ  nim  at  a  salar}*,  and  his


814


ROMAY


ROMERO


application  for  a  colonelcy  was  subsequently  re-
fused. He  succeeded  in  enterini^  the  Pennsylvania
artillery  with  the  commission  of  captain  in  Febru-
ary, 1776,  and  with  his  regiment  invaded  Canada.
In  May  of  the  same  year  he  was  tried  for  various
alleged  oflFences,  but  was  acquitted,  and  remained
in  the  Continental  service  till  1779,  when  he  was
captured  by  the  British  and  taken  to  England.
Although  his  exchange  was  refused,  he  pursued
his  profession  there  with  great  success.  He  set
out  to  return  to  this  country  in  1784,  but  is  sup-
posed to  have  been  murdered  at  sea  for  a  large  sura
of  money  which  he  carried  with  him.  In  a  diary
of  the  principal  part  of  his  life,  Romans  claims  to
have  been  the  first  surveyor  in  Florida.  He  was
a  mathematician,  an  artist,  and  an  author.  In  1771
he  became  a  memlier  of  the  American  philosophi-
cal society,  to  which  he  contributed  various  papers.
His  publications  include  "  A  Concise  Natural  His-
tory of  East  and  West  Florida,"  which,  though  it
contains  curious  typographical  errors,  such  as  print-
ing the  pronoun  I  as  a  small  letter,  and  is  composed
in  a  grandiloquent  style,  is  full  of  minute  and  well-
arranged  information,  illustrated  with  twelve  cop-
per-plates and  two  whole-sheet  maps,  and  is  rare
and  valuable  (New  York,  1775).  His  other  works
are  "Map  of  the  Seat  of  War"  (1775);  "Annals
of  the  Troubles  in  the  Netherlands  "  (English  trans-
lation, 2  vols.,  Hartford,  1778);  and  "  Compleat
Pilot  of  the  Gulf  Passage"  (1779).

ROMAY,  Tom&s  (ro-mi),  Cuban  phvsician,  b.
in  Havana  in  1769  ;  d.  there  in  1849.  fle  studied
in  his  native  city,  was  graduated  in  medicine  in
1791,  and  soon  afterward  was  appointed  to  a  profes-
sorship in  the  University  of  Havana.  In  1798  he
publisned  an  interesting  memoir  on  the  yellow
fever,  which  was  soon  translated  into  English  and
French  and  is  still  one  of  the  best  essays  on  the
subject.  The  Madrid  academy  of  medicine  made
him  one  of  its  honorary  members.  In  1802  he  pub-
lished a  memoir  against  the  custom  of  burying  the
dead  in  churches  and  cities,  and  advocated  the  es-
tablishment of  a  public  cemetery  outside  of  Ha-
vana, which  was  carried  into  efifect  soon  afterward.
In  1804  he  published  another  memoir  advocating
the  introduction  of  vaccine  virus  in  the  island  of
Cuba.  The  members  of  his  family  were  the  first
that  were  vaccinated,  and  during  forty-five  years
he  was  one  of  the  most  constant  advocates  of  vac-
cination. In  1808  he  published  also  an  extensive
memoir  on  the  culture  and  propagation  of  apiaries,
contributing  in  great  part  to  the  development  of
this  industry  in  the  island.  During  the  nrst  chol-
era epidemic  in  Havana,  in  1833,  Komay  devoted
all  his  time  and  energy  to  restraining  the  disease,
and  published  several  pamphlets  upon  the  subject.
The  Madrid  government  rewarded  his  services  by
appointing  him  honorary  physician  of  the  royal
chamber,  a  distinction  that  was  very  seldom  con-
ferred in  those  times.  He  was  also  elected  director
of  the  Royal  economical  society  of  Havana,  and  in
this  capacity  gave  his  attention  to  the  promotion
of  public  education  by  the  foundation  of  public
schools.  Besides  the  publications  noticed  above,
he  was  the  author  of  "  Conjuracion  de  Bonaparte  "
(1808),  and  his  complete  works  were  published
after  his  death  (Flavana,  1858).

ROMERO,  Matias  (ro-may'-ro).  Mexican  states-
man, b.  in  Oaxaca,  Mexico,  24  Feb.,  1837.  He  was
educated  at  the  Institute  of  arts  and  science  in  his
native  town,  where  he  studied  philosophy  and  then
law.  In  1853  he  settled  in  the  city  of  Afexico,  and
through  the  influence  of  Benito  Juarez  was  enabled
to  enter  the  foreign  office.  Meanwhile  he  con-
tinued his  legal  studies  at  the  Academy  of  theoreti-


.^^n.  /^r??zje/ic>.


cal  and  practical  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1857.  In  the  revolution  of  that  year  he  sided
with  the  government,  and  after  the  abandonment
of  Mexico  he  retired  to  Guadalajara,  where  Juarez
appointed  him  to  an  office  in  the  department  of
foreign  affairs. He

continued  to  follow  .,

the  fortunes  of  the
constitutional  gov-
ernment in  its  mi-
grations, and  at  Vera
Cruz  served  as  secre-
tjiryto  MelchorOcam-
po  (q.  v.),  and  chief
clerk  of  the  several  de-
partments under  that
statesman's  charge.
In  December,  1859,
he  was  appointed  sec-
retary of  the  Mexican
legation  in  Washing-
ton, and  he  was  subse-
quently charge  d'af-
laires  until  April,
1863.  The  period
during  which  he  was
in  office  at  the  legation  was  probably  the  most  dif-
ficult in  the  annals  of  Mexican  diplomacy,  involving
grave  and  complicated  questions  from  the  capture
of  the  Spanish  vessel  "  Maria  Concepcion "  down
to  the  French  intervention  in  Mexico.  On  his  re-
turn to  Mexico  in  1863  he  resigned  his  diplomatic
post,  and,  soliciting  an  appointment  in  the  army,
was  commissioned  colonel,  and  became  chief  of
staff  to  his  college  friend.  Gen.  Porfirio  Diaz.  He
was  employed  on  several  military  missions  of  a  diplo-
matic nature,  and  in  September  returned  to  Wash-
ington as  minister  to  the  United  States.  This
place  he  then  held  until  July,  1868,  and  negotiated
several  important  treaties  with  this  country  after
the  downfall  of  the  empire  in  Mexico.  He  accept-
ed the  treasury  portfolio  in  Juarez's  cabinet  in
August,  1868,  and  for  five  years  administered  the
finances  of  his  native  country  with  skill  and  judg-
ment. His  health  failing,  he  retired  to  the  Soco-
nusco  district  and  engaged  in  agricultural  pursuits,
also  serving  as  a  member  of  congress  from  that
part  of  Mexico.  In  1876  he  was  a  member  of  the
senate,  and  on  the  election  of  Gen.  Diaz  to  the

S residency  he  returned  to  his  post  in  the  treasury
epartment,  which  he  then  held  until  1  April,  1879.
He  was  appointed  postmaster-general  in  February,

1880,  but  on  the  inauguration  of  Gen.  Manuel  Gon-
zalez was  retired  from  that  office.  In  the  spring  of
1881  he  became  interested  in  the  Mexican  Southern
railway  company,  and  accompanied  Gen.  Grant  on
his  tour  of  inspection  through  Mexico. From  May,

1881,  till  February,  1882,  he  was  general  superin-
tendent of  the  company  in  Mexico.  During  Presi-
dent Garfield's  administration  the  boundary  ques-
tion between  the  United  States  and  Mexico  became
a  matter  of  public  consideration,  and  also  that  be-
tween Mexico  and  Gi^atemala,  and  he  was  again
sent  as  minister  from  Mexico.  Both  difficulties
were  adjusted  by  him  and  a  treaty  of  reciprocity
between  the  United  States  and  Mexico  was  signed.
He  resigned  his  post  at  Washington  on  the  expira-
tion of  Gonzalez's  presidential  term,  but  was  re-
appointed by  Gen.  Diaz  in  1884,  and  still  (1888)
retains  the  office.  Romero  has  published  upward
of  fifty  volumes,  but  they  are  chiefly  official  reports.
Among  the  more  important  are  "Circulars  and
other  Publications  made  by  the  Me^dcan  Legation
at  Wjishington  during  the  French  Intervention,"
1862-'7  (2  vols.,  Mexico,  1868);  "  Coffee-C^ilture  on


ROMEYN


RONAYNB


810


(1875):  "Corre-

ri Ml WM.Jlillirlon


The  SUt«


the  Southern  Coat^t  of  Chiapan

jiiv>»"i-" f  till'  M»*xic-»n  Ij«"'"«'

(li;  i-nch  InUTvonii

"  li  >kt'trli  of  the  A:

•11(1  SuooQiuoo  to  Mexico  "  (1S77):  kiiU

of  Oftxaca"  (Baroeloim.  Simin.  1886).

ROMETN.Theodorie  (calltnl  DiRCKXro-miiio),
clfr^viimn,  b.  in  Ilackonsack,  N.  J..  12  Juno,  1744;
a.  in 'S<  lu«n«vta<ly.  N.  V..  Ifl  April.  1804.  His  an-
cestor. CIhas  .Imiim*.  a  nativi*  of  Holland,  emi-
niitod  to  this  country  from  Kottordam  iti  1(M(1.
I)in'k  vfRs  pratluHtiMl  at  Princeton  in  17<yi,  xtudic^l
theolo)(y.  and  was  onlained  in  17(M.  Mul>s«><{Uontly
becoming  pastor  of  the  H«"formcHl  Duti-h  churches
in  llackcnsack  and  S^hraalcnburgh,  \.  J.  I)ur-
inp  the  Revolution  he  suffere<l  from  the  depreda-
tions of  the  British,  but  continue<l  to  serve  his
conjjrejfation  at  fjn^at  {KTsonal  risk.  He  declined
the  presidency  of  Rutjjers  in  1784.  and  a^rain  in
171)1,  Itecame  pastor  of  the  church  in  Si-henec-
tady.  N.  Y.,  in  May  of  the  former  year,  and  con-
tinual in  that  charge  until  his  death.  He  was  one
of  the  founders  of  the  academy  that  subscc{uently
benime  Union  college,  and  from  1797  till  1804  was

Erofess4»r  of  theology  in  the  general  synod  of  the
>>foriniHl  Dutch  church.  Kutgers  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  I),  in  1789.— His  brother,  John  Brod-
head.  clergyman,  b.  in  Marbletown,  Ulster  co.,
N.  Y.,  8  Nov.,  1777;  d.  in  New  York  city.  22  Feb..
1825,  was  graduated' at  Columbia  in  17t)5,  and  in
1798  was  licenstnl  to  preach.  He  Ix^came  tiastor  of
the  Rcf<»rme«l  Dutch  church  in  RhinebecK.  N.  Y.,
in  1799,  and  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Sche-
nec-ta<ly  in  1803,  was  in  charge  of  the  church  in
Albany  for  the  succeetling  four  years,  and  then  ac-
cepted the  charge  of  the  Cedar  street  church.  New
York  city,  which  he  held  until  his  death.  Prince-
ton gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1809.  Dr.
Romeyn  wjis  one  of  the  most  |x>pular  preachers  of
his  day.  and  an  able  theologian.  He  decline<l  calls
to  numerous  wealthy  parishes,  and  the  presidencies
of  Transylvania  university  and  Dickinson  college.
He  was  one  ot  the  founders  of  Prinwton  theologi-
cal seminary,  a  trustee  of  that  institution  and  of
Princeton  college,  and  at  the  age  of  thirty-three
was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly  of  the  Pn*s-
bytenau  church.  He  i)ublished  a  large  number  of
occasional  discourses,  which  were  collecte*!  and  re-
published (2  vols..  New  York,  1816). — Dirck's  neph-
ew, Nichoia.H,  physician,  b.  in  Hackensack,  N.  J.,
in  SepteinU'r,  1756;  d.  in  New  York  city,  21  July,
1817,  wrote  his  family  name  Romavne.  He  wiis
the  son  ot  a  silversmith,  and  received  great  iMhx-a-
tional  advantages.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revo-
lution he  went  to  Edinburgh,  where  he  was  known
as  an  able  scholar,  and  took  the  degree  of  M.  D.,
presentinga  thesis  entitled  "DeGeneratione  Puris,"
which  was  at  one  time  famous.  He  sul)se<juently
studitnl  in  Paris,  Ijondon,  and  Ijeytlen,  and  on  his
return  settltni  in  Philadelphia,  and  then  in  New  York
city,  where  he  j>rm-tise<l  his  profession.  He  em-
barked in  the  \S  illiam  Blount  consj)iracy  in  insti-
gating the  Cherokee  and  Creek  Indians  to  aid  the
British  in  their  attempt  to  conquer  the  8()anish
territory  in  Louisiana  ni  1797,  was  seized  and  im-

rrisonetl,  and  subse<juently  again  visited  Kuro|>e.
le  was  the  first  president  of  the  New  York  nie<li-
cal  s<H-iety,  and  of  the  New  York  college  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons,  of  which  he  was  a  founder,  and
in  which  he  taught  anatomy  and  the  institutes  of
medicine.  Dr.  John  W.  Francis  says  of  him:  "  He
was  unwearied  in  toil  and  of  mighty  energy,  dex-
terous in  legislative  bodies,  and  at  one  |H>riod  of
his  career  was  vested  with  almost  all  the  honors  the
medicsal  profession  can  bestow." He  published  an


addrMH  before  the  Htudentu  of  the  New  York  cwl-
lege  of  physicians  and  surgwms  •■"  ••  '•'*"•  Kthnolo-
gy  of  the  iUt]  .Man  in  America  "  k.  1806).

— Nicholas's  brother.  Jeremiah i  .  clerjfT-

man,  b.  in  New  York  city.  24  Ikut,.  17(18:  d.  in
Woodstock.  Ulster  co..  N.  Y..  17  July,  1818,  wan
edu(«t(>d  by  Dr.  Peter  Wilson  in  ilackensack,
N.  J.,  stutliwl  theology  under  Dr.  Dirck  Romeyn,
and  was  jiastor  successively  of  Dutch  Reformed
churches  in  liivingston  .>fanor  and  Iteil  H<x>k,
N.  Y.,  from  1788  till  1806.  after  which  he  took
charge  of  the  church  in  Harlem  till  1814.  He  wa«
an  eminent  linguist,  and  from  1797  till  his  death
was  professor  of  Hebrew  in  the  Dutch  lieforroed
church. — Another  nephew  of  Dirck,  Jameti  Vaa
I'ampen,  clergyman,  b.  in  Minisink,  N.  Y..  14
Nov..  1765;  d.  in  Hmkensack,  N.  J..  27  June.  1840.
was  educat(*d  at  Schenectady  a<-ademy,  studied
theology  under  his  uncle  Dirck.  and  was  ordained
in  1787.'  From  1788  till  17}«  he  was  |>astor  of  the
Reformed  Dutch  church  of  (ireenbush.  N.  Y..  bar-
ing charge  also  of  the  churches  of  Schosack  and
W\-nantskill.  N.  Y.,  at  difTerent  periods.  In  1799-
18^  he  was  pastor  of  the  unite<l  congregations  of
the  Dutch  Iteformed  church  in  Ha<-kensack  and
Si'hraalenburgh,  N.J.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Rut-
gers from  1807  till  his  death,  and  one  of  the  most
successful  collectors  for  the  th(*ological  professional
fund.  He  published  an  "  Address  to  tne  Students
of  the  Theological  Seminary." — James  Van  Cam-
pen's  son,  Jauie^  clergyman,  b.  in  Greenbush,
N.  Y.,  in  1797:  d.  in  New  llniuswick,  N.  J.,  7  Sept..
1859,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1816.  licensed
to  preach  in  1819,  and  was  successively  pastor  of
Rcu)nned  Dutch  churches  in  Nassau,  N.  Y..  Six
Mile  Run  and  Hackensack.  N.  J..  Catskill,  N.  Y.,
Leeds,  N.  Y.,  and  Bergen  Neck,  N.J.  He  abandoned
preaching  in  18.52  on  a<'count  of  the  failure  of  his
nealth.  Columbia  gave  him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.
in  18;i8,  but  he  refused  it.  He  published  "The
Crisis,"  a  sermon  (New  BrunswicK.  1842).  and  a
"  Plea  for  the  Evangelical  Press  "(18*i). — His  son,
Theodore  Bayard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nassau,  N.  Y.,
22  Oct..  1827:  d.  in  Haclcensack,  N.  J.,  29  Aug.,
1885,  was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1846,  and  at  the
New  Brunswick  theological  seminary  in  1849.  He
was  |>a.stor  of  the  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  Blaw-
enburg,  N.  J.,  in  1850-'65,  and  from  the  latter
date  until  his  death  of  the  1st  Reformed  church
at  Hackensack.  Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  18<59.  He  contribute*!  regularly  to  the  re-
ligious i)ress,  and.  besides  seruums  and  atltlresses,
publishe<l  "  Historical  Dis<'ourse  on  the  R(Hi]H>ning
and  Dedication  of  the  1st  Rcformetl  (Dutch)  Church
at  Hackensack,  N.  J..  May  2,  1809"  (New  York,
1870),  and  "The  Adaptation  of  the  Reformed
Church  in  America  to  Ainerican  Character"  (1876).
See  "  Memorial,"  published  by  the  consistory  (New
York,  1885).

RONAYNE,  Maurice,  clergyman,  b.  in  Castle-
martyr,  County  Cork,  In>land,  in  1828.  He  was
educattnl  bv  private  tutors,  and  at  Carlow  college,
and  entertMll  the  ecclesiastical  college  of  Maynooth,
but  left  l)efore  completing  his  course  in  theology,
and  became  a  Jesuit  in  1853.  He  finished  his  theo-
logical studies  in  l^val  s*"minary,  Franw.  and
came  to  the  United  States  in  1856.  He  taught  in
St.  John's  college.  Fordham,  and  in  St.  Francis
Xavier's,  New  York,  up  to  18«W,  and  then  went  to
Rome,  returning  in  the  following  ye^r.  He  is  at
present  (1888)  professor  of  history  in  St.  Francis
Xavier's  college.  He  has  written  articles  in  Konian
Catholic  publications,  and  es|>ecially  in  the  l*hiUir
del phia  "Catholic  ^uarteriy  Review."  principally
on  the  labor  question,  and  on  the  social  and  moral


816


RONCKENDORPF


ROOD


wndition  of  Roman  Catholic  nations.  lie  is  the
author  of  "  Relieion  and  Scienw :  their  Union  His-
torically Considered "  (New  York,  1879),  and  is
Kreparinfj  for  the  press  a  work  entitled  "  God
[iiowtible  and  Known."

RONCKENDORFF,  William,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Philmlelphia,  Pa.,  9  Nov.,  1812.  He  entered  the
navy  as  midshipman,  17  Feb.,  1832,  became  passed
midshipman.  23  June,  1838,  was  commissioned
lieutenant,  28  June,  1843,  and  in  June,  1845,  was
bearer  of  despatches  to  the  commander-in-chief  of
the  Pacific  squadron,  with  which  he  served  during
the  Mexican  war.  He  was  in  the  "  Savannah  "  at
the  capture  and  occupation  of  Monterey  and  points
on  the  coast  of  California,  and  returned  to  New
York  in  September,  1847.  He  commanded  the
steamer  "  M.  W.  Chapin  "  in  the  Paraguay  expedi-
tion of  1859  and  on  coast  survey  duty  in  1860,  was
commissioned  commander,  29  June,  1861,  and  had
charge  of  the  steamer  "Water  Witch"  from  1
March  till  12  Oct.,  1861,  in  the  Gulf  sfpiadron.  On
27  Dec,  1861,  he  took  command  of  the  steamer
"  San  Jacinto,"  with  which  he  was  present  in
Hampton  Roads  to  flght  the  "  Merrimac,"  and  par-
ticipated in  the  attack  on  Sewell's  Point,  15  May,
1862,  and  in  the  capture  of  Norfolk  on  18  May.
He  was  in  the  "  Ticonderoga,"  searching  for  priva-
teers in  1863.  and  in  Februarjr,  1864,  he  commanded
the  monitor  "  Monadnock  "  in  operations  in  James
river  until  the  evacuation  of  Richmond,  when  he
cruised  to  Havana  in  search  of  the  "  Stonewall."
In  July,  1865,  he  was  transferred  to  the  monitor
"  Tonawanda."  He  was  commissioned  captain,  27
Sept.,  1866,  and  was  at  Philadelphia  until  1  Oct.,
1870,  when  he  took  charge  of  the  iron-clads  at  New
Orleans  until  8  April,  1872.  He  commanded  the
steamer  "  Canandaigua,"  of  the  North  Atlantic
squadron,  in  1872-'3,  was  promoted  to  commodore,
12  Sept.,  1874,  and  was  placed  on  the  retired  list
on  9  Nov.,  1874,  by  reason  of  his  age.

RONDE,  Lainbertiis  de,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hol-
land in  the  18th  century.  He  was  pastor  of  Dutch
Reformed  churches  in  Surinam,  British  Guiana,  in
1746,  New  York  and  Harlem  in  1751-84,  and
Schaghticoke  in  1784-'95.  In  1749  he  proposed  to
the  cTassis  to  publish  a  book  of  first  trutlis  in  Ne-
gro-English and  Dutch.  The  classis  requested
him  to  transmit  it  to  them  for  approval,  and  in
1751  complained  that  he  had  been  installed  over
the  church  ot  New  York  without  their  knowledge,
and  that  he  had  signed  the  letter  of  the  coetus
without  any  explanation  of  his  new  relationships.
He  became  a  meml)er  of  the  eonferentie  party
after  the  disruption  in  1755,  and  was  never  absent
from  their  meetings.  Though  he  was  one  of  the
committee  that  procured  Dr.  Laidlie  to  preach  in
English,  he  afterward  turned  against  him,  and  was
the  leading  spirit  in  the  "  Dutch  party "  in  the
famous  lawsuit  that  grew  out  of  this  matter.
Many  were  determined  not  to  submit  to  the  inno-
vation of  English  preaching.  The  '*  Dutch  party"
lost  the  suit  and  paid  £300  costs.  During  the
Revolution,  De  Ronde  preached  in  Schaghticoke,
N.  Y.,  and  in  1780  represented  the  churches  of  Red
Hook  and  Saugerties  in  the  classis  of  Kingston.
His  publications  are  "  De  gekruisige  Christus,  als
het  voornaemste  toeleg  van  Gods  gebrouwe  Krins-
gesanten,  in  hunne  prediking,"  or  "  The  Christ
Crucified  as  the  Principal  Subject  of  God's  Faith-
ful Servants  of  the  Cross  m  their  Sermons"
(New  York,  1751);  "  De  ware  gedachniss,"  an  ac-
count of  the  death  of  the  Rev.  Gualterns  Du  Bois
(New  York,  1751) ;  "  A  System  containing  the  Prin-
ciples of  the  Christian  Religion  Suitable  to  the
Heidelberg  Catechism  "  (1763). This  is  the  first


book  published  in  the  English  language  by  a  mem-
ber of  the  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  America.  It
was  prepared  before  the  call  of  Laidlie,  to  meet  the
growing  necessity  for  instruction  in  English,  and
Ve  Ronde  offerinl  to  preach  in  English  if  the  con-
sistory thought  him  qualified.  He  also  publish^
"  True  Spiritual  Religion  "  (New  York,  1767),  and
numerous  "  Letters  to  Holland."

RONDEAU,  Jo86  (ron-do),  Argentine  soldier,
b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  in  1773;  d.  there  in  1834.  He
was  educated  in  Montevideo,  entered  the  military
service  in  1793,  and  when  Montevideo  was  captured
by  the  British,  7  Feb.,  1807,  he  was  taken  prisoner
and  sent  to  England,  but  he  was  liberated  in  July
of  that  year.  Going  to  Spain,  he  served  in  the
peninsula  against  the  French  invasion,  but  in
August,  1810.  he  returned  to  Buenos  Ayres,  and
joined  the  patriots  soon  afterward.  He  succeeded
in  April,  1811,  to  the  command  of  the  Argentine
forces  that  were  operating  against  Montevideo,
gained  the  victory  of  Las  Piedras,  18  May,  1811,
and  in  June  began  the  siege  of  that  city,  which
was  raised  on  23  Oct.  of  that  year  by  a  treaty  with
the  Spanish  general  Elio.  After  the  hostilities
against  Montevideo  had  begun  again.  Rondeau,  in
command  of  the  vanguard,  gainecl,  on  31  Dec,  1812,
the  victory  of  Cenito,  and  in  January,  1813,  super-
seded Sarratea  in  the  command  of  the  Argentine
forces,  and  began  the  second  siege  of  Montevideo,
but  in  1814  he  was  superseded  by  Alvear,  and  pro-
moted to  the  command  in  upper  Peru.  In  Decem-
ber of  that  year  he  refused  obedience  to  Alvear,
who  intended  to  deprive  him  of  his  command,  and
when  that  general  was  removed,  15  April,  1815,
Rondeau  was  chosen  supreme  director ;  out  he  re-
mained in  command  of  tlje  army,  routing  Gen.
Pezuela  at  Puesto  del  Marquez,  14  April,  1815,  and
occupying  Potosi,  but  suffering  defeat  at  Sipe-Sipe,
28  Nov.,  1815.  On  10  June,  1819,  he  was  elected
director  of  the  republic,  but  was  deprived  of  office,
12  Feb.,  1820,  when  the  supreme  power  was  vested
in  a  commission  of  the  municipal  body,  and  the
separation  of  the  different  provinces  was  virtually
consummated.  Rondeau  retired  to  private  life,  but
took  part  in  the  campaign  for  the  liberation  of
Uruguay,  and  on  17  Sept.,  1828,  was  elected  pro-
visional president,  resigning  on  25  April,  1829.

RONDTHALER,  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in
York,  Pa.,  6  Sept.,  1817;  d.  in  Nazareth,  Pa.,  5
March,  1855.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Moravian
theological  seminary,  and  from  1841  till  1853  was
in  the  active  ministry.  In  1853-'4  he  was  president
of  Nazareth  Hall.  He  was  the  author  of  a  "  Life  of
John  Heckewelder  "  (Philadelphia,  1847).

ROOD,  Ogden  Nicholas,  physicist,  b.  in  Dan-
bury,  Conn.,  3  Feb.,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1852,  and  then  studied  at  the  Sheffield
scientific  school  of  Yale,  and  at  the  universities  of
Munich  and  Berlin,  making  a  specialty  of  science.
In  1858,  soon  after  his  return,  he  was  chosen  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  and  physics  at  Troy  university,
where  he  remained  for  nearly  five  years.  He  was
called  in  1863  t«  the  chair  of  physics  in  Columbia,
and  has  since  delivered  lectures  there  and  in  the
School  of  mines  of  that  institution.  His  original
investigations  have  been  numerous,  and  include
special  studies  of  questions  in  mechanics,  optics,
acoustics,  and  electricity.  Prof.  Rood  was  one  of
the  first  to  apply  photography  to  the  microscope,
and  to  take  omocular  pictures  with  that  instru-
ment. His  studies  of  the  nature  of  the  electric
spark  and  of  the  duration  of  the  flashes  arc  par-
ticularly interesting,  involving  the  determination
of  much  more  minute  intervals  of  time  than  any
that  were  ever  measured  before. In  1880  he  de-


ROORBACH


R008RVRLT


317


I


rised  a  mercurial  air-pump  fdving  an  exhaustion
of  iW  millionth  of  an  atnuMphon*.  a  (lofpvo  that
has  not  Ihvu  nttaintMl  hy  other  piimim  up  to  the
prfstnit  tiujf  (1^<>^).  Th'«?  nji'ihcMN..*  i.i>..tMMU'try
that  ht>  has  orijfinatwl,  and  hi«  i  ini«  of

phenomena  that  (l»>ptMi(l  on  the  ph%-  vjsiim.

an^  Tory  in((i*niouH.  and  he  waM  the  lir»l  to  make
auantitiitivu  pxin'riments  on  c*oh)r-<"ontni8t.  Al-
tnou^'h  not  an  artist  by  profciwion,  he  [wintM  in
wator-t'olors,  is  frtspiontly  rcprwM'ntwl  at  the  an-
nual exhibitions,  and  has  been  a  memlter  of  the
American  water-<'o|or  s^x'iety  sinee  its  foundation
in  IHtMt.  lie  was  elet-teil  to  the  National  afa<lemy
of  wienrcs  in  IHtW,  and  in  1807  was  vi«f-pn«sident
of  the  American  association  for  the  atlvancement
of  science.  The  results  of  his  various  researches
are  inchidtHl  in  alxxit  sixty  memoirs  that  have
appeari'd  in  s<-ientiflc  journals.  IxUh  in  the  United
States  and  ahnwl,  but  chiefly  in  the  "American
JournnI  of  Science."  Sixteen  of  his  most  imtxirtant
memoirs  were  originally  n»ml  before  the  National
acthlemy  of  scienws.  l*rof.  I^>o<i  has  ptiblishi'd
"  Mo<lorn  Chromatics,"  a  work  that,  besides  pre-
senting; the  fundamental  f«K'ts  as  to  jwrception  of
color,  contains  the  results  of  numerous  ori^nal  in-
vestitfRtions  on  the  subject  (New  York,  1881).

ROORIUCH,  Orvllle  A^s^ust^$^  publisher,
b.  in  Ke.l  Hook.  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y..  20  Jan..  18(«:
d.  in  Schenoctmly.  N.  Y.,  21  June,  ISOl.  He  was
educate<l  in  Albany,  opened  a  lx)ok-storo  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C.,  alK)ut  1820,  and  was  enpagetl  in  business
there  till  1845.  During  the  latter  (wrt  of  that
time  he  also  carried  on  the  book  trade  in  New
York  city,  whither  he  remove<l  in  1845,  and  con-
tinued in  that  business  till  1855,  when  he  l>cgHn  to
publi-^h  and  edit  the  "  li<Kiksellers'  Medium."  He
compiled  and  arranged  the  "  Hibliotheca  Ameri-
cana," a  catalogue  of  American  publications,  in-
cluding reprints  and  original  works  from  1820  till
18«1  (4  vols..  New  York,  1852-'61).

KO<»SA.  Daniel  Bennett  St  John  (ro-zah),
physician,  b.  in  liethel,  Sullivan  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  April,
1838.  His  ancestor,  Isaac,  was  a  captain  in  the
Continental  army  during  the  Revolution.  Daniel
entered  Yale  in  1850,  but  left  on  account  of  the
failure  of  his  health,  sul)sequentlv  studied  chemis-
try imder  Dr.  John  W.  Draper  in  J»ew  York  city,  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Univer-
sity of  New  York  in  1800,  and  became  resident  phy-
sician in  the  New  York  hospital  in  1802.  He  stud-
ied abniail  in  1863,  devoting  himself  especially  to
ophthalmology  and  otology,  and  in  1804  st>ttlea  in
practi<"e  in  New  York  city.  He  was  professor  of
the  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear  in  the  me<lical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York
from  18<W  till  1882,  occupied  the  same  chair  in  the
University  of  Vermont  in  1875-'80,  was  a  founder
of  the  Manhattan  eye  and  ear  hosj)ital,  and  is  now
(1888)  professor  of  those  ilisc>ases  m  the  New  York
post-graduate  medical  sch(x>l,  of  whose  faculty  he
18  president.  Dr.  l{oosa  is  a  successful  practitioner,
eminent  as  a  surgeon,  and  an  acknowltnlged  au-
thority in  the  branch  of  his  profession  to  which  he
has  devoted  hims«'lf,  having  |)erformed  the  most
difficult  and  delicate  o|R>rations  that  occur  in  the
prosecution  of  his  specialty.  He  was  president  of
the  Intenintional  otological  society  in  1870,  and  of
the  New  York  state  me«iical  so<'iety  in  1879.  Yale
gave  him  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  in  18?2,  and
the  University  of  Vermont  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1880.
lie  has  transfate<l  from  the  (ierman  "Trnltsch  on
the  hlnr"  (New  York,  180;J),  and,  with  Dr.  Charles
E.  Ha«'kley,  "Stellwag  on  the  Kye"  (1807);  and  is
the  author  of  "  Vest-Pticket  Medical  Lexicon  "  (New
York,  1805);  *"  Treatise  on  the  Ear."  republished  in


liondon  and  translated  into  German  (IMS);  "A
iVK'tor's  Sugnetitiomi"  (1880);  and  **On  the  Neoee*
sitv  of  Wearing  QUuMe"  (Detroit,  1887).

kOOMEVELT.  NiekolM  J,  inventor,  h.  In  New
Yt)rk  city,  27  Dw.,  1707;  d.  in  SkaneatelM,  N.  V,.
30  Julv,  iM54.  Hi«  anceHtora  were  early  citizens  of
New  Vork.  His  father,  Isaac,  was  a  member  of  the
New  York  provincial  cnngreMi,  the  legislature,  and
the  city  council,  and  for  many  years  was  president
of  the  liank  of  New  York.  N'icholas  was  can-fully
etiucat^Ml,  His  connection  with  the  invention  of
verticral  steamlMmt  im«l«lle-whi'<!ls  Is  d«'scrili«"<l  by
John  H,  H.  liatrol>e  in  his"  Ijost  Chapter  in  the  IIi»-
tory  of  the  Steamboat  "  (lialtimore,  Md.,  1871).  Mr.
Iiatn>be's  investigations  show  that,  soon  after  the
evacuation  of  New  York  by  the  British,  Itoosevelt
returned  to  New  York  from  Flsopus,  where  he  then
reside<l,  and  where  he  ha^l  mmle  a  small  wo«^Nlen
boat,  acri>ss  which  was  an  axle  prf)jecting  over  the
sides  with  patldles  at  the  ends,  matle  to  revolve  by  a
tight  cord  wound  around  its  middle  by  the  reacti'on
of  hickory  and  whalebone  springs.  In  New  York
he  engaged  in  manufacturing  and  inventing  in  that
city,  subserpiently  became  interested  in  the  Schuy-
ler copper-mines  in  New  Jersey  on  the  Passaic
river,  and  from  a  model  of  Josiah  Homblower's  at-
mospheric machine  completed  a  similar  one,  built
engines  for  various  |>ur|«>ses.  and  <'onstructe«l  those
for  the  water-works  of  Philadelphia.  He  was  also
at  the  sjime  time  under  contract  to  erect  rolling-
works  and  supply  the  government  with  copper
drawn  and  rolle<i  for  six  74-gun  ships.  In  1797,
with  Robert  R.  Livingston  and  John  Stevens^  he
agreed  to  build  a  boat  on  joint  account,  ff)r  which
the  engines  were  to  be  constructe<l  by  Roosevelt,
and  the  prf)pelling  agency  was  to  Ik*  that  planned
by  Livingston.  This  experiment  failed,  the  s[ieed
attainetl  being  only  e<|uivaleiit  to  al)out  three  miles
an  hour  in  still  water.  On  0  Sept.,  1798.  Roose-
velt had  fully  descril>ed  to  Livingston  a  vertical
wheel,  which  he  earnestly  recommende<l.  This  is
the  first  practical  sugg«'stion  of  the  c«>mbination
that  made  steam  navigation  a  commercial  success,
although  four  years  later  RolK>rt  Fulton  iR'lieved
that  <-nains  and  floats  were  alone  to  be  relie<l  on.
Livingston,  however,  had  renlitnl  to  R<H)sevelt'8
pro|K)sition  on  28  Oct.,  1798,  that  "vertical  wheels
are  out  of  the  question."  But  in  the  spring  of  1802,
Livingston  having  communicated  Roosevelt's  plan
to  Fulton,  they  a«lopted  the  former's  view,  and  in
January  of  the  next  year  launche<l  a  boat  that  was
projielled  by  Roosevelt's  vertical  wheels.  R<K>se-
velt  in  the  mean  time  Itecame  greatly  emliarrassed
financially,  the  government  faile<l  to  fulfil  its  con-
tract with  him,  and  he  was  unable  to  nut  his  plans
in  ojieration.  In  1809  he  associated  nimself  with
Fulton  in  the  intrmluction  of  steamlntats  <»n  the
western  waters,  and  in  1811  he  built  and  navigate<l
the  '•  New  Orleans."  the  pioneer  boat  that  dc>scend-
e<i  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  rivers  from  Pittsburg
to  New  Orleans  in  fourteen  days,  he  having  pre-
viously descen<led  both  rivers  in  a  flat-Uiat  to  ob-
tain information.  In  Januar>',  1815.  he  applietl  to
the  legislature  of  New  Jersey  for  protection  as  the
inventor  of  vertical  wheels,  for  which  he  ha<l  ob-
taini'<l  letters-jiatent  from  the  United  States  in  De-
cemljer,  1814.  The  legislature,  after  discussion,  de-
cidwl  that  "  it  was  inex|HHlient  to  make  any  s|>ecial
provision  in  connection  with  the  matter  in  c-ontn>-
versy  lH»foro  the  Ixxly."  and  then*  the  matter  reste<l.
Roosevelt's  pai>er8  came  into  the  |)Ossc»»ian  of
Richanl  S.  Cox.  his  exwutor.  from  whom  they  were
obtaine<l  in  1828,  and  fn>m  these,  with  others  from
the  pafiers  of  Chancellor  Livingston,  a  case  was
pre{)ared  and  submitted  to  Roger  U.  Taney,  which


318


ROOSEVELT


ROOSEVELT


had  been  already  submitted  to  William  Wirt,  and,
both  opinions  being  favorable,  a  suit  was  about  to
be  begun  when  the  consideration  of  the  great  ex-
pense involved  in  its  prosecution  caused  the  whole
matter  to  be  abandoned.  Roosevelt  had  by  this
time  retired  from  active  life,  residing  with  his  fam-
ily at  Skaneateles.  In  the  case  submitted  for  Mr.
VVirt's  opinion,  it  is  said  that  Fulton  never  matle
oath  to  the  application  for  a  patent  for  vertical
wheels  over  the  sides;  and  that  the  application
itself  was  signed  by  another  person — a  statement
that  would  seem  to  be  corroborated  to  a  great  ex-
tent by  Fulton's  own  account  of  his  invention  in
an  interview  with  B.  IL  Latrobe  on  7  Feb.,  1W09,
when  the  latter  was  endeavoring  to  bring  about
what  subsequently  took  place — a  connection  between
Fulton  and  Roosevelt  in  regard  to  the  introduction
of  steamboats  on  the  western  waters.  "  1  have  no
pretensions,"  said  Fulton,  "  to  be  the  first  inventor
of  the  steamboat.  Hundreds  of  others  have  tried
it  and  failed.  Neither  do  I  pretend  to  the  right  to
navigate  steamboats,  except  in  New  York.  .  .  .
That  to  which  I  claim  an  exclusive  right  is  the
so  proportioning  the  boat  to  the  power  of  the  en-
gine and  the  velocity  with  which  the  wheels  of  the
boat,  or  both,  move  with  the  maximum  velocity
attainable  by  the  power,  and  the  construction  of
the  whole  machine."  In  the  same  conversation
Mr.  Fulton  said :  "  As  to  Mr.  Roosevelt,  I  regard
him  as  a  noble-minded,  intelligent  man,  and  would
do  anything  to  serve  him  that  I  could." — His
nephew,  Cornelius  Van  Hchaik,  merchant,  b.  in
New  York  city,  30  Jan.,  1794;  d.  in  Oyster  Bay,
L.  I.,  17  July,  1871,  inherited  a  large  fortune,  stud-
ied at  Columbia,  but  was  not  graduated,  and,  en-
gaging in  business,  was  a  successful  merchant
for  forty-seven  years.  During  the  latter  part  of
his  life  he  devoted  a  portion  of  his  large  mcome
to  charity. — Corneliuss  son,  Robert  Barnwell,
congressman,  b.  in  New  York  city,  7  Aug.,  1829,

was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1850.
While  in  prac-
tice he  also  con-
tributed to  the
magazines,  was
an  enthusiastic
sportsman,  and
organized  several
clubs  to  restrain
the  indiscrimi-
nate slaughter  of
game.  During  the
civil  war  he  was
an  active  Demo-
crat, and  a  found-
er of  the  allot-
ment commission
and  the  Loyal  na-
tional league.  He
founded  the  New  York  state  fishery  commission
in  1867,  and  was  appointed  one  of  the  three  fish
commissioners,  on  which  he  has  served  without
a  salary.  The  rejwrts  of  that  body  were  prepared
chiefly  by  him,  and  have  led  to  the  appoint-
ment of  similar  commissions  in  other  states.  His
first  experience  in  politic«  was  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  Citizens'  association  at  the  time  of  the
Tweed  ring  administration  in  New  York  city.  He
was  a  founder  of  the  Committee  of  seventy,  and
first  vice-president  of  the  Reform  club.  With
Charles  G.  Halpine  he  edited  the  "Citizen,"  the
organ  of  that  association,  and  after  Halpine's  death
succeeded  to  the  sole  charge  of  the  trnpor.  In  1870
he  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Democrat. Al-


OCi^K-Rox^^^ju.^^)^


though  the  pressure  of  anti-Tammany  Democratic
organizations  forced  Tammany  Hall  to  approve  his
nomination,  ho  denounced  the  mea.sures  of  the  cor-
rupt clique.  In  May.  1888,  ho  was  appointed  U.  S.
minister  to  the  Netherlands,  whereupcm  he  re-
sided the  office  of  fish  commissioner,  giving,  in
his  letter  to  the  governor,  a  review  of  what  bad
been  accomplished  during  his  twenty  years  of
service.  He  was  instrumental  in  establishing  paid
fire  and  health  departments  in  New  York  city,
was  a  commissioner  of  the  Brooklyn  bridge,  and
for  many  years  served  as  president  of  the  Fish
culture  a.ssociation,  of  that  for  the  protection  of
game,  of  the  New  York  sportsman's  club,  of  the
International  a.ssociation  for  the  protection  of
game,  of  the  Holland  trust  company,  a  founder
of  the  Lotus  and  Arcadian  clubs,  and  a  member  of
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science.  He  has  published  "The  Game  Fish  of
North  America"  (New  York,  1860);  "The  Game
Birds  of  the  North  "  (1866);  "  Superior  Fishing"
(1866);  "Florida  and  the  Game  Water  Birds"
(1868) ;  "  Five  Acres  too  Much."  a  satire  on  ama-
teur farming  that  was  provoked  by  Edmund  Mor-
ris's "Ten  Acres  Enough"  (1869);  "Progressive
Petticoats,"  a  humorous  illustration  of  modem
medical  habits  (1871);  and  edited  the  "Political
Works  of  Charles  G.  Halpine,"  with  a  memoir
(1869). — Another  son  of  Conielius,  Theodore,  mer-
chant, b.  in  New  York  city,  22  Sept.,  1831 ;  d.  there,
9  Feb.,  1878.  joined  the  firm  of  Roosevelt  and  Co.,
glass  importers,  and  continued  in  that  business
till  1876.  when  he  established  a  banking-house.
President  Hayes  appointed  him  collector  of  the
port  of  New  York,  but  he  was  not  confirn»ed  by
the  senate.  For  many  years  he  devoted  much  of
his  fortune  to  charity,  contributed  large  sums  to
the  Newsboys'  lodging-house  and  the  Young  men's
Christian  association,  was  a  founder  of  the  Orthopae-
dic hospital,  under  the  care  of  the  Children's  aid  so-
ciety, organized  the  Bureau  of  united  charities,  and
was  a  commissioner  of  the  State  board  of  charities.
He  was  a  director  of  the  Metropolitan  museum  of
art  and  of  the  Museum  of  natural  history. — Theo-
dore's son,  Theodore,  author,  b.  in  New  Vork  citr,
27  Oct.,  1858,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1880,
and  the  next  year  was  elected  to  the  New  York  as-
sembly as  a  Republican.  He  led  the  minority  dur-
ing the  session  of  1882,  was  active  in  reform  meas-
ures, and  on  his  re-election  in  1883  was  largely  in-
strumental in  carrying  out  the  state  civil-service
reform  law,  and  an  act  for  regulating  primary
elections.  As  chairman  of  the  committee  on  cities
in  1884,  he  succeeded  in  abolishing  the  fees  of  the
county  clerk  and  register,  and  in  providing  for
their  payment  by  salaries,  curtailing  abuses  in  the
sheriff's  and  surrogate's  oflices,  and  securing  the
passage  of  a  bill  that  deprived  aldermen  of  the  pow-
er to  confirm  appointments  to  office,  and  centred
in  the  mayor  the  responsibility  of  administ«ring
municipal  affairs.  He  was  chairman  of  the  New
York  delegation  to  the  National  Republican  con-
vention in  1884.  and  ap  unsuccessful  candidate  for
mavor  of  New  York  in  1886.  He  has  spent  much
of  his  time  in  the  west,  exploring  the  country  and
hunting  big  game.  He  is  the  pi*esident  of  the  Boone
and  Crockett  club,  of  New  York,  and  a  member
of  the  London  Alpine  club,  and  is  a  trustee  of  the
American  museum  of  natural  history,  and  on  the
board  of  the  State  charities  aid  association.  To-
gether with  his  brother  he  has  continued  his  father's
work  in  the  Newsboys'  lodging-house.  He  has  pub-
lished "  History  of  the  Naval  War  ^f  1812"  (New
York.  1882);  "Hunting  Trips  of  a  Ranchman"
(1883); "Life  of  Thomas 11. Benton"  (Boston,


ROOSEVELT


BOOT


819


1887);  and  "Life  of  Oouvornciir  Morrin."  In  the
"  Americnn  Slnlwmon  STit-^* "  ( 1H88) ;  hIm)  "  Kanc-h
Lif.'  and  the  Iluntini;  Trnil  "  <Ni'W  York,  18HH).—
Contolius'rt  ItrotluT,  JanieM  John,  jurist,  b.  in  New
York  citv.  14  D«?..  ITWi:  <1.  thon?.  5  Ai»ril.  1H75,
WHM  (n^fii'kt*^  *t  Columbia  in  lH\!i,  H«iinittp«l  to
tho  bar  in  1818,  and  l)ocamo  th««  {Mirtncr  of  IVtcr
Jay.  lit'  early  idt*ntifli>d  hims«'lf  with  tht-  I>t»infH
cratic  jwrty,  ami  wh«  a4-tive  in  thi-  raiiVM.HM  of  (»«'n.
Jat'kson  for  tho  prfsidt-nry  in  IH'28.  Me  retinal
ttMn|><>rarily  fn>m  jirofossional  life  in  18iK),  went  to
KuPMK".  and  wa**  in  Paris  during  tho  dixturlmnces
that  ioHowchI  the  revolution.  He  re.sumo<l  pra<"tice
on  his  return  in  1h:11,  was  a  meuilier  of  tho  legis-
lature in  18:»  and  18:t»-'4(),  and  in  1841-':)  sat  in
congress,  but  dtH-liiu'il  renomination  in  1844.  He
then  went  al)road  again  and  stn«lie<l  fori'ign  law
in  the  courts  of  Kngland,  Holland,  and  France.
He  lie<>aniu  a  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court  in
1851,  during  one  term  was  ex-oflicitj  jutlge  of  the
state  court  of  appeals,  resigned  in  1859  to  become
U.  S.  district  attorney  for  southern  New  York,
and  retired  in  1860. — Ilis  wife,  Cornklia,  was  the

daughter  of  Cor-
nelius P.  Van  Nes.s.
of  Vermont,  and
a  leatler  in  New
York  society.  She
did  goixl  service
in  organizing  hos-

Cital  and  charita-
lea.ss<x'iationsfor
the  aid  of  the  Na-
tional tnH)ps  dur-
ing the  civil  war.
and  was  subse-
quently active  in
benevolent  enter-
prises in  New  York
city.  —  Cornelius's
cousin, James

c^^^i^J^i^^^lUt^^ thr"!2t,b.m>rew

York  citv.  10  Nov.,
1800:  d.  there.  30  Nov.,  18(W.  wa.s  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1819,  and  studietl  law.  but  was  pre-
vented by  delicate  health  from  practising.  He
never  marrie<l.  and  the  fortune  that  he  inherited
was  not  large,  but  by  investments  in  real  estate,  and
a  simple  and  unostentatious  manner  of  living,  he
accumulated  the  sum  that  he  intended  from  his
early  manhood  to  leave  for  some  <'haritable  oliject.
Bv  the  terms  of  his  will  he  left  the  principal  part
of  his  estate  to  found  a  noble  hospital  in  New  \  ork
city  which  Ixjars  his  name,  and  was  formally  opened.
2  Nov.,  1871.  The  property  left  bv  him  was  valued
at  about  $1,000,000,  but,  in  the  interval  of  eight
Tears  between  his  death  and  the  opening  of  the
hospital,  the  estate  had  lK?en  so  atlministered  by
the  tnjstees  that  the  principal  aggregated  at  least
$1,(NM),(MN)  exclusive  of  the  ground  upon  which  the
buildings  were  erectwl  in  West  ."ittth  street,  and.  as
the  buildings  themselvi-s  repn»sented  an  ex|x>ndi-
ture  of  altout  $950,000.  the  pro{»crty  is  now  (1888)
worth  I^.CNNMNM).  On  the  toblet  that  is  placed  to
his  memory  in  Roosevelt  hospital  is  inscribe<l :  "To
the  memory  of  Janu«  Henry  I{<K)sevelt,  a  tnie  son
of  New  Yiirk.  the  generous  founder  of  this  hospital,
a  man  upright  in  his  aims,  simple  in  his  life,  and
sublime  in  his  benefacti«m." — Cornelius's  grandson.
Hilborne  liewla,  organ-builder,  b.  in  New  York
city,  21  I)i«c.,  1849;  d.  there,  80  iKx-.,  188«,  entere<l
an  organ-fm^tory  in  early  youth,  and  sulis«>quently
studitnl  his  trade  in  Kuriiue  from  an  artistic  stand-
point, es|M>cially  in  regard  to  electric  inventions  m


applied  to  organ-nmnufacture.  On  his  return  to
New  York  he  engni^Hl  in  buwinem  to  a  Uffre  ^'
tent,  <>Htablish('4l  fn^-tories  in  that  city.  Philadel-
phia, and  Italtimore.  and  built  M>mc  of  tho  larvcat
organs  in  tho  I'nitetl  States,  including  that  in  Gar-
den City  (*athe<lral.  Ixmg  Islan<l,  dnu-c  church.
New  York  citv,  each  of  which  contains  twenty
miles  of  elwlric  win*,  that  in  Triiiity  rhurch.  New
York,  and  tho  organ  in  the  main  building  of  the
Philatlelphiacontenniiil  ex|Mwiti<in.  He  wa<«  widely
known  among  elect rieians,  invent***!  several  impor-
tant details  of  the  teleplmne,  enjoye<l  a  njyalty  for
many  years  in  the  telephone-switch,  and  wa»  largely
inter»*ste<l  in  the  IJ«'ll  telephone  coniftany.

ROOT,  David,  dergvman,  b.  in  Pomfret.  Vu,
in  1790;  d.  in  ('hi<-ago.  III.,  :J0  Aug.,  187«.  He
was  graduate<l  at  Middlelniry  in  18II5,  entered  the
ministry,  and  wa.s  |tastor  successively  of  Presbyte-
rian chun-hes  in  (ieorgia  and  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  and
of  the  Congregational  church  in  Hover.  N.  H.  In
the  latter  city  he  identified  himself  with  the  Anti-
slavery  party,  which  he  serve*!  with  such  «!evotion
that  he  suffered  persecution  IxAh  there  and  in  Wa-
terbury.  Conn.,  whence  he  sul>sequentlv  rcmove<l.
He  then  held  pastorates  in  Guilford  and  New  Ha-
ven, Conn.,  till  1852,  when  he  retire<l.  He  gave
$10,000  to  endow  a  pn)fessorshii»  in  B<'loit  college.
Wis..  $20,(KX)  to  Yale  thi'ological  s«'minary,  and
$5,000  to  the  American  missionary  s«K-iety.

ROOT,  KUhu,  lawyer,  b.  in  Clinton.  Oneida  co.,
N.  Y.,  15  Feb..  1845.  His  father,  Onm.  was  pro-
fessor of  mathematii-s  in  Hamilton  college  from
1849  till  1885.  The  son  was  graduated  there  in
1864.  adopte<l  the  profession  of  law,  and  s«>ttlctl  in
New  York  citv.  where  he  ha-s  attained  high  reputa-
tion. In  188;i-'5  he  was  V.  S.  district  attoniey  for
the  southern  district  of  New  York.

ROOT,  EraittUK,  congressn>an. b.  in Hebron,
Conn.,  16  March,  1773:  d.  in  New  York  city,  24
Dec.,  1846. He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1793,  studied  law  in
his  native  town,  and
in 1796 settle*! in

Practice  in  Delhi,
l.  Y.  He  was  in  the
legislature  in  1798-
1802,  and  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in
1803-'5,  in  1809-'ll,
in  1812-'15,  and  in
18:«-'3.  Hewassub-
se<juentlyretunu'd  re-
{leatedly  to  the  as-
sembly, was  lieuten-
ant-governor in  1820-
'2,  and  state  senator
in  1840-'4.  For  many
years  he  was  major-
general  of  state  mili-
tia. Mr.  U<H)t  WHS  an
anient Democ-rat  of

the  (ieorge  Clinton  s*'hool  an*l  an  able  and  popu-
lar |x)Iitician.  Halleck  celebrate*!  him  in  one  of
the  "Croakers."  Mr.  K*H»t  publishe*!  "  A«!dresso«
to  the  People"  (New  Y*)rk,  1824).

ROOT.  George  Frederick,  nuisician. »».  in  Sl>ef-
field.  lt<>rkshin'  co..  .Mass.,  30  Aug..  1S20.  While
worlcing  on  his  father's  farm  he  found  op|Mtrtunity
to  leani  unaide*!  to  play  several  mu^i^•al  instru-
ments, an«l  in  his  eighteenth  y*>ar  he  went  to  IJos-
ton,  where  lie  soon  found  em|>lovment  as  a  teacher
of  music.  From  IKW)  till  1844  he  gave  instruction
in  the  public  schot>ls  of  tlie  city  an*!  was  also  di-
rector of  music  in  two  churches.  He  then  went  to
New  York  and  soon  was  occupied  in  teaching  mu-


Ho'CMJ^uif <^Car5t'


320


ROOT


ROSAS


sic  at  various  educational  institutions.  In  ISSO  he
went  to  Paris,  where  he  spent  a  year  in  study.
Alter  his  return  he  published  in  1858  his  first
song,  "  Hazel  Dell,"  which  became  very  popular.
It  appeared  as  the  work  of  "  Wurzel,"  the  German
equivalent  of  his  family  name,  and  the  same  pen-
name  appeared  on  many  of  his  later  pieces.  Many
of  the  numerous  songs  that  Dr.  Root  has  written
have  achieved  a  national  popularity.  Among  them
are  "Rosalie,  the  Prairie-Flower"  (1855);  "Battle
Cry  of  Freedom  "  (1861) ;  "  Just  Before  the  Battle,
Mother"  (1863);  "Tramp,  Tramp,  Tramp,  the
Boys  arc  Marching "  (1864);  "The  Old  Folks  are
Gone  "  ;  "A  Hundred  Years  ago  "  ;  "  Old  Potomac
Shore " ;  and  the  well-known  quartet,  "  There's
Music  in  the  Air."  His  cantatas  include  "The
Flower  -  Queen  "  (1852)  and  "The  Haymakers"
(1857).  lie  was  the  originator  of  the  normal  mu-
sical institutes,  and  when  the  first  one  was  held  at
New  York  in  1852  was  one  of  the  faculty.  Since
1860  he  has  resided  in  Chicago,  where  in  1872  the
degree  of  Doctor  of  Music  was  conferred  on  him  by
the  university  of  that  city  By  his  compositions
and  his  work  as  a  teacher  he  has  done  much  to-
ward elevating  the  standard  of  music  in  this  coun-
try. Besides  his  numerous  songs  he  has  composed
much  sacred  music  and  published  many  collections
of  vocal  and  instrumental  music.  He  is  also  well
known  as  an  author,  his  work  in  that  line  com-
prising " methods"  for  the  piano  and  organ,  hand-
books on  harmony  and  teacning,  and  innumerable
articles  for  the  musical  press. — His  son,  Frederic
Woodman,  musician,  b.  in  Boston,  13  June,  1846,
began  his  musical  education  under  his  father,  and
studied  also  with  William  Mason  and  James  Flint,
and  took  vocal  lessons  with  Carlo  Bassini,  of
New  York,  and  Vannuccini,  of  Florence.  During
1869-'70  he  studied  and  travelled  in  Europe,  ana
since  his  return  he  has  been  occupied  in  teaching,
composing,  and  conducting.  From  1866  till  1871
he  was  in  the  emplov  of  Root  and  Cadv,  the  Chicago
music  publishers.  "His  compositions  include  songs,
cantatas,  an  operetta,  and  other  pieces.  He  has
been  very  successful  as  a  teacher  of  vocal  music,
and  has  published  "  Root's  School  of  Singing "
(Cincinnati,  1873).  From  1871  till  1875  he  edited
the  "  Song  Messenger."

ROOT,  Jesse,  member  of  the  Continental  con-
gress, b.  in  Coventry,  Conn.,  28  Dec,  1736  ;  d.  there,
29  March,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1756  and  preached  several  years,  but  in  1763
was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  settled  in  Hartford,
Conn.  Early  in  1777  he  raised  a  company,  with
which  he  joined  Washington's  armv  at  Peekskill,
and  was  made  lieutenant-colonel,  fie  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Continental  congi-ess  in  1778-'83,
was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  in
1789,  and  was  chief  justice  of  Connecticut  in  1196-
1807.  He  subsequently  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature and  of  the  American  and  Connecticut  acade-
mies of  arts  and  sciences.  He  published  "  Reports
of  Cases  Adjudged  in  the  Courts  of  Errors  of  Con-
necticut "  (2  vols.,  Hartford,  1789-1802).

ROPES,  John  Codnian,  author,  b.  in  St.  Pe-
tersburg, Russia.  28  April,  1836.  His  father,  a
merchant,  resided  in  St.  Petersburg  in  1832-'7.
The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1857  aqd  at
the  law-school  in  1861,  and  since  has  practised  his
profession.  Mr.  Ropes  has  taken  much  interest  in
militar)'  history.  He  has  contributed  to  the  pub-
lications of  the  Military  historical  society  of  Mas-
sachusetts and  to  periodicals,  and  is  the  author  of
"  The  Army  under  Pope,"  in  "  Campaigns  of  the
Civil  War '*^ (New  York,  1881), and  "The  First  Na-
poleon, a  Sketch,  Political  and  Military  "  (1885).


ROSA  OF  LIMA,  Santa,  Peruvian  nun,  b.  in
Linm,  30  April,  1586:  d.  there,  24  Aug.,  1617.
Her  secular  name  was  Isabel  Flore.s,  and  she  was
the  daughter  of  a  member  of  the  viceroyal  guard
of  arquebusiers.  She  showed  great  piety  in  early
life,  and,  to  avoid  hearing  the  praises  of  her  beauty,
disfigured  her  face  with  oil  of  vitriol.  By  her  ex-
emplary conduct  she  won  the  admiration  of  the
church  authorities,  and  was  permitted  to  enter  a
convent  without  the  usual  dowry.  She  united  with
the  Dominican  order  in  1602,  and  led  for  fifteen
years  an  austere  life,  which  brought  about  her  early
death.  Her  funeral  was  attended  by  all  the  au-
thorities of  Lima,  and  the  archbishop  pronounced
a  panegyric  on  her  in  the  cathedral,  26  Aug.,  1617.
Soon  after  her  death,  efforts  were  made  by  the
Peruvian  church  to  push  claims  for  her  canoniza-
tion, and  it  was  decreed  by  Clement  X.  in  1671.
See  "  Vita  Sanctie  Rosae,"  by  the  Dominican  Hansen
(2  vols.,  Rome,  1664-'8),  and  "  Concentus  Domini-
cano,  Bononiensis  ecclesiae  in  album  .Sanctorum
Ludovici  Bertrandi  et  Rosjb  de  Sancta  Maria,  ordi-
nem  praxiicatorum,"  bv  Vicente  Orsini,  afterward
Pope  Benedict  XIII.  (Venice,  1674).

ROSAS,  Juan  Mannel  de  (ro'-sas).  Argentine
dictator,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres,  30  March,  1793;  d.
in  Swathling,  Southampton,  England,  14  March,
1877.  He  belonged  to  a  noble  family  that  owned
large  cattle  farms,  but  he  received  only  a  limited
education,  and  from  his  youth  took  part  in  the
work  of  his  father's  farm.  During  the  English
invasion  he  served  until  the  evacuation  of  Buenos
Ayres  and  Montevideo,  when  he  returned  to  the
country  to  take  charge  of  his  father's  property.
When  Gov.  Rodriguez,  of  Buenos  Ayres,  was  threat-
ened with  invasion  in  1820  by  the  governors  of
Santa  Fe  and  Entre  Rios,  he  appointed  Rosas  cap-
tain of  militia,  and  the  latter,  with  a  force  of  (500
fauchos,  assisted  in  the  battles  of  San  Nicolas  and
'avon.  Afterward  he  was  appointed  commander-
in-chief  of  the  southern  frontier  against  the  Pam-
pas Indians.  Under  President  Rivadavia  he  was
appointed  commander-in-chief  of  all  the  forces  of
the  province  of  Buenos  Ayres,  but  later  he  joined
the  insurrectionary  forces  against  the  government,
and  Rivadavia  resigned  in  consequence.  He  was
a  sustainer  of  the  Federal  administration  of  Dor-
rego,  and  when  the  government  of  the  latter  was
overthrown  by  LavalTe,  Rosas  joined  the  forces  of
Gov.  Lopez  against  Lavalle.  The  legislature  of
Buenos  Ayres  appointed  Rosas  governor  on  6  Dec.,
1829.  Although  nominally  he  sustained  the  F^-
eral  principle,  his  government  soon  became  arbi-
trary, and  numerous  executions  of  his  political
enemies  took  place  by  his  orders.  At  the  expira-
tion of  his  term  in  December,  1832,  he  resigned  in
the  expectation  of  being  re-elected,  but  the  legisla-
ture took  him  at  his  word  and  chose  Gen.  Balcarec.
Rosas  immediately  began  an  active  opposition,  and,
tired  of  continual  strife.  Balcarec  resigned  in  1833,
as  also  did  his  successor.  Col.  Viamonte,  soon  after-
ward. Several  other  governors  were  elected  by
the  legislature,  but,  fearing  the  vengeance  of  liosas,
were  afraid  to  accept,  so  that  the  president  of  the
legislature,  Manuel  Vicente  Maza,  took  charge  pro-
visionally of  the  executive.  The  representatives  of
the  province  elected  Rosas  governor  in  1835  with
extraonlinary  powers,  and  on  13  April  he  began  a
U'rannical  dictatorship,  which  endeld  only  with  his
flight  in  1852.  Soon  he  formed  alliances  with  some
of  the  governors  of  the  interior,  and  those  that  re-
sisted his  authority  he  vanquished,  so  that  he  be-
came arbiter  of  the  destiny  of  all  the  Argentine
Republic.  Two  of  the  principal  Federal  chiefs,
(juiroga  and  Lopez,  died  suddenly,  and  it  was  sus-


ROSATI


ROSCIO


821


pectctl  that  Romm  omimcI  their  death.  He  now  r»-
inaiiuHl  un<lis|>iitt>(I  chief  uf  hi-*  |»«rty.  nml  tiirnwl
his  Htlciitioit  iipiinnt  tho  (Vntmii/.atii)ii  |Mirty,  or
UnitariHiis  wh<»m  he  {H-rxwuttsl  cnielly.  VJ"ht'ii
()riU''s  >r'>v«'nimont  fi-II  then-,  in  OftnlH-r,  1K3H. ami
Presitli'iit  Hi  Vera  favitrtnl  the  Ar>;entine  refii);i'«'s,
litv<ns  iU-vl&nA  war  apiiiiwt  him,  ami  in  Jiilv,  IKW,
invBiU'il  the  territory  of  that  renublic  with  7.000
nu'Ji.  Althoiitrh  his  annv  was  at  nrst  dufeatecl.  ami
(ten.  Ijavalle  invadetl  tfie  Arjfentiiie  at  thv>  hea<l
of  an  army.  Rosa.s  organi7.e<l  a  font-  the  oommand
of  whi<h  he  pive  to  (Jen.  OriU'.  and  >M>pin  a  war
Af^iiiiit  the  Cnitarian  chiefs  of  the  interior,  and  a
price  was  set  on  their  heads.  A  law  was  promul-
gated that  ever)'  one,  male  and  female,  should  use
a  red  ribbon  as  the  l>adge  of  the  PVleral  i>arty,
and  all  political  documents  were  headwl  with  the
wortls  '*  Ijnng  live  the  holv  fe«leration  :  death  to  tho
savaj^e  Unitarians."  In  January.  \H4li,  Gen.  Oril>e,
at  the  hea<l  of  an  Arjjentine  army  of  14,000  men,
inva<le<l  the  republic  of  Urujfuav  apiin,  and  the
sieji:e  of  Montevideo,  which  lasted  for  nearly  nine
years,  Ijejjan.  P'rance  and  Kngland  interfered,  and
the  blocka<le  of  Buenos  Ayrea  began  on  18  Sent.,
1845.  but  Rosas  resisted  the  demands  of  the  allies
until,  in  Novemlx^r,  1849,  a  treaty  favorable  to  the
dictator  was  signed.  This  treaty  left  the  naviga-
tion of  1m  Plata,  Uruguay,  and  upper  Parana
rivers  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  provmce  of  Bue-
nos Ayres,  excluding  even  the  interior  jtrovinces,
ami  this  caused  general  dissatisfaction,  especially
in  the  river  provinces  of  Entre  RiosandCorrientes.
The  governor  of  the  former,  Gen.  Urt^uiza,  pub-
iishtHla  manifesto  on  1  May,  1851,  inviting  alt  the
provinces  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the  dictator,  and
on  29  May  he  conclude<l  an  offensive  and  defensive
alliance  with  Brazil  and  Truguay.  Assisted  by  the
money  and  army  of  Brazil,  he  marchetl  against
Iios*is's  army  in  Uruguay,  and  after  he  had  de-
feate<l  <)ril)e  the  troops  of  the  latter  joined  him.
Re-enforc"iHl  in  this  manner,  and  assiste«l  by  the
Brazilian  fleet,  he  marchetl  with  30,000  men  against
Buenos  Ayres.  Rosas,  with  an  army  of  atx)ut
equal  force,  was  intrenched  at  Palermo  and  Santos
Lugares,  but  at  the  first  attm-k  of  Unpiiza  his
tnjops  wavered.  Thev  were  defeatetl,  3  Feb.,  1852,
at  .Monte  Caserfw,  and  Rosas  escapi*d  oii  board  a
foreign  vess«-l  to  England,  where  he  afterward
live<l  in  n-tirement.  In  1859  the  Argentine  con-
gress ordere<l  proceedings  to  be  instituted  against
him,  and  on  17  April,  1861,  sentence  was  pro-
nounced, condemning  him  U>  death  as  a  "pro-
fessional munlerer  and  famous  robWr."  In  this
trial  2,(W4  assass-inations,  by  his  personal  orders,
were  pn)ved  against  him.  while  the  historian,  Jose
Rivera  Indarte  (q.  v.),  gi\e»  a  detailed  account  of
22,40.")  victims  of  Rosas  s policy.

ROSATI,  JoHeph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Sora,  Italy.
30  Jan.,  1780;  d.  in  Rome,  25  Sept.,  1843.  He  be-
came a  member  of  the  Lazarist  order,  and  studie<l
philf)sophv  and  theology  in  their  seminary  of  Monte
Citorio,  Home.  He  devoted  himself  with  great
real  to  the  spiritual  imjirovement  of  the  prisoners
in  the  city,  and  at  the  same  time  Ix-came  noted  as
a  pulpit  orator.  He  gave  his  leisun*  to  the  stu«ly
of  the  English  language,  and  when  Bishop  Dulxturg,
of  New  Orleans,  invitetl  him  to  come  to  the  Unite<l
States,  he  accept e<l  without  hesitation,  and  lande<l  in
Baltimore  cm  23  July,  1816.  After  s(>ending  nearly
a  year  in  Ijouisville,  Ky.,  he  went  to  St.  Ijouis  on  17
Oct.,  1817.  designing  to  found  a  lazarist  college,
but,  after  consultation  with  Bisho[t  DulKUirc:.  it  was
decided  to  establish  the  institution  in  the  Barrens,
Perry  county.  Mo.  Here  Father  Rosati  and  his
brother  Lazarists  erected  a  rude  building  with  their

TOL.  T. — 21


own  bands.  It  waa  ready  to  rpoeire  itudenta  in
1819.  and  he  was  amMiintiMl  it.«  first  cuiierior.  at  the
same  time  filling  tlie  chairs  of  logic  and  thcologr.
From  this  iM-ginning  was  devc|o[MMl  St.  .Mary^s
college  and  seminary  at  the  Bam-ns.  which  after-
wanl  took  high  rank.  He  was  made  »uiKTior  of
the  I.«zaristjt  in  the  Unite<l  States  in  1826,  and  in
182^1  rebuilt  his  seminary  on  a  larger  scale.  The
same  year  heobtaim-*!  acI>lony  of  Sisters  of  Ix)retto
to  uke  charee  of  an  atademy  and  a  home  for  In-
dian girls.  In  March,  1M24,  he  was  made  coadjutor
of  Bishop  I)ul)ourg,  and  in  1H27  he  was  apprnnted
bishop  of  St.  I^)uis,  which  had  been  erected  the
nrevious  year  into  an  e|)is<-o|)al  see.  He  was  also
for  some  time  administrator  of  the  diricese  of  New
Orleans,  and  retained  the  pitst  of  su])erior  of  the
Ijazarist  onler  up  to  1830.  He  co-oiwratwl  with
the  Jesuits  in  founding  St.  Ixmis  university  and
the  House  of  novices  at  Floris.sant,  ami  introduced
various  sisterhoo«ls.  By  his  aid  and  i»atronag«'  St.
Ix)uis  hospital,  saiil  to  have  Ik-cu  the  first  of  its
kind  in  the  United  States,  wa-s  establisht-tl.  and
he  also  built  a  fine  cathedral,  which  he  consei-rated
in  October,  1884.  He  attendecl  the  first  four  pro-
vincial councils  of  Baltimore,  and  exercistnl  much
influence  in  their  delil)eration8.  Bishop  Rosati  was
very  successful  in  making  converts  to  his  church.
In  1840  he  sailed  for  Euro{»c,  and  on  his  arrival  in
Rome  he  was  apjHiintedafKistolic  delegate  to  Harti,
to  settle  a  controversy  that  had  arisen  Ix'twtfn  that
republic  and  the  court  of  Rome,  an<l  also  to  bring
about  a  reorganization  of  the  Haytian  church.  On
his  return  to  Romethe  j>opeexpresse<l  hisap|>roval
of  the  diplomacy  of  Bishop  R<isati,  who  pre|kared
to  sail  for  the  I'nited  States  from  a  French  |K)rt,
but  he  fell  sick  in  Pari.s.  and  was  a<lvise<l  by  his
physicians  to  go  back  to  Rome,  where  he  died
shortly  after  his  arrival.

RO^iBHl'tiH,  John  (rose'-bruh).  clergyman,  b.
in  .Scotland  in  1714;  d.  in  Trenton,  N.  J..  2  Jan.,
1777.  He  came  to  this  country  al>out  1740,  and
after  the  death  of  his  wife  taught  for  some  time
and  then  entered  Princeton,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1761.  He  studied  theology  under  the  Rev.
John  Blair,  and  was  licensed  to  pn»ach  on  16  .Aug.,
1 76^{.  His  first  field  of  lalxir  was  in  Warren  county,
N.  J.,  where  in  October,  1764.  he  was  called  to  Mans-
field, Oxfonl,  and  Greenwich,  and  was  ordained
at  the  latter  place  on  11  Dec.  For  five  years
he  remained  with  this  parish,  but  in  1769  he  was
transferred  to  the  Forks  of  Delaware,  Pa.,  where
he  remained  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  During  the
Revolutionary  war  he  joined  with  his  neighbors  in
the  formation  of  a  military  company,  and  on  n>ach-
ing  Philadelphia  was  commissione*!  chaplain  of  the
3d  battalion  of  the  Northampton  county  militia.
He  serve<l  during  the  cam^mign  in  New  Jersey,  and
was  taken  prisoner  in  Trenton  by  a  jwrty  of  Hes-
sians, who  brutally  munlered  him.  See  "  Roa-
bnigh :  A  Tale  of  the  Revolution."  by  the  Rer.
John  ('.  Clyde.  I).  D.  (p:aston.  Pa.,  1880).

ROSCIO,  Juan  German  (ros'-se-o),  Venezuelan
statesman,  b.  in  Caracas  in  1769;  d.  in  Cucuta  in
1821.  He  was  graduate<l  in  law  at  the  Univer»ity
of Caracas  in  1795.  ioine<l the revolutionists  in

1810,  and  was  electe«l  deputy  to  the  congress  of

1811,  e<littHl  the  manifesto  of  the  confederation  of
Venezuela,  assisted  in  forming  the  Fe<leral  consti-
tution, and  in  1812  was  appointe<l  a  meml»cr  of
the  F«»deral  executive.  On  the  surrender  of  Gen.
Miranda  to  the  Sfianish  p'nend,  Montevenle,
Roscio  and  other  memlwrs  of  the  executive  wers
sent  as  prisoners  to  Cadiz.  In  1814  he  and  three
others  escaped,  and  took  refuge  in  Gibraltar,  but
the  governor  delivered  them  up  to  the  Spanish


322


ROSE


ROSE


authorities.  In  1816  he  regained  his  liberty  and
went  to  Jamaica,  and  in  1818  to  Philadelphia,
where  he  wrote  a  work  entitled  "Triunfo  tie  la
Libertad  sobre  el  Despotisino."  He  returned  to
South  America  in  1818,  and  wrote  for  a  Republican
pajier  called  "  Correo  del  Orinoco."  He  was  soon
appointed  director  of  the  revenues,  and  elected  to
the  congress  of  1819.  At  his  death  he  was  vice-
president  of  Colombia.

ROSE,  Auuila,  poet,  b.  in  England  in  1695 ;  d.
in  Philadelnhia,  Pa..  22  Aug.,  1723.  He  is  de-
scribed by  Henjamin  Franklin  in  his  "  Autobiogra-
phy" as  "an  ingenious  young  man  of  excellent
character,  much  respected  in  the  town,  secretary
to  the  assembly,  and  a  pretty  poet."  His  writings
were  issued  as  "  Poems  on  Several  Occasions,  by
Aquila  Rose:  to  which  are  prefixed  some  other
Pieces  writ  to  Him,  and  to  his  Memory  after  his
Decease.  Collected  and  published  by  ins  Son,
Josej)h  Rose  "  (Philadelphia,  1740).

ROSE,  Chauncey,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Wethers-
field,  Conn.,  24  Dec,  1794;  d.  in  Terre  Haute,
Ind.,  13  Aug.,  1877.  He  was  educated  in  the
common  schools  of  his  district,  and  during  the
autumn  of  1817  visited  the  states  of  Indiana,  Illi-
nois, Kentucky,  Tennessee,  and  Alabama,  looking

for  a  place  in
which  to  re-
side and  en-
gage in  busi-
ness. After
spending  the
winter  in  Mt.
Sterling,  Ky.,
he  settled  in
April  in  Terre
Haute,  and
soon  after-
ward moved  to
Parke  county,
where  for  six
years  he  de-
voted his  at-
tentiontomill-
ing.  In  1825  he  returned  to  Terre  Haute  and  en-
tered business,  becoming  one  of  the  most  successful
merchants  of  that  region.  His  profits  were  judi-
ciously invested  in  land,  and  he  acquired  a  large
fortime.  He  was  active  in  securing  railway  trans-
portation in  Indiana,  and  was  the  principal  pro-
moter of  the  Terre  Haute  and  Indianapolis  railroad.
On  the  death  of  his  brother  John,  he  found  that
the  will,  if  it  were  executed  under  the  laws  of  New
York,  would  not  accomplish  the  clearly  defined  in-
tentions of  the  testator.  He  accordingly  instituted
legal  proceedings  to  have  it  set  aside,  and  after  six
years  of  litigation  succeeded  in  doing  so.  The
estate  was  then  valued  at  $1,600,000,  to  which  he
became  sole  heir.  Although  legally  entitled  to
the  money,  he  at  once  endeavored  to  carry  out  his
brother's  wishes  and  expended  alK)ut  $1,500,000
in  charities,  principally  in  New  York.  Besides
other  sums,  he  contributed  $12,000  to  endow  an
academy  in  Wethersfleld,  and  his  gifts  for  philan-
thropic purposes  in  Terre  Haute  and  vicinity  ex-
ceed $1,000,000.  Among  the  special  objects  of  his
interest  were  the  Providence  hospital,  the  Free  dis-
pensary, and  the  Rose  orphan  asylum,  which  he
endowed  with  sufficient  money  to  assure  its  per-
manency. His  chief  benefaction  was  the  build-
ing and  equipment  of  Rose  polytechnic  institute
(of  which  the  principal  building  is  shown  in  the
accompanying  illustration),  to  which  he  left  the
greater  part  of  his  estate,  so  that  this  institution
has  a  productive  capital,  exclusive  of  the  buildings,


of  at  least  $500,000.  In  1874  it  was  organized  as
the  Terre  Haute  school  of  industrial  science,  with
Mr.  Rose  as  president  of  its  Ixjard  of  managers,  and
in  1875  it  assumed  its  present  designation.  Its
chief  purpose  is  to  provide  higher  education  in
mechanical  engineering,  and  it  is  the  only  separat«
school  of  its  character  in  the  western  states.

ROSE,  Ernestine  Louise  Lasiuond  Potow-
8ky,  reformer,  b.  in  Peterkoff,  Poland,  18  Jan.,
1810,  She  was  born  of  Jewish  parentage,  but  early
abandoned  that  creed.  In  1829  she  visited  Eng-
land, lx?came  a  disciple  of  Rol)ert  Dale  Owen,  and
soon  afterward  married  William  E.  Rose.  In  1836
she  came  to  New  York  and  circulated  the  first  pe-
tition for  the  property  rights  of  married  women,
there  being  in  1837  a  bill  pending  in  the  New  York
legislature  on  this  subject.  Mrs.  liose  lectured  in
the  chief  cities  of  the  United  States,  and  was  a
delegate  from  the  National  woman  suffrage  asso-
ciation to  the  Woman's  industrial  congress  in
Berlin  on  9  Nov.,  1869.  Later  she  attended  all  of
the  woman's-rights  conventions,  and  she  has  re-

f)eatedly  addressed  legislative  assemblies.  She  has
ived  for  some  time  in  France  and  England,  and
frequently  speaks  on  religious  topics,  temperance,
and  the  enfranchisement  of  women.  "

ROSE,  (jJeorge  Maclean,  Canadian  publisher,
b.  in  Wick,  Caithness-shire,  Scotland,  14  March,
1829.  He  was  educated  at  the  Presbyterian  acade-
my in  his  native  place,  and  learned  the  printing
trade  in  the  office  of  the  '•  John  O'Groat  Journal.
In  1851  he  came  to  Canada,  and  in  1853,  with  his
brother  Henry,  he  established  a  small  job-printing
office  in  Montreal.  In  1856  the  partnership  was
dissolved,  and  George,  removing  to  Upper  Canada,
aided  in  founding  the  MerricKville  "Chronicle,"
and  was  also  city  editor  of  the  London  "  Proto-
type." Since  1858  he  has  been  in  the  printing  busi-
ness in  Toronto  and  Montreal  as  manager  or  pro-
prietor, and  with  his  brother  Daniel  he  now  (1888)
has  the  most  extensive  publishing  and  printing  es-
tablishment in  the  Dominion.  Mr.  Rose  has  long
been  an  active  temperance  reformer  in  the  United
States  as  well  as  in  Canada,  He  was  president  of
the  Toronto  board  of  trade  in  1882,  and  for  five
years  a  director  of  the  Ontario  bank.  Among  other
books  he  has  edited  "The  Life  of  Henry  Ward
Beecher"  (Toronto,  1887).

ROSE,  Sir  Jolin,  bart.,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  Turriff,  Aberdeenshire,  Scotland,  2  Aug.,  1820.
He  was  educated  at  King's  college,  Aberdeen,  and
in  1836  he  accompanied  his  parents  to  Canada,  and
settled  with  them  in  Lower  Canada.  He  took  an
active  part  in  suppressing  the  rebellion  of  1837,
taught  for  a  time  in  the  eastern  townships,  after-
ward studied  law  in  Montreal,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1842,  and  soon  had  the  largest  commercial

iiractice  in  the  city.  Mr.  Rose  was  a  memlier  for
Montreal  in  the  Canada  assembly  from  1857  till
1861,  and  for  Centre  Montreal  from  1861  till  the
union,  when  he  declined  to  be  a  candidate  for  that
constituency,  and  was  elected  for  Huntingdon,
which  he  continued  to  represent  until  his  retire-
ment in  1869.  He  was  solicitor-general  for  Lower
Canada  from  November,  1857,  till  August,  1858,  a
member  of  the  executjve  council  of  Canada  from
6  Aug.,  1858,  till  June^  1861,  and  became  receiver-
general,  6  Aug.,  1858.  He  was  a  second  time  so-
licitor-general for  Lower  Canada  from  7  Aug.,  1858,
till  10  Jan.,  1859,  and  commissioner  of  public  works
from  11  Jan.,  1859.  till  12  June,  1861.  when  he  re-
tired, owing  to  feeble  health.  In  1864  he  was  ap-
pointed by  the  British  government  a  commissioner
for  the  settlement  of  claims  that  arose  under  the
Oregon  treaty  with  the  U.  S.  government. He  be-


ROSE


ROSECRANS


323


Jle^v^^Sr^


oame  a  member  nf  the  privy  council,  80  Nov.,  1867,  I
aixl  hi'Id  the  jK)rl  folio  of  minister  of  flnancu  from  |
that  elate  until  his  retirement  from  nuhlie  life  in  i
V&ild. IIu  was  a  delegate  to  l^mdon,  England,  dur-
ing; the  hittmg  of  the

colonial  conference  in

1HI57.  representing  the
Prf)testant  (nlucational
interests  of  Lower  Can-
ada, and  again  in  1868
as  minister  of  finance
on  jtublic  business,  lie
was  n»quested  by  the
governor  -  general,  on
behalf  of  the  Hritish
government,  to  make  a
confidential  examina-
tion into  the  alleged
grievances  of  the  prov-
ince of  Nova  Scotia
relative  to  the  financial
terms  that  were  grant-
ed it  on  its  entering
the  Dominion,  and  rec-
ommended the  extend-
ing of  large  financial
concessions  to  the  province.  In  1869  he  was  selected
by  the  government  of  Canada  to  confer  with  the  U.  S.
government  on  the  subject  of  reciprocal  trade,  the
fisheries,  copyright,  patent  laws,  the  navigation  of
the  St.  I^awrence,  and  the  extradition  of  criminals.
In  1869  he  removed  to  England,  where  he  became  a

Eartner  in  the  banking  firm  of  Morton,  Rose  and
o..  London,  and  was  for  several  years  afterward
recopiized  as  the  unofficial  representative  of  Can-
ada in  the  British  isles.  Sir  John  Rose  was  re-
quested in  1870  by  the  British  government  to  go  on
a  confidential  mission  to  the  United  States,  which
led  to  the  treaty  of  Washington.  Since  his  resi-
dence in  London  he  has  been  a  meml)er  of  various
royal  commissions,  and  was  chairman  of  the  finance
committee  of  the  Colonial  and  Indian  exhibition  of
1886.  He  was  appointed  by  the  Prince  of  Wales  a
trustee  of  the  Royal  college  of  music,  and  became
a  member  of  the  council  of  the  duchy  of  Cornwall,
and  on  24  Julv,  188J3,  its  receiver-general.  In  con-
sideration of  his  public  services  he  was  created  (in
1870)  a  knight  commander  of  the  order  of  St.
Michael  and  St.  George,  advanced  to  the  dignity  of
knight  grand  cross  of  the  same  order  in  1878,  cre-
ated a  baronet  of  the  United  Kingdom  in  1872,  and
made  a  privy  councillor  in  1886.  In  1843  he  mar-
ried Charlotte,  daughter  of  Robert  Emmet  Temple,
of  Rutland.  Vt.,  and  after  her  death  he  marrieu  (2
Jan..  1887)  Julia,  Marchioness  of  Tweeddale.

ROSE,  Thomas  EUwood,  soldier,  b.  in  Bucks
county.  Pa.,  12  March,  18;{0.  He  was  educated  in
the  common  schof)ls,  entered  the  National  army
as  a  private  in  the  12th  Pennsylvania  regiment  in
April,  1861,  became  captain  in  the  77th  Pennsyl-
vania in  October  of  the  same  year,  was  engaged  at
Shiloh,  the  siege  and  battles  of  Corinth  and  Mur-
freesljoro',  became  colonel  in  January,  1863,  and
fought  at  Liberty  Gap  antl  Chickamauga,  where
he  was  taken  pnsoner.  He  escafied  at  Weldon,
N.  C,  wa.s  retaken  the  next  day,  and  sent  to  Libby
prison.  Richmond,  Va.,  on  1  Oct.,  1863.  He  almost
unnuHliately  began  preparations  to  esca|)e.  With
the  aid  of  Slaj.  Archibald  G.  Hamilton,  of  the  12th
Kentucky  cavalry,  he  cut  a  hole  in  the  solid  ma-
sonry of  the  kitchen  fire-place  larec  enough  to  ad-
mit a  man's  Inxly  into  the  cellar  Vm'Iow,  their  only
implements  being  a  broken  jack-knife  and  an  old
chisel  found  in  the  prison,  and  their  time  of  work-
ing between  the  hours  of  10  p.  M.  and  4  a.  m. This


having  been  completed,  a  working-party  of  flfteen
men  was  organize<l,  under  the  command  of  V,o\.
Rose,  who  undertook  the  most  dangerous  and
arduous  part  of  the  task.  They  cut  through  the
stone  wall  of  the  cellar,  and  dug  a  tunnel  fifty  feet
long  through  an  earthen  em>>ankment,  emerging
at  a  ix)int  where  the  sentry  could  not  see  them,
whence  they  found  ejisy  m-cess  to  the  street.  This
work  occupied  nearly  three  months,  and  during
much  of  the  time  Col.  Ros«'  and  Mai.  Hamilton
worked  alone.  On  the  night  of  9  Feb.,  18<M,  the
tunnel  was  complete<l.  aixl  KM)  sr)Idiers  escaj>ed,  of
whom  48  were  n-taken,  includini;  Col.  Rom*.  Rose
was  suffering  from  a  broken  ankle,  and  was  in  sight
of  the  National  lines  when  he  was  recapture<l.  He
was  again  confinetl  in  Libby  prison,  but  left  there
on  80  April,  1864,  and  was  orderetl  to  Columbus,
Ohio,  where  he  was  formally  exchange<i  on  20  May,
1864,  rejoined  his  regiment,  and  serve<l  with  it  from
6  June,  1864,  until  the  close  of  the  war,  i)articipat-
ing  in  the  engagements  around  Atlanta  and  in  the
l)attles  of  Columbia,  Franklin,  and  Nashville.  He
was  brevettcd  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  "for
gallant  and  meritorious  service  during  the  civil
war"  on  22  July,  1865,  and  major  and  lieutenant-
colonel  in  the  regular  army  on  2  March,  1867.  for
Liberty  Gap  and  Chickamauga.  He  became  cap-
tain in  the  11th  infantry  in  1866,  and  in  1870  was
transferred  to  the  16th  infantrv.

ROSEBKIJGH,  Abner  MulhoUand  (rose-
brew),  Canadian  physician,  b.  near  Gait,  Ont.,  8  Nov.,
1835.  He  was  e<lucated  at  Victoria  college,  Toron-
to, and  studied  medicine  in  New  York  and  Ix)n-
don.  He  practised  successfully  in  Toronto,  and  in
186J3  revived  the  Free  dispensary  of  that  city,  which
had  been  closed  for  want  of  funds,  estal>lishing  it
upon  a  firm  basis,  and  in  1867  he  organized  the
Toronto  ear  and  eye  infirmary.  He  has  devoted
his  attention  to  medical  electricity  and  ophthal-
mology, and  delivered  lectures  on  the  latter  sub-
ject at  Victoria  college  in  1870-'l.  In  1864  he  in-
vented a  new  demonstrating  ophthalmoscope,  and
in  that  year  he  photographed  the  living  fundus
oculi.  In  1865  he  photographed  the  inverted  reti-
nal image  of  an  object  j)laced  in  front  of  the  eye.
In  1878  he,  in  association  with  a  friend,  Mr.  G.
Black,  anticijMited  Van  Ryssellx?rghe  in  rendering
practical  the  simultaneous  transmission  of  tele-
phonic and  telegraphic  messages  on  the  same  wire.
He  has  published  "An  Introduction  to  the  Study
of  the  Optical  Defects  of  the  Eye"  (1866);  "Chlo-
roform and  a  New  Way  of  Administering  It "
(New  York,  1869);  "A  Hand-Book  of  Medical
Electricity  "  (1885) ;  and  a  pamphlet  on  "  Recent
Advances  in  Electro-Therapeutics"  (1887).

ROSECRANS,  WilUani  Starke,  soldier,  b.  in
Kingston.  Ohio,  6  Sept.,  1819.  He  was  graduate<i
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1842,  standing
fifth  in  his  class,  and  entered  the  corns  of  engineers
as  brevet  2d  lieutenant.  He  serveu  for  a  year  as
assistant  engineer  in  the  construction  of  fortifica-
tion at  Hampton  Roads,  Va.  and  then  returned  to
the  military  academy,  where  he  remained  until  1847
as  assistant  professor,  first  of  natural  and  exjieri-
mental  philosophy,  and  then  of  engineering.  Sub-
sequently he  served  as  sujwrintending  engineer  in
the  ri'pairs  of  Fort  Adams,  R.  I.,  on  surveys  of
Taunton  river  and  New  Bedfonl  harbf)r,  improve-
ments of  Providence  and  NewjKirt  harlxirs,  and  at
the  Washington  navy-yard  until  1  April,  1854,
when  he  resigned,  after  attaining  the  rank  of  1st
lieutenant.  He  then  established  him.self  in  Cin-
cinnati as  an  architect  and  civil  engineer.  In
1855  he  took  charge  of  the  Cannel  coal  company.
Coal  river,  W.  Va.,  becoming  also  in  1856  presi-


824


ROSECRANS


ROSECRANS


r?:  ^^^c^^^O'^y-tt.cc^f


dent  of  the  Coal  river  navigation  company,  and  in
1857  he  organizeil  the  Preston  coal-oil  company,
manufacturing  kerosene.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  volunteered  as  aide  to  Gen.  George  B.
McClellan,  who  was  then  commanding  the  De-
partment of  the  Ohio,  and  assisted  in  organizing
and  equipping  home-guards. He  was  appointed

chief  engineer  of
Ohio,  with  the  rank
of  colonel,  on  9  June,
1861.  and  on  10  June
was  made  colonel  of
the  23d  Ohio  volun-
teers. Soon  after
organizing  Camp
Chase,  at  Columbus,
Ohio,  he  received  a
commission  as  brig-
adier-general in  the
regular  army,  to  date
from  16  May,  1861 ;
he  took  the  field  with
command  of  a  pro-
visional brigade  un-
der Gen.  AlcClellan
in  western  Virginia.
His  first  important
action  was  that  of  Rich  Mountain,  which  he  won
on  11  July,  1861.  After  Gen,  MeClellan's  call  to
higher  command,  Rosecrans  succeeded  him,  on  25
July,  in  the  Department  of  the  Ohio,  which  con-
sisted of  western  Virginia,  Ohio,  Michigan,  and
Indiana.  He  had  command  of  the  National  forces,
and  defeated  Gen.  John  B.  Floyd  at  Carnifex  Fer-
ry, 10  Sept.,  1861,  and  thwarted  all  Lee's  attempts
to  gain  a  footing  in  western  Virginia.  These  ser-
vices were  recognized  by  unanimous  votes  of  thanks
of  the  legislatures  of  Ohio  and  West  Virginia,  and
in  May  he  was  ordered  to  report  to  Gen.  Henry
W.  Halleck,  before  Corinth,  and  given  command
of  Gen.  Eleazar  A.  Paine's  and  Gen.  David  Stan-
ley's divisions  in  the  Army  of  the  Mississippi,  with
which  he  participated  in  the  siege  of  Corinth.  He
succeeded  Gen.  John  Pope  in  the  command  of  the
Armv  of  the  Mississippi,  and  with  four  brigades
fought  the  battle  of  luka  on  19  Sept.,  where  he
defeated  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  after  which  he  re-
turned to  Corinth,  where,  anticipating  an  attack,
he  fortified  the  town,  and  on  3  and  4  Oct.  defeated
the  Confederate  army  under  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn
and  Gen.  Sterling  Price,  which  he  pursued  for
forty  miles  when  he  was  recalled.  On  25  Oct.  he
was  sent  to  Cincinnati,  where  he  found  orders
awaiting  him  to  supersede  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell,
and  was  made  commander  of  the  Department  of
the  Cumberland,  which  was  to  consist  of  whatever
territory  south  of  the  Cumberland  he  should  wrest
from  the  enemv.  This  command  he  held  from  27
Oct.,  1862.  till  19  Oct.,  1863,  and  during  that  time
conducted  a  campaign  remarkable  for  brilliant
movements  and  heavy  fighting.  After  reorgan-
izing his  army  and  providing  twenty  days'  rations
at  Nashville,  he  advanced  on  the  Confederate  forces
under  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  on  Stone  river,  30  Dec,
1862.  On  the  following  morning  the  Confederates
attacked  the  right  wing  of  the  National  army  and
drove  it  back,  while  the  left  wing  engaged  the  Con-
federate right.  Meanwhile  Rosecrans  was  obliged  to
re-enforce  nis  right,  and  personally  directed  the  re-
formation of  the  wing,  thereby  saving  it  from  rout,
although  not  without  verv  hard  fighting,  in  which
both  sides  lost  heavily.  iTwo  days  later  the  battle
was  renewed  by  a  furious  assault  on  the  National
lines,  but  after  a  sharp  contest  the  enemy  was
driven  back  with  heavy  loss. Unwilling  to  engage


in  a  general  action,  the  Confederate  army  retreated
to  the  line  of  Duck  river,  and  the  Army  of  the
Cumberland  occui)ied  Murfreesboro'.  This  battle
was  one  of  the  bloodiest  in  the  war,  and  resulted
in  a  loss  of  9,511  by  the  National  forces  and  9,236
by  the  Confederates.  As  soon  as  Vicksburg  was
beyond  the  reach  of  possible  succor  from  Bragg,
by  a  brilliant  flank  movement  Rosecrans  dislodg^
him  from  his  intrenched  camps  at  ShelbyviUe
and  TuUahoma,  and  in  fifteen  clays,  24  June  to  7
July,  1863,  drove  him  out  of  middle  Tennessee.
As  soon  as  the  railway  was  repaired,  he  occupied
Bridge[)ort  and  Stevenson.  From  7  July  till  14
Aug.  railway  bridges  and  trestles  were  rebuilt,
the  road  ancl  rolling-stf)ck  put  in  order,  supplies
pushed  forward,  and  demonstrations  made  to  con-
ceal the  point  of  crossing  Tennessee  river.  From
14  Aug.  till  1  Sept.  he  crossed  the  Cumberland
mountains  and  the  Tennessee  river,  and,  threatening
Bragg's  communications,  compelled  him  to  with-
draw from  impregnable  Chattanooga,  9  Sept.,  and
retire  behind  the  Chickamauga  until  Gen.  Joseph
E.  Longstreet's  arrival  with  his  corps.  Rosecrans
concentrated  his  forces  with  the  utmost  despatch
to  meet  the  inevitable  combat.  The  battle  was
opened  on  the  19th  by  an  attempt  to  gain  posses-
sion of  the  road  to  Chattanooga,  continued  through
the  day,  and  resulted  in  Rosecrans  defeating  tne
attempt  and  planting  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas's
corps,  re-enforced  by  Gen.  Richai^  W.  Johnson's
ana  Gen.  John  M.  Palmer's  divisions,  firmly  upon
that  road ;  but  during  the  night  Longstree't  came
up,  and  was  immediately  given  command  of  the
Confederate  left.  On  the  following  morning  the
contest  was  renewed  by  a  determined  attack  on
the  National  left  and  centre.  At  this  moment,
by  the  misinterpretation  of  an  order.  Gen.  Thomas
J.  Wood's  division  was  withdrawn,  leaving  a  gap
in  the  centre,  into  which  Gen.  Longstreet  preyed
his  troops,  forced  Jeflferson  C.  Davis's  two  bri-
gades out  of  the  line,  and  cut  oflf  Philip  H.  Sheri-
dan's three  brigades  of  the  right,  all  of  which,
after  a  gallant  but  unsuccessful  effort  to  stem  this
charge,  were  ordered  to  re-form  on  the  Dry  Val-
ley road  at  the  first  good  standing-ground  in  rear
of  the  position  they  had  lost.  The  two  divisions
of  Horatio  P.  Van  Cleve  and  Davis,  going  to  suc-
cor the  right  centre,  were  partly  shattered  by  this
break,  and  four  or  five  regiments  were  scattered
through  the  woods,  but  most  of  the  stragglers
stopped  with  Sheridan's  and  Davis's  commands.
The  remainder,  nearly  seven  divisions,  were  un-
broken, and  continued  the  fight.  The  gallant  Gen.
George  H.  Thomas,  whose  orders  the  night  before,
reiterated  a  few  moments  before  this  disaster,  were
to  hold  his  position  at  all  hazards,  continued  the
fight  with  seven  divisions,  while  Gen.  Rosecrans
undertook  to  make  such  dispositions  as  would
most  effectually  avert  disaster  in  case  the  enemy
should  turn  the  position  by  advancing  on  the  Dry
Valley  road,  ana  capture  the  remaining  commis-
sary stores,  then  in  a  valley  two  or  three  miles  to
the  west.  Fortunately,  this  advance  was  not  made,
the  commissary-train  was  pushed  into  Chattanoo-
ga, the  cavalry,  ordered  down,  closed  the  ways
behind  the  National  right,  and  Gen.  Thomas,  after
the  most  desperate  fighting;  drew  back  at  ni^t  to
Rossville  in  pursuance  of  orders  from  Gen.  Kose-
crans.  On  the  22d  the  army  was  concentrated  at
Chattanooga.  The  battle  was  a  victory  to  the
Confederates  only  in  name ;  for  Chattanooga,  the
objective  point  of  the  campaign,  remained  in  the
possession  of  the  National  forces.  The  total  Na-
ti(mal  loss,  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  was
16.179 ;  the  Confederate  loss,  17,804. Gen.  Rose-


ROSECRANS


rosp:lius


835


orariH  wan  relieved  of  his  fommand  on  28  Oct,  and
he  vrnn  anslf^Hi]  to  the  lK<|Hirtinent  of  the  Miwouri
in  JHiiiiary,  1N<(4,  with  hemlquartcrN  in  St.  Louis,
wh«Tf  h»'  cotHlufte*!  the  iiiilitary  orx-rations  that
tenuiniitiHl  in  tlio  dofeat  and  fxpiibitm  from  the
state  of  the  invading  Confederate  fon?e»  under
Uen.  IViee.  lie  was  placed  on  waiting  orderx  at
Cineinnati  on  10  Dec.,  1864,  inuhtere<i  out  of  the
volunteer  service  on  15  Jan.,  IWW,  and  resigne<l
from  the  army  on  2H  March.  18<J7.  after  n-ceiving
the  brevet  of  major-general  in  the  n-gular  army
for  his  services  at  the  i«ttle  of  Stone  Kivi-r.  Later
in  1807  ho  was  offered  the  DemtK-rntic  nomination
for  governor  of  California,  but  declined  it.  lie
was  «piK)inted  minister  to  Mexico  on  27  July,  18tW,
and  held  that  office  until  2«  June,  1H(M»,  when  he
returned  to  the  Uniteti  States,  and  declined  the
Democratic  nomination  for  governor  of  Ohio.  Sub-
sequently he  resumed  the  practice  of  engineering,
and  m  18?i-'3  was  engaged  in  an  effort  to  initiate
the  construction  of  a  vast  system  of  narrow-gauge
railways  in  Mexico,  at  the  instance  of  President
Juarez.  He  l)ecatne  president  in  1871  of  the  San
Jose  mining  companv,  and  in  1878  of  the  Safety
powder  com|>any  in  aan  Francisco.  He  was  also
mtrusted  with  a  charter  for  an  intenx-eanic  rail-
way from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  to  the  Pacific,  made
by  the  Mexican  republic  under  considerations  urged
by  him  wlien  envoy  to  Mexico,  and  he  was  requested
to  use  his  influence  to  induce  American  railway
building  skill  and  capital  to  undertake  the  worlt.
He  memorialized  congress  to  cultivate  friendly  and
intimate  commercial  relations  with  Mexico,  and  to
encourage  and  assist  the  material  progress  of  that
country :  and  at  the  instance  of  American  and  Eng-
lish railway  builders,  and  of  President  Juarez,  he
went  to  Mexico.  He  hat!  for  fifteen  months  so  ably
discusso<l  in  the  new8|>apers  the  benefits  of  railway
construction  to  Mexico  that  the  legislatures  of
seventeen  of  the  Mexican  states  passed  unanimous
resolutions  urging  their  national  congress  to  enact
the  legislation  advocatwl,  and  the  governors  of  six
other  states  sent  official  recommendations  to  the
same  effect.  In  1876  Gen.  Rosecrans  declined  the
Democratic  nomination  for  congress  from  Nevada.
He  was  electetl  as  a  Democrat  to  congress  from
€alifoniia,  served  from  5  Dec.,  1881,  till  4  March,
1885,  and  was  api)ointed  register  of  the  U.  S.
treasury  in  June.  1885,  which  office  he  still  (1888)
holds.  For  a  full  account  of  the  Tennessee  cam-
paigns, see  Gen.  Henrv  M.  Cist's  "Army  of  the
Cumlwrland  "  (New  York,  1882) ;  *'  Rosecrans's
Campaign  with  the  14th  Armv  Corps,  or  the  Army
of  the  Cumberland."  by  W.  D,  Bickham  (Cincin-
nati, 18613) :  and  Van  Home's  "  History  of  the
Armv  of  the  Cumlwrland"  (2  vols..  Cincinnati,
1875).— His  brother.  SjiveHter  Horton,  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Homer.  Licking  co..  Ohio,  5  Feb.,
1827 ;  d.  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  21  Oct.,  1878,  was
graduated  with  distinguished  hcuior  at  Kenvon
college,  Ohio,  in  1845.  A  letter  from  his  brother.
Gen.  Rosecrans,  announcing  the  con%-ersion  of  the
latter  to  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  tume«l  his
thoughts  in  the  same  direction.  He  became  a
Roman  Catholic  in  1845.  and  entered  St.  John's
ci>llcge.  Fordham,  N.  Y..  where  he  was  gniduated
in  1846.  He  then  affiliated  himself  with  the  dio-
cese of  Cincinnati,  and  was  sent  by  Bishop  Purcell
to  studv  theology  in  the  College  of  the  propa-
ganda, Rome,  where  he  received  his  doctor's  de-
gree in  1851.  He  was  ordained  in  1852.  and  re-
turned imnu'diately  to  the  United  States.  For
seveml  months  after  his  arrival  he  acteil  as  pastor
of  the  Church  of  St.  Thomas  in  Cincinnati,  and
he  was  then  ap]>oint«d  one  of  the  {tastors  at  the


cathedral,  which  post  ho  held  till  1859.  A  col-
lege waM  opene«l  in  that  year  for  the  education  of
Roman  Catholic  youths,  of  which  Dr.  Rosecrans
was  ma<le  president.  He  contitmed  U)  resi«le  in
this  institution  until  made  l>ishop  of  ColumbuK.
He  also  eilitcd  the  "Catholic  Telegraph,"  and  s|ient
much  tinje  in  instructing  the  theological  students
of  his  iliocese.  On  25  March,  18<52,  he  was  conse-
crated as  auxilian*  of  the  archdiocc'se  of  Cincin-
nati, under  the  tTtle  of  bishop  of  Pom|K-io{)olis.
In  1868  the  archdicK-ese  was  divide<l  an<l  a  new
see  was  erwti'il  at  Columbus.  Dr.  Rosecrans  was
nomiiyited  first  bishop,  and  took  |)osscssi«m  of  his
s«'e  on  3  Man-h  of  the  sjime  y«'ar.  .Shortly  after-
ward the  Acailemv  of  .St.  Mary's  of  the  .Springs
was  founded  near  Columbus,  and  the  bishop  l)egan
St.  Mary's  cathedral,  one  of  the  first  buildings  in
the  city.  He  also  erected  St.  Aloysius's  seminary,
and  through  his  initiative  numerous  other  schools
were  founded.  He  was  taken  suddenly  ill  on  Sun-
day, 20  Oct.,  1878,  as  he  was  a))out  to  enter  his
cathedral  for  vesiier  s«'rvice,  and  die<l  on  the  fol-
lowing day.  Bisnon  Rosecrans's  life  was  one  of
great  siujplicity  anu  self-<lenial.  He  live<l  in  the
orphan  asylum,  taught  daily  in  the  Academy  of
the  Sacred  Heart,  and  went  several  times  weekly
to  St.  Mary's  of  the  Springs  for  the  same  purpose.
All  that  he  had  he  gave  to  the  i>oor,  and  he  was
often  obliged  to  walk  long  distances,  even  when
in  delicate  health,  because  he  ha«l  not  the  money
to  pay  his  car-fare.  All  the  money  that  was  in  his
possession  at  his  death  was  two  silver  half-dollars.
ROSELIUS,  Christian,  lawyer,  b.  near  Bre-
men, Germany,  10  Aug.,  1803;  d'.  in  New  Orleans,
5  Sept.,  1873.  His  early  education  was  limited  to
the  elementary  branches,  and  at  sixteen  he  left  his
native  land  on  board  the  Ijark  "Jupiter"  for  New
Orleans,  having  secured  his  pa.'ssage  by  the  sale  of
his  services  for  a  stateil  period  after  his  arri^'al,
which  was  in  July,  1820.  He  was  employed  for
several  years  in  a  printing-oflSce,  and  in  1825,  with  ft
partner,  established
and  edited  the  first
literary  journal  pub-
lished in  Louisiana.
It  was  called  "The
Halcyon,"  and,  fail-
ing to  prove  remu-
nerative, was  aban-
doned for  the  study
of  the  law,  Mr.
Roselius  supyjorting
himself  at  this  pe-
riod by  teaching.
His  legal  studies
were  pursued  in
comjiany  with  his
friend,  '  Alexander
Dimitry.  in  the  of-
fice of  Augnste  De-
vesac,  beginning  in

Deceml)er,  1826,  and  terminating  in  March,  1828,
at  which  time  he  was  admitte<l  to  practice  by  the
supreme  court,  consisting  of  Judges  Martin, ^lat-
thews,  and  Porter.  His  love  of  the  civil  law
became  a  passion,  and  soon  place<l  him  in  the
front  rank  and  eventually  at  the  head  of  the
Louisiana  bar.  In  1841  he  was  appointed  attor-
ney-general of  the  state  and  servwi  for  a  term
of  two  years.  During  the  same  decade  he  was
honored  with  an  invitati«m  to  become  the  law
partner  in  Washington  of  Daniel  Webster,  which
lie,  however,  declined,  preferring  to  remain  in  the
south.  For  many  years  he  was  dean  of  the  faculty
of  the  University  of  Louisiana,  and  for  the  last


j(y^j'S^-aJtZi^-V'^


326


ROSENGARTEN


ROSS


twenty-three  years  of  his  life  professor  of  civil
law.  In  18(J3'he  was  offered  the  highest  place  in
the  reconstructed  supreme  court  of  the  state;  but
he  declined  to  accept  the  apix)intraent  unless  the
court  should  be  secured  from  military  interference.
Mr.  Rosolius  possessed  one  of  the  finest  private
libraries  in  the  south.  It  was  particularly  rich  in
the  Latin  classics,  of  which  ne  was  a  constant
remler,  and  in  Shakespeariana,  of  which  he  was  a
devoted  student.  lie  conversed  eciually  well  in
English,  French,  and  German.  His  house  and
spacious  grounds  at  Carrol Iton,  a  suburb  of  the
great  city,  was  noted  for  its  generous  hospitality,
few  persons  of  distinction  visiting  New  Orleans
during  the  last  two  decades  of  his  life  without  be-
ing entertained  by  Mr.  Roselius,  who  was  a  cheery
and  charming  host.  His  hand  and  purse  were
always  open  to  the  unfortunate,  and  one  of  several
visits  to  nis  native  land  was  for  the  sole  purpose  of
aiding  some  of  his  less  prosperous  kinsmen.

ROSENOARTEN,  Joseph  (Jeorge,  lawyer,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  14  July,  1835.  He  was  gratlu-
ated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1852,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1856,
studied  in  Heidelberg  in  1857,  and  practised  after
his  return  to  his  native  city.  During  the  civil  war
he  served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  John  F.  Reynolds  in
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  has  delivered  nu-
merous addresses  before  various  literary  and  chari-
table a.ssociations,  including  one  before  the  Penn-
sylvania historical  society  on  the  "  Life  and  Public
&rviees  of  Gen.  John  F.  Reynolds"  (Philadelphia,
1880),  and  contributed  frequently  to  periodicals.
He  is  the  author  of  "  The  German  Soldier  in  the
Wars  of  the  United  States  "  (Philadelphia,  1881).

ROSENTHAL,  Lewis,  author,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  10  Sept.,  1856.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1877,  went  to  Paris,  and  was  for  four
years  a  journalist  and  tutor.  He  has  been  a  fre-
quent writer  for  magazines  and  the  daily  press,  and
has  published  "  America  and  France :  the  Influ-
ence of  the  United  States  in  France  in  the  Eight-
eenth Century  "  (New  York,  1882).

ROSENTll  AL,  Max,  artist,  b.  in  Turck,  Russian
Poland,  23  Nov.,  18:^3.  In  1847  he  went  to  Paris,
where  he  studied  lithography,  drawing,  and  paint-
ing with  M.  Thurwanger,  with  whom  he  came  to
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1849,  where  he  completed  his
studies.  He  made  the  chromo-lithograpnic  plates
for  what  is  believed  to  be  the  first  fully  illustrated
book  by  this  process  in  the  United  States,  "  Wild
Scenes  and  Wild  Hunters."  In  1854  he  drew  and
lithographed  an  interior  view  of  the  old  Masonic
temple  in  Philadelphia,  the  plate  being  22  by  25
inches,  the  largest  chromo-lithograph  that  had  been
made  in  the  country  up  to  that  time.  He  designed
and  executed  the  illustrations  for  various  works,
and  during  the  civil  war  followed  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  and  drew  every  camp,  up  to  the  battle  of
Gettysburg.  These  drawings  he  reproduced  at  the
time.  Up  to  1884  he  did  miscellaneous  works,
including  about  200  lithographs  of  distinguished
Americans.  After  1884  he  turned  his  attention  to
etching,  and  he  has  since  executed  150  portraits  of
eminent  Americans  and  British  officers,  together
with  numerous  large  plates,  among  which  are
"Storm  Approaches,  alter  the  painting  by  Henry
Mosler,  illustrations  for  several  of  Longfellow's
poems,  and  original  etchings  entitled  "  Doris,  the
Shepherd's  Maiden,"  and  "  Marguerite."  He  is  a
member  of  the  Pennsylvania  academy  of  fine  arts,
and  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Sketch  club. — His
son,  Albert,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  30  Jan.,  1863,
studied  art  under  his  father  and  at  the  Pennsylva-
nia academy. He  turned  bis  attention  to  etching,


and  hasl)ecome  widely  known  for  his  work,  which,
like  that  of  his  father,  includes  numerous  iMjr-
traits  of  American  historical  characters.  He  is  a
member  of  the  Academy  of  fine  arts,  the  Sketch
club,  and  the  Art  students'  union.

ROSENTHAL,  Toby  Edward,  artist,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  15  March,  1848.  He  removed
with  his  family  to  San  Francisco  in  1855,  and  began
the  study  of  art  there  under  Fortunato  Arriola  in
1864.  'fhe  following  year  he  went  to  Munich  and
became  a  pupil  at  the  Royal  academy,  then  studied
under  Carl  Raupp,  and  later  (1868-'74)  again  at
the  academy,  under  Carl  von  Piioty.  lie  gained
medals  in  Munich  in  1870  and  1883,  and  in  Phila-
delphia in  1876.  Excepting  some  visits  to  bis
home,  his  professional  life  has  been  spent  in  Eu-
rope. His  more  important  works  are  "  Love's  Last
Onering"  and  "  Spring's  Joy  and  Sorrow  "  (1868) ;
"  Morning  Prayers  in  Baches  P^amily,"  which  was
bought  by  the  Saxon  government,  and  is  now  in
the  museum  of  Leipsic  (1870);  "Elaine"  (1874);
"  Young  Monk  in  Refectory  "  (1875) ;  "  Forbidden
Longings,"  "  Who  laughs  Last  laughs  Best,"  and
"Girls'  Boarding-School  Alarmed  '  (1877);  "A
Mother's  Prayer^' (1881);  "Empty  Place  "  (1882) ;
"Trial  of  Constance  de  Beverley"  (1883); "  De-

Earture  from  the  Family "  (1885);  and  "Dancing
lesson  during  the  Empire."  "  Out  of  the  Frying-
Pan  into  the  Fire,"  executed  in  1871,  is  one  of  the
most  popular  of  his  works,  and  has  been  frequent-
ly engraved.  He  has  also  painted  some  sixty  por-
traits, in  Europe,  and,  during  his  visits  in  1871  and
1879-'80,  in  San  Francisco.  Very  few  of  his  works
have  been  exhibited  in  this  country.

ROSIER,  James,  explorer,  b.  in  Norfolk,  Eng-
land, about  1575;  d.  about  1635.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Cambridge,  and  was  engaged  by  Lord
Arundel,  of  Waruour,  to  accompany  Capt.  George
Waymouth  on  his  voyage,  during  which  Rosier
explored  the  coast  of  Maine  and  Penobscot  river.
On  his  return  he  published  "  A  True  Relation  of
the  most  proj)erous  voyage  made  this  present  yeare
by  Captaine  George  Waymouth  in  the  Discovery
of  the  Land  of  Virginia:  where  he  discovered  60
miles  of  a  most  excellent  River ;  together  with  a
most  fertile  land,"  written  by  James  Rosier,  "a
Gentleman  employed  on  the  voyage "  (London,
1605),  which  is  reprinted  in  volume  iv.  of  "  Purchas
his  Pilgrimmes"  (1625).

ROSS,  Alexander,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Scot-
land in  1742;  d.  in  London,  29  Nov.,  1827.  He
entered  the  army  as  an  ensign  in  the  50th  foot  in
February,  1760,  served  in  Germany,  came  to  this
country  as  a  captain  in  May,  1775,  and  was  present
al  the  principal  battles  of  the  war  of  the  Revolu-
tion. He  became  brevet  major  in  1781,  was  aide-
de-camp  to  Lord  Cornwallis,  and  represented  him
as  commissioner  to  arrange  the  details  of  the  sur-
render of  Yorktown.  He  afterward  served  as
deputy  adjutant-general  in  Scotland,  went  thence
to  India,  and  served  in  a  similar  caj>acity  while
Cornwallis  commanded  in  that  country.  He  at-
tained the  rank  of  general,  1  Jan.,  1812. — His  son,
Charles,  published  "Correspondence  of  Charles,
First  Marcjuis  Cornwallis;  Edited  with  Notes"
(London.  3  vols.,  1859).  This  work  throws  much
light  on  the  services  of  the  marquis  in  this  country.

ROSS,  Alexander,  author,  b.  in  Nairnshire,
Scotland,  9  May,  1783;  d.  in  Colony  Gardens  (now
in  Winnipeg,  Alanitoba),  Red  river  settlement,  Brit-
ish North  America,  23  Oct.,  1856.  He  came  to
Canada  in  1805,  taught  in  Glengarry,  U.  C,  and  in
1810  joined  John  Jacob  Astor's  expedition  to
Oregon.  Until  1824  he  was  a  fur-trader  and  in  the
service  of  the  Hudson  bay  company. About  1825


ROSS


KOSS


327


he  roinovwl  to  the  Ro<l  river  sott lenient  nntl  wim  «
inemU*r  of  the  council  of  Assinelioia,  nnd  wiu«
sheriff  of  the  U<m|  river  settlement  for  .severKi
years,  lie  whs  for  llfteen  ywirs  a  resident  in  ihe
t«rrit»)rie,s  of  the  Hudson  Iwy  comfMny.  and  hns
jfiven  the  result  of  his  olisorvHt ions  in  the  works
"Adventures  of  the  First  Settlors  on  the  ()rejr«>n
or  Columbia  Kiver;  heintru  Narrative  of  the  Kxjk--
dition  flttin);  out  l*y  John  Jacob  Astor  to  establish
the  Piu'iflc  Kur  ('om|MUiy.  with  an  Account  of  some
Indian  Tril»««s  on  the  ("ojist  of  the  Pacific"  (Lon-
don, 1849):  "The  Fur-IIunters  of  the  Far  West,  a
Narrative  «»f  Adventures  in  the  On»jron  and  I^K•ky
Mountains"  (2  vols,,  IKVi);  and  "The  K^hI  Kiver
S«'ttlement.  its  Rise,  Progress,  and  Pn>sent  State"
(185(1). — His  son,  JameM,  b.  in  Ue«l  river  settle-
ment, ManitolNi,  9  May,  IHJW;  d.  in  Winnipeg.
Manitolxa.  20  Se^)t.,  1871,  was  educated  at  St.  John's
college,  Ited  river,  and  at  Toronto  university,
where  ho  was  gnMluate<l  with  honors  in  1857.  In
1858  he  taucht  as  assistant  classical  master  in
Up{>er  C'ana«rH  college.  Toronto.  In  1859,  ri'turn-
ing  home,  he  was  H|>^M)inted  j)ostmaster,  sheriff,
and  governor  of  the  jail  at  lied  river,  was  con-
ne<'teil  as  part  proprietor  and  editor  with  the
"Nor'- Wester"  in  1860-'4,  subsequently  as  asso-
ciate editor  of  the  Hamilton  "Spectator,"  and  was
alsf)  a  writer  on  the  Toronto  "Globe."  IIo  was
afterward  admitted  to  the  liar  of  Manitoba,  in
1870  was  ap|)ointe<I  chief  justice  of  the  ^)rovisional
government  under  Louis  Kiel,  and  is  said  to  have
drawn  up  the  jHHition  of  right.  He  was  opposed
to  Kiel's  violent  and  arbitrary  jicts.

KOSS,  Alexander  Coffnian,  merchant,  b.  in
Zanesville,  Ohio,  31  May,  1812;  d.  there,  25  Feb.,
1883.  He  liecame  a  merchant  in  his  native  nlace,
sang  in  a  church  choir,  and  in  the  presidential  can-
vass of  1840  was  a  meml)er  of  a  Whig  glee-club,
A  friend  having  suggeste<l  that  the  tune  "  Little
Pigs"  would  Ixj  a  suitable  chorus  for  a  political
song,  Ross  set  himself  to  com|)ose  the  song,  and
one  Sunday  during  sermon-time  produced  "  Tippe-
canoe and  Tyler  too."  This  was  sung  by  his  glee-
club  at  a  mass-meeting  in  Zanesville,  and  at  once
became  {wpular.  When  he  went  to  New  York  in
Septeiul)er,  to  buy  goo<ls,  he  sang  it  at  a  great
meeting  in  Lafayette  hall,  the  audience  took  up
the  chorus,  after  the  meeting  it  was  repeated  by
crowds  in  the  streets  and  about  the  hotels,  and
thenceforth  it  was  the  mtjst  successful  song  of  a
canvass  in  which  Gen.  Harrison  was  said  to  have
been  sung  into  the  White  House.  From  a  lx)v
Mr.  Ross  was  interested  in  scientific  inventions,  ani
he  is  said  to  have  pro<luced  the  first  daguerreotype
ever  matle  in  this  country.  He  was  one  of  tne
most  enterprising  business  men  in  Zanesville,  and
accumulated  a  large  proiwrty.  See  "Our  F'amiliar
Songs,  and  Those  who  Made  Them,"  by  Helen  K.
Johns<m  (New  York,  1881).

ROSS,  Alexander  Milton,  Canadian  natural-
ist, b.  in  lielleville.  Out..  13  Dec,  18:^2.  He  at-
tended school  at  Belleville  till  his  eleventh  year,
when  the  death  of  his  father  compelled  his  re-
moval. He  evinced  a  great  love  for  natural  his-
torv  at  an  early  age.  In  his  l)oyhood  he  came
to  S'ew  York  city,  and  after  struggling  with  many
diversities  Infame  a  com[K)sitor  on  the  "  Evening
Post."  William  Cullen  Bryant,  its  editor,  was
much  interested  in  him,  an(l  remained  his  friend
ever  afterward.  During  this  periml  he  became
ac(iuaiute<l  with  GarilMldi,  who  was  then  a  resi-
dent of  New  York;  and  in  1874  Ross  was  in-
strumental in  securing  a  pension  for  Garibahli
from  the  Italian  government.  In  1851  he  l)egan
the  utudy  of  medicine  under  the  direction  of  Dr.


Valentine  Motf,  in  New  York,  and  after  four  year*
of  unremitting  toil,  working  as  a  oomixwitor'dur-
ing  the  day  and  studying  medicine  at  night,  he
receivi-*!  his  clegrec  of  M.  D.  in  1855,  .S<^K)n  after
his  gnuliiation  he  was  appointed  a  surgeon  in  the
fonres  in  Nicaragua,  under  William  Walker.  In
18.5<i  he  Ijocame  a<'tively  engage«I  in  the  anti-slavery
struggle  in  the  Cnitcil  .States,  liet^oniing  a  pen>oniil
friend  of  John  Bnjwn.  During  the  civil  war
he  servwl  for  a  short  time  as  a  surgeon  in  the  Na-
tional armv,  an<l  afterwanl  he  was  employe<l  by
Pri'sident  Lincoln  as  confidential  corresjumdent
in  Canada,  where  he  renden»«I  imiKtrtant  services
to  the  I'.  S.  g<jvernment,  receiving  the  thanks  of
the  presi«lent  and  Sec.  S«'ward.  At  the  close  of
the  war  Dr.  I^)ss  offere<l  his  services  to  President
Juan'Z  of  Mexico,  and  received  the  ap|N)intment  of
surge<m  in  the  Mexican  army.  After  the  over-
thniw  of  the  empire  he  returne<l  to  Canada  and
began  to  collect  and  classify  the  fauna  and  flora  of
that  country,  a  work  that  hiwl  never  In-fore  \toen
attempted  by  a  native.  He  has  collected  and  clas-
sified nundreils  of  sfK-ciesof  birds,  eggs,  mammals,
reptiles,  and  fresh-water  fish,  3,400  s|)ecies  of  insects,
and  2,000  species  of  Canadian  flora.  After  his  re-
turn to  Canada  he  became  a  memlier  of  the  Col-
lege of  physicians  and  surgeons  of  Queliec  and
Ontario,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  So-
ciety for  the  diffusion  of  physiologi<«I  knowledge
in  1881.  Dr.  Ross  has  l)een  appointed  treasurer
and  commissioner  of  agriculture  for  the  province
of  Ontario,  and  he  hjis  removed  from  Montreal
to  Toronto.  He  was  knighted  by  the  emperor  of
Russia,  and  by  the  kings  of  Italy.  Greece,  and  Sax-
ony in  1870,  and  by  the  king  of'  I*ortugal  in  1877.
He  was  appointeti  consul  in  Canada  by  the  kings
of  Belgium  and  Denmark,  and  received  the  decora-
tion of  the  "  Academic  Francaise  "  from  the  govern-
ment of  France  in  1879.  He  is  a  memlier  of  many
scientific  societies,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Recollec-
tions of  an  Abolitionist  "(Montreal,  1867);  "Birds
of  Canada  "  (1872) ;  "  Butterfiies  and  Moths  of  Can-
ada "(1873);  "Flora  of  Canada"  (1873);  "Forest
Trees  of  Canada  "  (1874) ;  "  Ferns  and  Wild  Flow-
ers of  Canada  "  (1877) ;  "Mammals,  Reptiles,  and
Fresh-water  Fishes  of  Canada  "  (1878) ;  "  Vaccina-
tion a  Medical  Delusion  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Medical
Practice  of  the  Future"  (1887).

ROSS,  Darid,  congressman,  b.  in  Mantiand
aVx)Ut  1750.  He  was  a  delegate  from  that  state  to
the  Continental  congress  in  178ft-'7.  On  11  May,
1787,  he  voted  on  the  motion  to  amend  the  article
passetl  on  29  Aug.,  1780.  making  it  rea<l  "  that  the
proceedings  of  congress  do  not  authorize  the  secre-
tary of  the  Unitc<l  States  for  the  de)iartment  of
foreign  affairs  to  enter  into  any  stipulation  w^ith
the  minister  of  his  Catholick  majesty."  He  also
voted  on  27  Sept.,  1787,  to  offer  a  resolution  of
thanks  to  John  Adams  for  his  sen'ice  as  min-
ister to  England,  and  on  13  Oct.,  1787,  voted  for
Mr.  Pierce  Butler's  motion  that  it  was  the  de-
sire of  congress  to  entertain  the  friendship  exist-
ing between  the  United  States  and  his  "Catho-
lick majesty."

ROSS,  £dmund  Gibson,  senator,  b.  in  Ash-
land. Ohio,  7  Dec.,  1820.  He  was  apprenticed  at
an  early  ajje  to  a  printer,  n'ceive<l  a  limited  e<Iuca-
tion,  and  in  1847  removed  to  Wisconsin,  where  he
was  employed  in  the  office  of  the  Milwaukee  "Sen-
tinel "  lor  four  years.  He  went  to  Kansas  in  1856,
was  a  memV)er  of  the  Kansas  constitutional  con-
vention in  1859,  and  sen-nl  in  the  lei^iislature  until
18(51.  He  was  als4i  editor  of  the  Kansas  "State
Record"  and  the  Kaiwis  "Tribune,"  which  was
the  only  Free-stale  {«ij)er  in  the  territory  at  that


328


ROSS


ROSS


time,  the  others  havinp  been  destroyed.  In  1802
he  enlisted  in  the  National  army  as  a  private,  and
in  18(W  iR'came  major.  On  his  return  to  Kansas,
after  the  war,  he  was  aj)i)ointed  to  succeed  James
H.  Lane  in  the  V.  S.  senate,  and  was  elected  to  fill
out  the  term,  serving  from  25  July,  1866,  till  4
March,  1871.  He  voted  against  the  impeachment
of  President  Johnson,  thus  offending  the  Reimbli-
can  party,  with  which  he  had  always  actea,  and
was  charged  with  having  adopted  this  course  from
mercenary  and  corrupt  motives.  After  his  term
ended  he  ri'tumed  to  Kansas,  united  with  the
Democratic  party,  and  was  defeated  as  their  candi-
date for  governor  in  1880.  In  1882  he  removed  to
New  Mexico,  where  he  published  a  newsj)ar)er,  and
in  May,  1885,  was  appointed  by  President  Cleveland
governor  of  that  territory.

ROSS,  Frederick  Aiignstiis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Cobham,  Cumberland  co.,  Va.,  25  Dec.,'l796 :  d.  in
Fluntsville,  Ala.,  13  April,  1883.  He  was  etlucated
at  Dickinson  college,  Carlisle,  Pa.,  entered  the  Pres-
bvterian  ministry,  emancipated  his  slaves,  and  from
ltJ25  till  1851  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Kings-
ford,  Tenn.,  where  he  had  removed  in  1818.  In
1828  he  labored  as  an  evangelist  in  Kentucky  and
Ohio.  At  the  division  of  the  Presbyterian  general
assembly  in  1837-'8  he  adhered  to  the  new  school
branch,  and  in  1855  he  became  nastor  of  the  1st
Presbvterian  church  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  holding
this  charge  until  1875andcontinuing  pastor  emeri-
tus xintil  his  death.  With  James  Gallaher  and
David  Nelson  he  edited  a  monthly  publication  en-
titled "  The  Calvinistic  Magazine,"  founded  in
1826,  and  he  published  a  lx)ok  entitled  "Slavery  as
ordained  of  God  "  (Philadelphia,  1857).

ROSS,  George,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  In-
dependence, b.  in  Newcastle,  Del.,  in  1730;  d.  in
Lancaster,  Pa.,  in  July,  1779.  Ilis  father,  George
(1676-1754),  left  the  Presbyterian  ministry  for  that
of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land and  came  from
Scotland  to  Delaware
about  1703.  He  very
soon  rose  to  promi-
nence, becoming  one
of  the  pillars  of  the
Episcopal  church  in
the  American  colonies,
and  aeting  as  chaplain
to  several  of  the  pro-
prietary governors  of
Pennsylvania.  The
son  at  the  age  of
eighteen  began  the
study  of  the  law,  and
on  his  admission  to
the  bar,  in  1751,  set-
tled in  Lancaster,  Pa.
He  was  a  member  of
the  Pennsylvania  assembly  in  1768-'70,  and  ap-
pointed by  the  convention  that  as.sembled,  after
the  dissolution  of  the  proprietary  government,  to
prepare  a  declaration  of  rights.  Mr.  Ross  was
elected  to  the  1st  general  congress  at  Philadel-
phia in  1774,  and  continued  to  represent  his  state
until  June,  1777,  when,  through  failing  health,  he
resigned  his  seat.  On  this  occasion,  the  citizens
of  Lancaster  having  voted  him  a  piece  of  plate
worth  £150,  he  declined  the  gift  on  the  ground
that  "  it  was  the  duty  of  every  man,  especially  of
every  representative  of  the  people,  to  contribute
by  every  means  within  his  power  to  the  welfare
01  his  country  without  expecting  pecuniary  re-
wards." On  first  entering  congress  he  was  ap-
pointed by  the  legislature  to  report  to  that  body  a


/


^7?^  _


set  of  instructions  by  which  his  conduct  and  that
of  his  colleagues  were  to  be  guided.  He  was  among
the  foremost  leaders  in  the  provincial  legislature
in  espousing  measures  for  the  defence  of  the  com-
munity against  British  aggression,  and  in  1775
drew  up  a  reply  to  a  message  of  Gov.  Penn  that
deprecated  any  defensive  mejisures  on  the  i»art  of
the  colonies.  He  was  also  the  author  of  the  report
urging  vigorous  action  for  nutting  the  city  of
Philadelphia  in  a  state  of  defence.  On  14  April,
1770,  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  court  of  ad-
miralty for  Pennsylvania,  which  post  he  fille<l  un-
til his  death  three  months  later.  Judge  Ross  pos-
sessed a  l)enevolent  disposition,  which  often  led  nim
to  espouse  the  cause  of  the  Indians  and  to  save
that  people  from  the  consequences  of  the  frauds
that  were  practised  on  them  by  the  whites.  As  a
lawyer  he  was  early  classed  among  the  first  of
the  profession,  and  as  a  judge  he  was  learned  and
upright,  and  remarkable  for  the  ease  and  rapidity
with  which  he  despatched  business.  He  was  the
last  man  of  the  Pennsylvania  delegation  to  sign  the
Declaration  of  Independence. — His  half-brother,
John,  lawjrer,  b.  in  New  Castle,  Del.,  in  1714 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  8  May,  1776,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania,  27  Aug.,
1735,  and  so  rapidlv  rose  in  his  profession  that  m
1743  he  was  the  cHief  rival  of  Andrew  Hamilton
before  the  courts.  In  1744  he  engaged  in  the
manufacture  of  pig-iron  in  Berks  county  with  John
Lesher,  and  he  continued  his  interest  m  the  same
until  his  death.  In  1759,  with  others,  he  was  con-
sulted by  the  governor  and  council  in  relation  to  a
law  for  recording  warrants  and  surveys,  and  thus
render  the  title  to  real  estate  more  secure.  In  1760
he  took  part  in  the  organization  of  St.  Paul's  Epis-
copal church,  and  was  its  first  warden.  Alexander
Graydon  says:  "Mr.  John  Ros.s,  who  loved  ease
and  madeira  much  better  than  liberty  and  strife,
declared  for  neutrality,  saying  that,  'let  who  would
be  king,  he  well  knew  that  he  should  be  subject ' " ;
and  John  Adams  writes  of  him  in  his  diary,  25
Sept.,  1775,  as  "a  lawyer  of  great  eloquence  and
heretofore  of  extensive  practice,  a  great  Torv,  but
now  they  say  beginning  to  be  converted."  He  was
a  friend  and  correspondent  of  Benjamin  Franklin,
and  an  early  member  of  the  American  philosophi-
cal society.

ROSS,  George  William,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  near  Nairn.  Middlesex  co.,  Ont.,  18  Sept.,
1841.  His  family  came  from  Ross-shire,  Scotland,
in  1832.  He  was  educated  at  his  native  place  and
at  the  Toronto  normal  school,  and  taught  from
1857  till  1871,  when  he  was  appointed  inspector  of
public  schools  for  the  county  of  Lambton.  He
was  active  in  the  movement  for  the  creation  of
county  model  schools,  and  did  much  to  perfect
them  when  they  were  established,  preparing  the
syllabus  of  lectures,  and  serving  for  a  time  as  in-
spector of  model  schools.  He  was  a  meml)er  of
the  central  committee  of  examiners  from  1876  till
1880.  Mr.  Ross  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  par-
liament in  1872,  re-elected  by  acclamation  in  1874,
and  chosen  again  in  1878  and  1882,  but  he  was
unseated  in  October,  1883,  for  bribers*  by  agents
during  his  canvass.  He  was  appointed  minister  of
education  for  Ontario,  23  Nov.,  1883,  elected  to  the
legislative  assembly  of  Ontario.  15  Dec,  1883.  and
re-elected  in  1886.  Mr.  Ross  has  been  for  many
years  active  in  the  temperance  and  i)rohibitory
movements  in  Canada  He  was  an  honorary  com-
missioner at  the  Colonial  and  Indian  exhibition
in  London,  England,  in  1885.  He  has  edited  the
Strathroy  "  Age  "  and  the  Seaforth  "  Expositor,"
and  was  also  one  of  the  conductors  of  tne  "  On-


ROSS


ROSS


tario TpHchcr."  Mr.  lioss stiidicMl  law,  and  ohuinwl
tho  (l«'>rrt>e  of  LL.  H.  from  Albert  university  in
IHTJ*.  I'Ut  nt'Vi'r  |)rjwtis«'<l.

ROSS,  Heory  Howard,  lawyer,  b.  in  Basex,
N.  Y..  9  May.  itW);  tl.  thert'.  14  S.'|.t..  1K62.  He
was  );rH<limtiHi  at  Columbia  in  1H()M.  stu<lii'<l  law,
wm  atlmitUHl  to  tho  Iwr.  pra<'tiso(l  in  Ksm-x  for  fifty

Jean*.  an«l  was  clwtiHl  to  i-onffrww  a-n  a  Whi^f,  s<!rv-
njf  from  T)  IKk-.,  1H2.J.  till  «  March,  1H27.  In
1847-'M  he  was  a  county  jutljje,  and  in  1M4H  was  a
presidential  elector,  lie  was  adjutant  on  the  staff
of  Gen.  John  K.  Wtxil  at  the  l«iltle  of  Plaltsburg.

11  8t>pt.,  1H14.  and  was  afterwanl  ap|>oint«d  nuijor-
ffeneral  of  the  st«te  railitia.  The  L'niv«jrsity  of
Vermont  jjnve  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1813.

ROSS,  JameM,  senator,  b.  in  York  county.  Pa.,

12  July.  17(52;  d.  in  Alleffhany  City,  Pa.,  27  Nov.,
1847.  lie  entered  the  school  of  the  Ilev.  Dr.  John
McMillan  and  accepted  the  iK)st  of  tem-her  of  I^atin.

1  In  1782  Mr.  Ross  Ih?-

came  a  student  at
law,  was  admitte<l  to
the  Itfir  in  1784,  went
to  Washington,  Pa.,
where  he  i)ructised
until  in  1795  he  re-
moved to  Pittsburg.
In  1789  Mr.  lioss  was
elected  a  memljer  of
the  convention  to
frame  a  new  consti-
tution for  the  state.
The  ability  that  he
displayed  inthisbotly
gave  him  a  reputa-
tion which,  with  his
fame  as  an  orator
and  lawyer,  secured
his  election  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  in  April,
1794,  for  the  unex-
pired tenn,  ending  8
March.  1797,  of  Albert  Gallatin,  who  had  b^n
thrown  out  because  he  had  not  been  for  nine  years
a  citizen,  as  required  by  the  constitution.  In
1797  he  was  again  elected  to  succeed  himself.  To
Senator  Ross  undoubtedly  belongs  the  chief  cred-
it of  the  peaceful  ending  of  the  whiskey  insur-
rection. On  17  July,  1794,  Gen.  Neville,  the  chief
excise  officer,  was  attacked,  and  his  house  and
other  prof»erty  were  clestroved.  At  a  tumultuous
meeting  of  the  people  at  Washington,  Pa.,  a  rally
of  anntnl  men  was  called,  to  lie  neld  on  1  Aug.,
at  Braddock's  Field.  Mr.  Ross,  in  a  powerful
speech,  alone  opposed  the  will  of  an  excited  popu-
lace. He  was  told  that  he  had  that  day  destroyed
all  chances  of  future  political  preferment,  but.
nothing  daunted,  he  attended  the  liraddock's  Field
meeting  and  also  that  of  the  delegates  from  west-
ern Pennsylvania  and  Virginia,  at  Parkinson's
Ferry.  By  his  ])ersonal  ap(K^als  and  arguments  a
party  was  formed,  which,  if  not  very  numerous,
mcluilitl  many  citizens  of  note,  several  of  whom
had  lx>en  active  on  the  other  side.  While  he  was
at  Parkinson's  Ferry  a  messenger  from  the  capi-
tal brought  Senator  Ross  the  information  that  lie
hatl  been  appointed  by  Washington  the  chief  of  a
commission  to  compose  the  insurrection.  Senator
Ross  more  than  prejwred  the  way  for  his  colleagues,
and  the  insurrection  was  virtually  at  an  end  lx>fore
they  joine<l  him.  Mr.  Ross  ha<{  b«»en  for  several
years  intimate  with  Gen.  Washington,  \mnp  con-
8ultc<l  as  counsel,  and  now,  at  the  president's  re-
quest, became  his  attorney  in  fact  for  the  sole  man-
agement of  his  large  estates  in  western  Pennsyl-


vania. While  still  in  the  senate,  he  was  nominateil,
in  171M),  as  governor  of  the  state.  The  nomination
was  esteemed  to  be  Mpiivalent  to  an  election,  but
Mr.  Ross  refused  to  canvas  the  state  in  hin  own
lN>half  and  was  defeatc><l.  At  the  next  election  Mr.
Ross  wiis  again  nominatiHl  ami  was  again  unsuc-
cessful. The  same  disposition  to  defend  the  right,
regardless  of  jK-rsonal  cotiMHiuences.  that  ha^l  in-
duced him.  as  a  lioy  at  Dr.  McMillan's  s<>h(Kil,  to
voliintiHT  against  marauding  Indians,  that  had
separated  him  from  friends  and  neighltors  during
the  whiskey  war,  that  in  the  senate  had  urginl  war
against  S[»ain  to  protect  the  mouths  of  the  Missis-
sippi for  the  ust»  of  the  west,  induce<l  him  to  be-
frien<l  the  cause  of  a  party  of  friendless  negro  slaves
who  ha<l  t'scaiHMl  from  their  masters  and  found
refuge  in  Philadelphia.  Impassioned  orator>'  gained
the  case.  The  "  Port  Folio,"  publishe<l  in  Philadel-
phia in  1810,  says  that  Mr.  Ross  received  the  thanks
of  the  Alxdition  society ;  but  the  generous  act  dimin-
ished his  popularity.  In  1808,  for  the  third  time,
he  was  nominate<l  for  governor,  and  was  again  un-
successful. With  this  election  the  jxiwer  of  the  Fed-
eralists in  Pennsylvania  was  broken,  and  with  it  the
(Ktlitical  life  of  Mr.  Ross  came  to  an  end.  He  de-
cline<l  to  connect  himself  with  other  parties;  only
as  a  PYHleralist  would  he  hold  public  ofnce.  Exi'ept
a  short  sketch  in  tho  "Port  I* olio"  for  1816,  there
is  no  published  life  of  James  R^^iss,  and  even  that  in
great  measure  consists  of  extracts  from  his  speeches.

ROSS,  James,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in  Pictou,
Nova  Scotia,  in  July,  1811.  His  father,  who  came
from  Forfarshire,  Scotland,  in  1795,  was  i»astor  of
the  Presbyterian  church  at  Pictou  for  nearly  forty
years.  The  son  was  educate<i  at  the  Pictou  acad-
emy, and  had  charge  of  the  grammar-school  at
Westmoreland,  New  Brunswick,  for  four  years.
After  completing  a  course  in  theology  he  was
licensed  to  preach  in  1835,  and  became  pastor  of
the  congregation  to  which  his  father  had  mmistered
at  Pictou.  In  1842  Mr.  Ross  became  editor  of  the
"  Presb)'terian  Banner."  He  afterward  was  pro-
fessor of  Hebrew  and  biblical  criticism  in  Dalhousie
college,  and  upon  the  opening  of  the  theological
seminary  at  West  River  was  placed  in  charge  of  it.
After  Truro  college  was  amalgamated  with  Dal-
housie college  Mr.  Ross  was  appointed  its  president,
and  also  acted  as  a  professor.

ROSS,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  Tain,  County
Ross,  Scotland,  29  Jan.,  1?26;  d.  in  Philadelphia
in  March,  1800.  He  early  removed  to  Perth.  Scot-
land, and  entered  into  mercantile  pursuits,  but  in
1763  came  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  became  a
shipping-merchant.  At  the  beginning  of  the  diffi-
culties with  the  mother  country  he  espoused  the
cause  of  the  colonies,  and  was  a  signer  of  the  non-
importation agreement  of  the  citizens  of  Philadel-
phia in  1765.  He  presided  at  the  meeting  of  the
mechanics  and  tradesmen  of  the  city  that  was  held
on  9  June.  1774.  to  consider  a  letter  from  the  artifi-
cers of  New  York,  and  was  a  memljer  of  the  com-
mittee to  reply  to  the  same.  On  16  .Sept.,  1775,  he
was  appointed  muster-master  of  the  Pennsylvania
navy,  which  office  he  resigned,  23  Feb..  1776*.  on  ac-
count of  the  importance  of  his  commercial  affairs.
In  May,  1776,  he  was  employe<i  by  the  committee
of  commerce  of  congress  to  purchase  clothes,  arras,
and  t)owder  for  the  use  of  the  army.  This  necessi-
tateu  the  establishment  of  agencies  in  Nantes  and
Paris,  and  repeatinl  visits  to  Fnince  during  the  war.
In  this  duty  he  advance*!  or  plinlged  his  cretlit  for
4;2O,0OO  more  than  he  was  supplied  with  by  con-
gress, much  to  his  enil>arrassinent  and  subsequent
rf)ss.  He  was  on  terms  of  familiar  intercourse  with
Washington,  Franklin,  and  Robert  Morris,  and


330


ROSS


ROSS


there  are  several  entries  in  the  diary  of  Gen.  Wash-
ington, during  the  sittings  of  the  convention  to
frame  the  United  States  constitution,  of  engage-
ments to  dine  with  Mr.  Ross  at  his  country  place,
the  Grange,  named  after  the  home  of  I^afayette.

ROSS,  Sir  John,  Hritish  explorer,  b.  iti  Baisar-
roch,  Scotland,  24  June,  1777;  d.  in  London,  Kng-
land,  30  Aug.,  1850.  He  was  the  son  of  a  clergy-
man, entered  the  royal  navy  in  1786,  and  was  .se-
verely woundetl  four  times  under  the  Iwitteries  of
Bilbao,  Spain,  receiving  a  pension  of  £150  wr  an-
num. In  1817  he  was  offered  the  command  of  two
vessels  for  an  arctic  expedition  to  ascertain  the
existence  of  a  northwest  passage,  and  on  25  April,
1818,  he  sailed  in  the  "Isabella,"  accompanied  by
Lieut.  William  E.  Parry  in  the  "  Alexander."  He
returned  to  England  in  November  of  tliat  year,  and
was  made  post-captain  on  7  Dec,  1818.  In  May,
1829,  he  sailetl  in  the  steamer  "  Victory,"  e<iui{»ped
by  Sir  Felix  Booth,  sheriff  of  London,  and  was  ac-
companied by  a  small  tender  of  sixteen  tons,  the
"Krusenstein."  In  September,  1830,  he  became
ice-lx)und  in  the  Gulf  of  Boothia,  and  he  aban-
doned ills  ship  on  29  May,  1832.  In  August,  1833,
his  party  was  rescued  by  the  "  Isabella,"  then  en-
gaged on  a  whaling  expedition.  He  arrived  in
London  in  18Ji3,  and  was  knighted,  24  Dec,  1834,
and  made  companion  of  the  bath.  From  1839  till
1845  he  was  consul  at  Stockholm,  and  in  1850  he
commanded  the  "  Felix,"  a  vessel  of  ninety  tons,
in  search  of  Sir  John  Franklin,  returning  in  1851,
in  which  year  he  became  rear-admiral.  His  publi-
cations include  "  A  Voyage  of  Discovery  made
under  the  Orders  of  the  Admiralty  for  the  I'urpose
of  exploring  BafTin's  Bav,  and  inquiring  into  the
probability  of  a  N.  W.  tassiige"  (London,  1819);
"  Observations  on  '  Voyages  of  Discovery  and  Re-
search within  the  Arctic  Regions,'  by  Sir  John
Barrow"  (1819;  2d  ed.,  1846);  "Treatise  on  Navi-
gation by  Steam  "  (1828);  "  Narrative  of  a  Second
Voyage  in  Search  of  a  Northwest  Passage,  etc.,  in-
cluding the  Reports  of  Capt.  James  Clarke  Ross
and  the  Discovery  of  the  Northern  Magnetic  Pole"
(1835) ;  "  Memoirs  and  Correspondence  of  Admiral
Lord  de  Saurey"  (2  vols.,  1838);  "Arctic  Expedi-
tion, with  a  Summary  of  the  Searching  Expeditions
for  Sir  John  Franklin  "  (1850) ;  and  a  "  Narrative
of  the  Circumstances  and  Causes  which  led  to  the
Failure  of  the  Searching  Expeditions  sent  out  by
the  Government  and  Others  for  the  Rescue  of  Sir
John  Franklin  "  (1855). — His  nejphew.  Sir  James
Clarke,  explorer,  b.  in  London,  England,  15  April,
1800;  d.  in  Aylesbury,  Buckinghamshire,  England,
3  April,  1862,  entered  the  navy  in  1812,  and  accom-
panied his  uncle  on  his  first  arctic  expedition  in
1818.  From  1819  till  1827  he  was  with  Capt.  Parry
in  his  vovages  in  search  of  a  northwest  passage,  and
also  in  his  expedition  of  1827.  He  was  appointed
commander  on  8  Nov.,  1827,  sailed  with  his  uncle
in  1829,  was  absent  four  years,  and  discovered  what
he  l)elieved  to  be  the  northern  magnetic  pole.  On
his  return  to  England  he  was  made  post-captain,
28  Oct.,  1834,  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  1836  to  search
for  missing  whaling  vessels,  and  after  his  return
engaged  in  a  magnetic  survey  of  Great  Britain  and
Ireland.  In  April,  1839,  he  was  appointed  to  com-
mand the  "  Erebus,"  and  in  September  of  that  year,
in  company  with  the  "  Terror,  sailed  for  the  Ant-
arctic seas  to  make  magnetic  and  meteorological
observations  and  investigations.  After  a  success-
ful voyage  of  four  years,  in  which  much  valuable
information  regarding  this  region  was  gained,  he
returned  to  England  in  September,  184^3.  In  Janu-
ary, 1848,  he  was  ap|)ointed  to  the  "  Enterprise  "
and  made  an  unsuccessful  voyage  to  Baffin  bay  in


search  of  Sir  John  Franklin,  going  as  far  as  Bar-
row strait.  In  1841  he  was  presented  with  the
founder's  gold  medal  of  the  London  geographical
st)ciety,  and  he  also  received  a  gold  niKlal  from  the
Geographical  society  of  Paris,  was  knighteil  in
1844,  and  received  in  that  year  the  degree  of  I).  C.  L.
from  Oxford.  He  was  the  author  of  "  A  Voyage
of  Discovery  and  Research  in  the  Southern  and
Antarctic  Regions  during  the  Years  1839-"43"(2
vols..  London,  1847).

ROSS,  John,  or  Kooweskoowe,  Indian  chief,  b.
in  the  Cherokee  country,  Ga.,  about  1790;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  1  Aug.,  1866.  He  was  a  half-
breed,  and  at  an  early  age  acquired  a  gotKl  Eng-
lish education.  In  1817-19  Georgia  attempted  to
induce  the  Indians  to  remove  west  of  Missis.sippi
river,  and  for  this  purpose  a  liberal  bribe  was  of-
fered to  Ross,  who  became  chief  of  his  tribe  in
1828,  by  William  Mcintosh,  a  half-breed  Creek ;  but
this  was  refused  and  the  Creek  was  publicly  dis-
graced. The  proceedings  of  the  Georgia  legislature
with  reference  to  the  Cherokees  in  1829  led  to  an
appeal  on  the  part  of  the  Indians  to  the  sujtreme
court  of  the  United  States,  Ross  acting  a.s  their
agent.  This  resulted  in  a  decision  in  their  favor:
but  Georgia  refused  to  ol»cy,  and  aggressions  upon
the  Indians  increased.  In  1835  a  treaty  was  con-
cluded between  an  agent  of  the  United  States  and
the  Cherokees,  a  portion  of  the  latter  agreeing  to
surrender  their  lands  and  remove  west  within  two
years,  while  nearly  1,200  remained  to  become  citi-
zens of  the  states  in  which  they  residetl.  and  are
known  as  the  Eastern  band.  Against  this  treaty
Ross  and  more  than  15.000  of  his  tribe  protested  in
an  appeal  that  was  written  by  Ross  and  addressed
to  the  president  of  the  United  States,  saying  that
the  treaty  had  been  obtained  fraudulently.  The
government  sent  a  force  under  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,
to  compel  its  fulfilment.  The  Cherokees  yielded,
and,  with  Ross  at  their  head,  removed  to  tHeir  new
home,  a  moderate  allowance  being  made  to  them
for  their  losses.  Ross  continued  to  be  chief  of  the
Cherokees.  He  at  first  resisted  all  movements  con-
nected with  the  civil  war,  issuing  a  proclamation
of  neutrality  on  17  May,  1861,  but  on  20  Aug.,
1861,  he  called  a  council  at  Talequah  and  formed
an  alliance  with  the  Confederate  states.  His  wife
opposed  this  union  until  the  last  moment,  and
when  an  attempt  was  made  to  raise  a  Confederate
flag  over  the  council-house  her  opposition  was  so
spirited  that  the  act  was  prevented.  Political  ques-
tions originating  in  the  sale  of  lands  in  Georgia
divided  the  Cherokees  into  two  parties,  between
which  bitter  enmity  existed.  One  of  these  factions
has  been  always  known  as  the  •'  Ross  party,"  and
was  headed  by  William  R.  Ross,  the  son  of  John,
who  was  appointed  U.  S.  agent  to  the  confederated
tribes  of  the  Indian  territory.  Ross  was  the  au-
thor of  a  "  Letter  to  a  Gentleman  in  Philadelphia"
(1836).  By  the  act  of  3  March,  1883,  the  Eastern
band  of  Cherokees  was  authorized  to  institute  a
suit  in  the  court  of  claims  against  the  United
States  to  determine  its  rights  to  stocks  and  Iwnds
held  by  the  United  States  in  tnist  for  the  Chero-
kees, arising  out  of  the  sale  of  lands  west  of  the
Mississippi,  and  also  of  the  wrmanent  annuity
fund,  to  which  suit  the  Cherokee  nation  west  was
made  a  party  defendant.  Judgment  was  rendered
against  the  Eastern  band,  which  was  affirmed  by
the  U.  S.  supreme  court  on  1  March,  1886,  the  de-
cision defining  the  status  of  these  Indians,  whose
condition  l)ecame  more  unsettled.

ROSS,  John,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  the
County  Antrim,  Ireland,  10  March.  1818;  d.  near
Toronto,  Canada,  31  Jan.,  1871. He  came  to  Can-


ROSS


ROSS


381


•da  with  his  (Mrents  in  infancy,  and  was  f«lu*
catc«l  at  thf  ilii*trict  «'h<M)l,  HriK-Kville.  He  tht-n
Mtudiini  law,  vans  ailintttiHl  tn  the  l»ar  in  1(<)U,  and
stM>n  attained  n-putation  an  a  pnu-titionor  an<l  as  a
supporter  of  the  LiU'rals.  In  IH4H  Mr.  li««»  lie-
camo  a  nu*mlM>r  of  the  k'gi.olative  oouneii.  He  de-
clineil  an  executive  oflice  in  the  p)verninent,  hut
in  IHSl  acceiit4><l  tliat  of  solicitor-ffeneral.  In  lKr)2
he  went  to  Kn^land  to  su|M>rintend  the  coniph>lion
of  the  contracts  for  the  construction  of  the  (tnmtl
Trunk  railway,  and  he  was  afterward  pn-sident  of
this  road  for  ten  years.  On  his  return  to  t'Hna4la  \w
was  attorney-general  till  1H54,  and  then  s^a>aker  of
the  legislative  council  till  April,  1850 ;  and  in  the  Ik'-
ginning  of  IS-W  he  was  apimintetl  receiver- genend
in  the  administration  of  .John  A.  Macdonald,  re-
taining onice  until  his  colleagues  were  out  of  power
in  August  »)f  the  same  year.  He  resumed  ofTlce  a
few  days  later  as  |)resident  t>f  the  executive  coun-
cil in  t'artier's  administration.  At  the  time  of
the  confederation  he  Iwcame  a  meml)er  of  the  Do-
minion senate.  He  was  engagwl  in  journalism  at
one  time,  and  established  a  newspaper  that  advo-
cated his  favorite  [K)litical  reforms.

ROSS,  Sir  John,  British  soldier,  b.  at  Stone-
house,  CumlH>rland,  Kngland,  18  March,  1829.  He
entere<l  the  army  in  1840  as  2d  lieutenant  in  the
rifle  brigade.  He  was  present  at  the  battles  of  the
Alma  and  Inkerman  in  1854,  as  adjutant  of  the  2d
battalion,  and  received  a  brevet  majority,  with  three
me<lals,  for  his  services  in  the  Crimea.  He  served
during  the  Indian  mutiny,  to<ik  part  in  the  action
of  C'awupore  and  the  capture  of  Lucknow,  and
afterwani  raised  a  camel  corps,  which  he  success-
fully commanded  in  the  Central  Indian  campaign
under  Sir  Hugh  Kose.  For  these  services  he  re-
ceivetl  a  brevet  lieutenant-colonelcy  and  a  medal,
and  was  made  a  companion  of  the  imth.  He  com-
manded the  liengal  troops  in  the  Perak  expedition
of  1875-'6,  and  in  1878  was  chosen  to  lead  the
brigade  of  Indian  troops  that  was  sent  to  Malta
during  the  Eastern  crisis.  On  his  return  to  India  he
commande<l  the  Calcutta  district  brigade,  until  he
was  given  charge  of  the  reserve  division  of  the  Af-
ghanistan field  force,  under  Sir  Frederick  Rol>erts,
with  whom,  in  1880,  he  marched  from  Cabul  to
Candahar,  in  command  of  the  Indian  Ijrigades.
For  his  services  on  this  occasion  he  received  the
Afghan  medal  and  star  and  was  made  a  knight-
commander  of  the  bath,  and  received  the  thanks  of
parliament.  In  1881  he  was  ap|>ointed  to  the  com-
mand of  the  Poonah  division  of  the  Bombay  army,
which  he  relinquishtnl  in  1880,  when  he  was  pro-
moted lieutenant-general.  In  the  springof  1888  Sir
John  was  appointe<l  general  ofllcer  commanding
the  forces  in  Canada,  and  in  May  of  the  same  year
he  was  sworn  in  as  mlministrator  of  the  government
of  Canada,  pending  the  arrival  of  the  newly  ap-
pointed governor-ceneral,  Lord  Stanley,  of  Preston.

ROSS,  John  Jones,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
St.  Anne  de  la  Parade,  10  Aug..  1832.  He  was  edu-
cated at  (i^uel)ec  college  and  became  a  physician.
Dr.  Ross  represented  Champlain  in  the  Canada  as-
sembly fmm  1801  till  the  union,  when  he  was  re-
turned for  that  constituency  to  the  Dominion  par-
liament and  the  legislative  as.sembly.  In  1807  he
resigned  his  seat  in  the  latter  <m  his  apfiointment
to  the  legislative  council  of  Quek)ec.  He  continued
to  n»present  Champlain  in  the  Dominion  {uirlia-
ment  till  1874,  when  he  retiretl.  Dr.  Ross  was  a
meml)er  of  the  executive  council  of  yuel)ec  and
speaker  of  the  legislative  council  frf>m  27  Feb.,
1873,  till  August,  1874.  He  was  reapi>ointed  on
27  Jan.,  1870,  and  held  office  till  March,  1878,
when  the  ministry  was  dismissed  by  the  lieutenant-


governor.  He  again  bot-ame  a  member  of  the  ox-
M-ulive  council  and  s|M-aker  of  the  legislative  coun-
cil, 81  Oct.,  187i>.  and  was  commissioner  of  agri-
cultur«>  and  piddic  works  from  July,  1881,  till
Man-h,  1882,  when  he  n?tin"«l  from  the  cabinet.
After  the  resignation  of  the  .Mousseau  ministry  he
fornie<l  an  administration  on  2^^  Jan.,  1884.  Iiocom-
ing  i)r(>mier  ami  commissioner  of  agriculture  and
public  works.  He  and  the  memlters  of  his  a4lmin-
istration  resigned  in  January.  1K«7.  and  in  April
of  the  same  year  he  was  apiM)inted  a  mend^-r  of
the  C'anadian  senate.  Dr.  Ross  is  vice-president
of  the  Provincial  college  of  physicians  and  sur-
geons and  a  mcml)er  of  the  Agricultural  council
of  Queliec,  and  was  electe<l  vice-president  of  the
North  Shore  railway  company  in  187.'j.

ROSS,  I^awrence  Sullivan,  soldier,  b.  in  Ben-
tonsiK)rt,  Iowa.  27  Sept.,  1K18.  He  was  graduated
at  Horence  Wesleyan  uiuversity,  Florence.  Ala.,
commande<l  Texas  frontier  tr«x)i>s  under  (Jen.  .Sam-
uel Houston,  and  became  colonel  of  the  0th  Texas
regiment  of  cavalry  in  the  Confetlerate  army  on
24  May,  1802.  He  was  made  brigadier-general  21
Dec,  180^^,  and  led  a  brigade  in  Wheeler's  cavalry
corps  of  the  Army  of  Tennessee.  In  1880  Gen.
Ross  lx?came  governor  of  Texas.

ROSS,  Leonard  Fulton,  soldier,  b.  in  Fulton
county.  III.,  18  July,  1823.  He  was  educatotl  in
the  common  schools  of  Illinois  and  at  Jacksonville
college,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1845.  In  1840  he  joined  the  4th  Illinois  volun-
teers for  the  Mexican  war,  became  1st  lieuten-
ant, and  was  commended  for  services  at  Vera  Cruz
and  Cerro  Gonlo,  commanding  the  Ixxlv-guard  of
Gen.  James  Shields  while  making  a  difficult  re-
connoissance.  He  also  bore  important  despatches
from  Metamora  to  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  and  to
Gen.  Robert  Patterson  in  Victoria,  Mexico.  After
the  war  he  resumed  his  practice,  and  was  probate
judge  for  six  years.  He  was  chosen  in  May.  1801,
colonel  of  the  17th  Illinois  regiment,  which  he  had
raised,  and  served  with  it  in  Missouri  and  Ken-
tucky, bearing  himself  with  great  gallantry  at
Frederick  town.  Mo.,  21  Oct.,  1801.  where  his  horse
was  shot  under  him.  In  1802  he  was  in  e<mimand
of  Fort  Girardeau.  Mo.  He  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  25  April.  1802.
after  commanding  a  brigade  since  the  wipture  of
Fort  Donelson.  Tenn.,  10  Feb.,  1802.  After  the
evacuation  of  Corinth,  30  May,  1802,  he  was  pro-
moted to  the  command  of  a  division  and  stationed
at  Bolivar,  Tenn.  In  1807  he  was  ap|>oint(Hl  by
President  Johnson  collector  of  internal  revenue
for  the  9th  district  of  Illinois.  He  has<)een  three
times  a  delegate  to  National  Republican  conven-
tions, and  was  twice  a  defeate<l  candidate  for  con-
Sess.  Since  1800  he  has  given  his  attention  to
rming  and  has  been  interested  in  various  agri-
cultural societies.  He  has  importe<l  fine  stock
into  this  countn',  and  now  (1888)  has  a  large  farm
in  Iowa. — His  brother,  Lewis  W.,  was  a  rej)re-
sentative  in  congress  in  1803-'9.

ROSS,  Robert,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Ross  Tre-
vor, Devonshire.  Kngland,  about  1770;  d.  in  North
Point.  M<1..  12  Sept..  1814.  He  wjus  graduated  at
Trinity  college,  Dublin,  became  an  officer  in  the
20th  foot,  ser>'ed  in  Holland.  Egvpt.  and  the  |»en-
insula,  and  was  selected  by  the  l)uke  of  Welling-
ton to  command  the  corps  that  was  sent  to  this
country  in  1814.  He  arrived  in  Chesa|H'ake  Imy
with  3.500  men  frcmi  Wellington's  army,  and  was
re-etiforcwl  by  l.(KK)  marines  trom  Sir  George
Cockburn's  bl(K;kading  sfjuadron.  The  entire  force
landinl  at  lienwlict.  on  the  Patuxent,  near  Wash-
ing^n. Ross  advanced  with  caution,  and,  joining


332


ROSSEL


ROST


Cockburn,  marched  to  Bla<iensburg,  where  he  de-
feated the  American  army,  consisting  mostly  of
undisciplined  militia, on  24  Aug.,  1814,  and  burned
and  sacKi'd  Washington.  He  was  killed  while  lead-
ing the  advance  towanl  Baltimore,  Md.

ROSSEL,  Elisabeth  Panl  Edouard  (ros-sel),
Chevalier  de,  French  navigator,  b.  in  Sens,  11  Sept.,
1765;  d.  in  Paris,  20  Nov.,  1829.  Ue  entered  the
marine  guards  in  1780,  served  under  De  Grasse  in
the  West  Indies,  fought  at  Yorktown  in  October,
1781,  and  afterward  served  under  Vaudreuil  till
the  conclusion  of  peace  in  1783.  He  was  attached
under  D'Entrecasteaux  to  the  station  of  the  Indian
ocean  in  1785,  liecame  lieutenant  in  1789,  and  was
flag-captain  during  the  expedition  in  search  of
La  Perouse  {q.  v.)  in  1791-'95,  of  which  he  assumed
command  in  1794  after  the  death  of  the  two  com-
manders. After  publishing,  at  the  expense  of  the
government,  the  narrative  of  D'Entrecasteaux's  ex-
pedition, he  succeeded  Pleurieu  {q.  v.)  in  1811  as
member  of  the  longitude  office,  and  in  1812  Bou-
gainville (q.  V.)  in  the  institute.  He  was  brevetted
rear-admiral  in  1822,  and  became,  on  31  Dec,  1826,
keeper  of  the  logs  and  charts  in  the  navy  depart-
ment, a  post  which  he  held  up  to  the  time  of  his
death. He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  French

Geographical  society  in  1821,  and  its  first  president,
lis  works  include  "  Instructions  nautiques  pour
les  cotes  de  la  Guvane  "  (Paris,  1808) ;  "  Voyage  de
D'Entrecasteaux  k  la  recherche  de  La  Perouse"
(2  vols.,  1809);  "Signaux  de  jour,  de  nuit  et  de
brume"  (2  vols.,  181^'21);  and  "Instructions  pour
la  description  nautique  des  cotes  de  la  Martinique  "
(1823).  He  was  also  one  of  the  chief  editors  oi  the
"Collection  des  voyages  et  decouvertes  des  Espa-
gnoles  dans  I'Americjue  du  Sud  "  (10  vols.,  1840).
His  name  has  been  given  to  a  small  island  in  the
Pacific  ocean  south  of  America.

ROSSER,  Leonidas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Peters-
burg, Va.,  31  July,  1815.  He  was  graduated  at
Weslevan  university  in  1838,  and  then  entered  the
New  Vork  conference  of  the  Methodist  church.  In
1839  he  was  transferred  to  the  Virginia  conference,
where  he  has  since  been  stationed,  and  was  presiding
elder  of  the  districts  of  Fredericksburg  in  1852-'3,
Norfolk  in  1853-'6,  Lynchburg  in  1856-'8,  Rich-
mond in  1865-'9,  and  Randolph  Macon  m  1877- '81.
Dr.  Rosser  was  delegate  to  the  general  conference
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  every  four
years  from  1850  till  1866,  and  during  the  civd  war
was  general  missionary  to  the  Confederate  army.
In  1858  the  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Emorv  and  Henry  college,  and  during  1858-'9
he  edited  the  Richmond  "Christian  Advocate."
His  publications  include  "  Bantism,  its  Nature,  Ob-
ligation, Mode,  Subjects,  and  Benefits  "  (Richmond,
1843);  "Experimental  Religion,  embracing  Justi-
fication, Regeneration,  Sanctification,  and  the  Wit-
ness of  the  Spirit "  (1854) ;  "  Class-Meetings  "  (1855) ;
"  Recognition  in  Heaven  "  (1856) ;  "  Reply  to  How-
ell's '  Evils  of  Infant  Baptism ' "  (1856) ;  and  "  Open
Communion  "  (1858).

ROSSEK,  Thomas  Lafayette,  soldier,  b.  in
Campbell  county,  Va..  15  Oct.,  1836.  He  entered
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1856,  but  when  Vir-
ginia seceded  from  the  Union,  although  in  the
graduating  class  and  about  to  receive  a  commis-
sion in  the  U.  S.  army,  he  resigned  and  entered
the  Confederate  army  as  1st  lieutenant  of  artil-
lery. His  services  soon  gained  him  promotion,
and  he  was  made  captain  in  October,  1861,  and
lieutenant-colonel  of  artillery  in  June,  1862.  Dur-
ing the  same  month  he  was  given  command  of  a
regiment  of  cavalry  and  attached  to  the  Army  of
Northern  Virginia. He  attained  the  rank  of  bnga-


dier-general  on  10  Oct.,  1863,  and  was  given  com-
mand of  the  Virginia  cavalry  in  the  Shenandoah
valley.  In  this  capacity  he  served  under  (Jen.
Jubal  A.  Pearly  when  the  latter  was  ordered  to
command  the  Confederate  forces  in  the  valley
of  the  Shenandoah,  and  was  present  at  the  bat-
tle of  Cedar  Creek.  Gen.  Rosser  was  conspicu-
ous for  his  services  in  this  campaign,  and  was
constantly  opposed  by  Gen.  George  A.  Custer,  who
had  been  his  classmate  at  the  military  academy.
In  November,  1864,  he  was  made  a  major-general
of  cavalry.  After  the  war  he  turned  his  atten-
tion to  engineering,  and  had  charge  of  the  Da-
kota, Yellowstone,  and  Missouri  divisions  of  the
Northern  Pacific  railway  from  1870  till  1879.  He
held  the  office  of  chief  engineer  of  the  Canadian
Pacific  railroad  in  1881-'2,  and  is  now  (1888)  presi-
dent and  general  manager  of  the  New  South  min-
ing and  improvement  company,  and  consulting  en-
gineer of  tne  Charleston,  Cincinnati,  and  Chicago
railroad  conipaiiv.

ROSSITER,  Thomas  Prichard,  artist,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  29  Sept.,  1817;  d.  in  Cold
Spring,  N.  Y.,  17  May,  1871.  He  was  educated  in
New  Haven,  and  subseouently  began  the  study  of
art  there  with  Nathaniel  Jocelyn.  About  1838  he
began  to  practise
his  profession  in
his  native  city,  but
in  1840-'l  he  stud-
ied in  London  and
Paris.  During  the
next  five  years  he
had  a  studio  in
Rome,  sketching
and  painting  dur-
ing the  summers  in
Italy,  Germany,  and
Switzerland.  On
his  return  to  the
United  States  he  es-
tablished himself  in
New  York,  where
he  was  chiefly  en-
gaged on  his  scrip-
tural pictures, "  Mi-
riam dancing  be-
fore the  Hosts,"  "  Return  of  the  Dove  to  the  Ark,"
"Jeremiah  the  Prophet,''  "Ascension,"  "The  Ideals,"
and  "The  Jews  in  Captivity."  In  1853  he  went
again  to  Europe,  making  an  extended  tour.  In
December  of  the  same  year  he  opened  a  studio  in
Paris,  where  he  remained  about  tnree  years.  Dur-
ing this  time  he  produced  "Joan  of  Arc  in  Prison,"
"  Venice,"  "  Wise  and  Foolish  Virgins,"  and  many
other  works.  At  the  Universal  exhibition  of  1855
he  received  a  gold  medal  for  his  "  Venice  in  the
15th  Century  "  (1854),  and  at  the  salon  of  the  same
year  he  was  awarded  a  medal  of  the  third  class.
From  1856  till  1860  he  was  in  New  York,  after
which  he  removed  to  Cold  Spring,  where  he  resided
until  his  death.  He  painted  a  large  number  of
pictures,  mostly  historical  or  scriptural  subjects,
and  also  numerous  portraits.  Besiaes  those  already
mentioned,  they  include  "  The  Representative  Mer-
chants," "  The  Home  of  Washington,"  painted  in
conjunction  with  Mignot  (1858);  "The  Discover-
ers "  (1859) ;  "  Washington's  First  Cabinet " :  and  a
series  of  pictures  on  the  "  Life  of  Christ."  He
was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National  academy
in  1840,  and  an  acadenlician  in  1849.

ROST,  Pierre  Adolph,  jurist,  b.  in  France
about  1797;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  6  Sept.,  1868.
He  was  educated  at  the  Lycee  Najwleon  and  the
]^cole  polytechnic  in  Paris. With  his  fellow-stu-


c^.  (7. Our-^T^ih^.


ROSTAINQ


ROTHKRMEL


883


I


dents  he  served  in  the  defence  of  Paris  when  Na-
polerm  retipwl  to  Kllia,  and  on  tht«  n'i»tomti«)n  of
the  (.•miiin>  iio  n|>|)lic«l  for  a  romniiMtion,  wliich
would  nave  been  grunt(><l  Imt  for  the  defeat  at
Waterloo.  In  1816  he  came  to  Ijouisiana  and  set-
tled at  Natchez,  Miss.,  and  soon  afterward  he  stud-
ied law  with  Jo!4eph  K.  Davin.  After  his  admission
to  the  l>ar  he  settled  in  NatchitfK'hes,  where  the
population  was  lar^ly  French,  and  soon  attHine<l
a  profltnhle  practice.'  In  1H2({  he  was  elected  to
the  state  senate,  and  four  years  later  he  was  nomi-
nate*!  for  conffresstnan,  but  whs  defe^ititl.  Me  then
removed  to  New  Orleans,  and  contimuHl  there  in
the  practice  of  his  profession  until  IHUS,  when  he
went  to  Kurope.  On  his  return  he  was  ap|>ointed
judge  of  the  supreme  court,  but  soon  resigneil  to
engage  in  agricultural  pursuits.  In  1846.  when
the  reorfjaniziition  of  the  court  was  effectetl,  ho
again  acceptwl  a  seat  on  the  licnch.  On  account
of  his  ample  knowle<lge  of  l)olh  civil  and  commer-
cial law.  he  t<x)k  rank  among  the  foremost  judges
that  Louisiana  has  ever  iK)ssessetl.  It  is  said  of
him  that  "  for  clearness  of  diction  and  logical  jjer-
spicacity  in  the  application  of  legal  principles  to
the  facts  of  the  case  in  hand,  his  decisions  will
stand  comparison  with  those  rendered  by  the  fore-
most jurists  in  the  land."  On  the  formation  of  the
provisional  Confederate  government  he  was  ap-
|)ointed  its  commissioner  to  Siwin,  and  remained
abroml  until  after  the  civil  war.  He  then  resumed
his  practice,  and  devoted  his  energies  to  the  resto-
ration of  his  property.

ROSTAINU,  Just  Antolne  Henri  Marie  Ger-
main, Marquis  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  the  cha-
teau of  Vauchette,  near  Montbrison,  France,  24
Nov.,  1740;  d.  there  in  September,  1826.  He  was
first  attached  to  the  household  of  the  "  grand  dau-
phin." and  afterward  was  first  page  to  Louis  XV.
After  serving  in  Germany  as  a  cavalry  officer,  he
joineil  the  musketeers  in  1*76!).  and  became  colonel
of  the  Auxerrois  regiment.  He  was  transferred  to
the  command  of  the  Uatinois,  and  ordered  to  this
country  under  the  command  of  Rochatnbeau,  where
he  remained  from  1780  till  1783.  For  his  bravery
in  the  attack  on  St.  Lucia,  and  at  the  siege  of
V'orktown,  he  received  the  cross  of  St.  Louis,
was  made  a  member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincin-
nati, and  promoteti  brigadier.  After  his  return  to
France  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  constituent  assem-
bly, and  on  20  March,  1792,  he  was  commissioned
lieutenant-general.  Shortly  afterward  he  retired
to  his  estates,  where  he  s|>ent  his  remaining  days.

ROTCH,  Arthur  (roach),  architect,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  i;{  May,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1871,  and  then  studied  architecture  for
two  years  in  the  Massachusetts  institute  of  tech-
nology, and  for  five  years  in  the  ^kiole  des  beaux
arts  in  Paris.  While  he  was  in  France  he  had
charge  of  the  restoration  of  the  Chateau  de  Che-
nonceau.  In  1880  he  became  senior  member  of
the  firm  of  Rotch  and  Tilden,  in  Ik>ston,  and  since
that  time  he  has  built  various  churches  and  the
Memorial  library  building  in  Bridgewater,  .Miiss.,
gymnasiums  of  Ik>wdoin  college  and  Phillips  Kxeter
academy,  Associates'  hall,  high-school,  and  academy
in  Milton,  Mass.,  the  art  schools  and  art  museum
of  Wellesley  college,  and  many  private  houses  and
business  bUK-ks  throughout  the  United  States.  Mr.
Rotch  has  exhibitetl  water-colors  in  the  Paris  salon,
the  London  acatlemy,  the  New  York  aca^lemy  of
design,  aiul  elsewhere.  He  is  chairman  of  the  visit-
ing coramitliH!  of  fine  arts  of  Harvard  university,
and  is  one  of  the  corporation  of  the  Massachusetts
institute  of  technology.  In  conjunction  with  bis
brother  and  sisters  he  founded,  as  a  memorial  to


his  father,  who  married  a  daughter  of  Abbott
Ijawrrnce.  the  Rotch  travelling  wholarship,  which
annually  sends  a  student  of  an*hitecture  to  Europe
for  two  years'  study  an<l  travel.

ROTOH.  Cliaritjr  Rodman,  philanthronist.  b.
in  NewjMirt.  li.  I..  31  Oct..  1706;  d.  in  Kendol.Ohio,
8  Aug.,  1H24.  Slie  was  the  daughter  of  a  sea-cap-
tain, and  marrie<l  Thomas  Rot<-h,  of  Nantucket,  in
1790.  For  some  time  she  live«l  in  that  town,  but
in  1801  she  sett leil  in  Hartford. and  in  IHll  failing
health  led  her  to  take  up  her  n'sidcnce  in  Kendol,
Ohio.  Her  husliand  di«><l  in  1H2^{  and  be<|Ueathed
to  her  his  personal  property  to  Ir*  (li>>{><>sed  as  she
should  decide.  She  deternnned  to  found  a  school
for  orphan  and  destitute  children,  and  a  few  years
after  her  death  the  fund  that  she  left  reachc«l  the
sum  of  $20,000.  The  interest  of  this  money  was
subsefjuently  applie<l  to  the  purchase  of  a  farm  of
18.')  acres  near  Massillon,  Ohio,  on  which  waa
erected,  at  a  cost  of  $5,000,  a  building  for  educa-
tional and  dwelling  ^ur]toses.  In  this  institution
boys  are  thoroughly  instructed  in  the  art  of  hus-
bandry and  girls  in  culinary  duties  and  the  mak-
ing of  their  own  wearing-apparel.  The  course  is
four  years  in  length.

ROTH,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sarmund,  Prus-
sia, 3  Feb.,  17-26;  d.  in  York,  Pa.,  22  July,  1791.
He  was  etlucated  in  the  Roman  Catholic  church,
but  in  1748  united  with  the  Moravians.  In  1756
ho  was  despatched  to  Pennsylvania,  and  three
years  later  he  entereti  the  Moravian  Indian  mis-
sion, serving  for  fifteen  years  in  Pennsylvania  and
Ohio.  Returning  to  Pennsylvania  in  1773,  he  was
employed  in  rural  congregations  till  his  death.
Roth  made  a  special  study  of  the  Unami  dialect
of  the  Ijenape  language,  and  com[H>sed  in  it  an
extensive  religious  work,  "  Ein  Versuch !  der  Ge-
schichte  unsers  Herrn  u.  Heylandes  Jesu  Christi
in  die  Delawarische  Ubersetzt  der  Unami.  von  der
Marter-Woche  an  bis  zur  Himmelfahrt  unsers
Herrn,  iin  Yahr  1770  u.  1772  zu  Tschechschequa-
nQng  an  der  Susquehanna,"  which  is  still  in  manu-
script.— His  son.  John  Lewis  (1773-1841).  was  the
first  white  mule  child  that  was  l)om  in  Ohio.

ROTHERMEL,  Peter  Frederick,  artist,  b.  in
Nescojwick,  Luzerne  co..  Pa.,  18  July,  1817.  He  re-
ceived a  common-school  education,  and,  after  study-
ing land-surveying  for  some  time,  took  up  the
study  of  art  at  the  age  of  twenty-two.  He  was
instructed  in  drawing  oy  John  R.  Smith,  and  sub-
sequently became  a  pupil  of  Bass  Otis  in  Phila-
delphia. During  1856-  9  he  was  in  P^urojie,  resid-
ing for  about  two  years  in  Rome,  and  vifjiting  also
the  princi|)al  cities  in  FIngland,  France;  Germany,
IJelgium,  and  Italy.  Since  his  return  he  has  lived
in  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  elected  a  meml^er  of
the  Pennsylvania  academy,  of  which  institution  he
had  been  director  from  1847  to  1855.  He  possesses
much  facility  of  composition,  and  has  produced  a
large  number  of  works,  including  "  De  Soto  dis-
covering the  Mississippi"  (1844);  "Embarkation
of  Columbus,"  in  the  Pennsylvania  academy;
"  Christian  Martyrs  in  the  Colisseum  "  ;  a  series  of
paintings  illustrative  of  William  II.  Prescott's
"  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico "  (about
1850):  "The  Virtuoso^'  (1855);  "Vandyke  and
Rubens";  "  Kin^  Lear"  (1856);  "  Patrick  Henry
before  the  Virginia  House  of  Burgesses";  "St.
Agnes  "  (1858) ;  "  Paul  at  Ephesus  " ;  "  Paul  before
Agrippa";  "St.  Paul  preaching  on  Mars  Hill  to
the  Athenians":  "Trial  of  Sir  Henry  Vane";
"Battle  of  Gettysburg"  (finished  in  18tl),  in  Me-
morial Hall,  Fairmount  park.  Philadelphia;  "The
Landsknecht  "  (1876) :  and  "  Bacchantes  "  (1884).
Verj  many  of  his  paintings  have  been  engraved.


334


ROTH  ROCK


ROUARIE


ROTHROCK,  Joseph  Trimble,  physician,  b.
in  McVevtown,  Pa.,  9  April,  1H39.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard
in  1864  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1868.  Dr.  Rothrock
began  practice  in  Centre  county,  Pa.,  but  in  1870
removed  to  Wilkesbarre,  making  a  sjjeoialty  of  dis-
eases of  the  eye  and  ear,  and  in  1876  established
the  North  Mountain  school  of  physical  culture  in
Luzerne  county,  also  during  the  same  year  he  was
appointed  by  the  American  philosophical  society
lecturer  on  forestry  in  execution  of  the  Michaux
legacy,  and  so  has  been  able  to  contribute  largely
toward  developing  the  growing  forestry  sentiment
in  Pennsylvania.  In  1877  he  was  called  to  the
chair  of  botany  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
which  he  has  since  held.  During  the  civil  war  he
entered  the  army  as  a  private  in  the  131st  Penn-
sylvania regiment,  and  became  a  captain  in  the
20th  Pennsylvania  cavalry.  In  1865-'6  he  was  as-
sociated with  the  exploring  party  of  the  Western
Union  extension  telegraph  in  British  Columbia,
and  in  1873-5  he  was  botanist  and  surgeon  to  the
Geographical  and  geological  exploration  and  sur-
vey west  of  the  100th  meridian  under  Lieut.  George
>I.  "Wheeler.  He  is  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society  and  of  other  scientific  soci-
eties. Besides  his  account  in  vol.  vi.  of  Lieut.
Wheeler's  reports,  he  is  the  author  of  various  pa-
pers in  medical  journals,  and  of  botanical  memoirs.

ROTOURS,  Jean  Julien  Angot  (ro-toor).
Baron  des,  French  colonial  governor,  b.  in  the  castle
of  Rotours,  Orme,  2  June,  1773 ;  d.  in  Paris,  ,28
March,  1844.  He  entered  the  navy,  11  June,  1791,
took  part  in  the  expedition  of  1793  to  Santo  Do-
mingo, and  assisted  in  the  engagement  at  Cape
Fran9ais,  21  June,  where,  although  bearing  a  flag
of  truce,  he  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  negroes,  but
afterward  released,  and  went  on  an  American  mer-
chant-vessel to  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  fur-
nished the  means  of  returning  to  France.  He  wa«
promoted  commander  in  1808,  and  captain  in  1814,
and  in  181<)-'19  made  a  successful  campaign  in  the
West  Indian  waters,  for  which  he  was  created  baron,

25  May,  1819.  Afterward  he  was  despatched  with
a  corvette  to  protect  the  French  fisheries  on  the
coast  of  Newfoundland,  when  a  difficulty  with
England  threatened  to  end  in  war,  and  was  pro-
moted rear-admiral  in  1821.  Rotours  was  ap-
pointed governor-general  of  Guadeloupe  in  1826,  ar-
rived at  Basse-Terre  on  31  May,  and  found  that  the
city  had  been  nearly  destroye<l  by  the  hurricane  of

26  July,  1825.  He  immediately  began  to  rebuild  it
on  a  more  elaborate  plan,  and,  after  inquiring  into
the  wants  of  the  colony,  proposed  to  the  king  a
plan  to  unify  the  colonial  administration,  by
which  the  island  was  allowed  partial  self-govern-
ment through  delegates  that  formed  a  council-gen-
eral. Rotours  also  provided  means  to  check  the
return  of  yellow-fever  epidemics,  established  a  hos-
pital and  a  camp  for  the  soldiers  in  Matouba,  at
the  coolest  station  in  the  mountains,  drained  the
deadly  marshes  that  surrounded  Pointe-a-Pitre,
executed  great  works  in  that  harbor,  completed  the
canal  Vatable,  and  also  constructed  in  Grande  Terre
several  other  canals,  which  proved  of  great  benefit
to  the  colony.  One  of  these  has  since  received  the
name  of  Canal  des  Rotours.  He  founded  the  city
of  Bordeaux-Bourg.  erected  schools,  churches,  and
bridges,  and  openSl  roads.  Under  his  adminis-
tration Guadeloupe  attained  a  high  state  of  pros-

Srity,  and  when  Rotours  obtained  his  recall  in
ay,  1830,  regret  was  felt  at  his  departure.  His
works  include  "  M6moire  sur  le  mode  de  procedure
criminelle  en  vigueur  k  la  Guadeloupe"  (Paris,1826).


ROTTERMUND,  Baron  de,  French  geologist,
\).  in  France  in  1813  ;  d.  in  Montreux,  Switzerland,
in  1858.  He  came  to  Canada,  and  was  for  some
time  in  the  service  of  the  crown-iands  department
as  an  inspector  of  mines.  He  is  principally  re-
memljereu  because  of  his  attacks  upon  T.  Sterry
Hunt,  the  geologist,  in  1850,  and  for  liis  opposition
to  the  theory  of  Sir  William  Logan  that  tnere  are
no  coal-mines  in  Lower  Canada.  The  baron  held
that  coal  existed  both  at  Gasixj  and  Ouebec,  having
discovered  particles  at  the  latter  place.  Frencn
geologists  to  whom  these  particles  were  submitted
agreed  with  him,  but  finally  the  correctness  of  Sir
William  Logan's  opinion  was  demonstrated.  He
wrote  a  report  to  the  mayor  of  (Quebec  on  com-
bustible minerals  to  be  found  in  that  citv.

ROUARIE,  Armand  Tallin  (roo-ah-ree).  Mar-
quis de  la,  French  soldier,  b.  in  the  castle  of  Rou-
arie,  near  Rennes,  14  April,  1756;  d.  in  the  castle
of  La  Guyomarais,  near  Lamballe,  Brittany,  30
Jan.,  1793.  He  was  admitted  in  1775  to  the  lx)dy-
guard  of  the  king,  but  a  duel  about  an  actress
caused  his  dismissal.  Chagrin  and  anger  led  him
to  attempt  suicide,  but  his  life  was  savetl  and  he
came  to  the  United  States,  10  May,  1777,  under  the
assumed  name  of  Count  Armand.  Congress  ac-
cepted his  services  and  gave  him  the  commission
of  colonel.  He  participated  in  the  engagement  at
Red  Bank,  was  with  Lafayette  in  New  Jersey,  was
active  iti  Westchester  county,  N.  Y.,  and  in  Con-
necticut, and  served  under  Gen.  Horatio  Gates
against  Cornwallis.  He  opposed  the  forces  of  Sim-
coe,  Emmerick,  and  Barremore;  he  captured  the
last-named  near  King's  Bridge,  8  Nov.,  1779,  and
defeated  the  others.  In  the  following  year  his  corps
was  incorporated  with  Pulaski's,  and  he  rendered
good  service  at  Warren  Tavern  and  in  central  New
Jersey.  Toward  the  beginning  of  1781  he  was
called  away  to  France  on  account  of  family  mat-
ters, but  he  returned  in  time  to  participate  in  the
victory  of  Yorktown,  and  brought  with  him  a  sup-
ply of  clothing  and  ammunition.  He  took  part  in
the  campaign  of  1782  in  the  south,  and  was  very
severe  in  his  denunciation  of  Gen.  Gates  on  account
of  the  defeat  at  Camden.  On  26  March,  1783,  he
was  made  brigadier-general  by  congress  and  be-
came a  member  of  the  Society  of  the  CincinnatL
After  the  conclusion  of  peace  he  returned  to  France,
where  he  lived  in  private  till  1788,  when  he  was
elected  one  of  the  twelve  deputies  sent  by  the
province  of  Brittany  to  plead  before  the  king  for
the  preservation  of  its  privileges.  The  king,  being
irritated  by  his  inconsiderate  zeal,  committed  him
to  the  Bastille  for  a  few  weeks.  On  his  release  in
1789  be  bitterly  denounced  the  principles  of  the
revolution,  and  planned  to  unite  the  provinces  of
Brittany,  Anjou,  and  Poitou,  and  to  raise  an  army
to  operate  with  the  allies.  His  plans  were  a{>-
proved  by  the  brothers  of  Louis  XVI.  at  Coblentz,
5  Dec,  1791,  and  he  was  appointed  high  royal  com-
missioner in  Brittany.  On  5  March,  1792,  the  chiefs
of  the  confederacy  met  at  his  castle,  and  every-
thing was  in  readiness  for  action,  when  the  plot
was  revealed  to  the  legislative  assembly,  and  troops
were  sent  to  secure  Rouarie.  He  eluded  them  for
several  months,  but  he  was  taken  sick  and  died
after  a  short  illness  in  the  castle  of  Guyomarais.
His  papers,  which  he  had  buried  in  an  iron  box
six  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  soil,  were  discov-
ered by  accident,  and  their  contents  caused  the  ar-
rest of  the  whole  family  of  Guyomarais,  of  which
twelve  members  were  sent  to  the  scaffold.  A  few
weeks  later  the  great  uprising  of  Les  Chouans  was
organized  in  Vend^  on  the  plans  that  were  left  by
La  Rouarie. He  was  a  man  of  great  ability,  urbane


ROULARD


ROUS


885


and  ()<)lishcHl  in  manners,  and  an  eloquent  and  per-
8Uiu*ivi'  sprnkor.

ROri.ARII, CliarloH (r<H)-lnr), West Indian

P:M*t,  I),  ill  the  island  of  St.  Martin  in  1751 ;  d.  in
aris  in  17H7.  He  went  in  his  youth  to  Paris,
when'  he  studitnl  philosophy.  His  first  verst's  at-
trac>to<l  the  attention  of  Voltaire,  whoeonipliniented
the  youn^  |Mict.  In  17H1  he  b<H-amc  liliniriaii  of
the  navy  de|>artin«'nt  at  Paris,  which  iM)st  he  hehl
till  his  death.  His  works  include  "Chniits  du  soir
et  <lu  matin  "  (1774):  "Ia's  «|uatre  saisons"  (1777);
and  "  Le  cycle  de  la  conqucte."  an  original  work
in  pros*'  and  verse  which  narrates  the  S|MUiish  con-
quest of  AiiH'rica(17H8).

ROl'MFORT,  AugruHtoK  Louis,  soldier,  b.  in
Pari.s.  France,  10  Dec.,  1796;  d.  in  Harrisburc,  Pa.,
2  Aujr.,  1878.  He  came  with  his  father  to  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  aliout  1805,  was  ^radiwiteil  at  the
U.  S,  military  acjulemy  in  1817,  and.  after  a  short
service  in  tiie  marine  corps  in  Washington  and
Philadelphia,  resigned  on  18  Aug..  1818.  He  was
then  pmfessor  of  mathematics  at  Mount  Airy  col-
lege, (lermantown,  till  1826,  and  from  that  time
till  IH34  suiMjrintendent  of  a  military  .school  in  that
town,  where  many  young  men  were  prepared  for
West  Point.  He  was  reappointed  in  the  army  by
Gen.  Jackson  as  militarv  store-kee|>er  of  ordnance
in  18.J4,  and  serve«l  at  f'rank ford  arsenal  till  1841,
when  he  resigned  again.  Meanwhile  he  had  be-
come an  active  DenuK-ratic  politician,  and  was  in
the  legislature  in  1843-'4,  and  harbor-master  of
Philatlelphia  in  1845-'8.  He  had  Ix'en  matlc  cap-
tain of  Pennsylvania  militia  in  1820,  and  in  1843
had  risen  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  in  which
capacity  he  showed  much  vigor  and  |irudence  in
suppressing  the  native  American  riots  in  1844.  He
was  connected  with  niilnuids  from  1850  till  1860,
and  from  1863  till  1866  wivs  mayor  of  Harrisburg,
where  he  won  reputation  by  his  success  in  main-
taining order  during  the  crisis  of  the  Confederate
invasion.  After  this  he  engaged  in  literary  pur-
suits till  his  death.

ROUND,  William  Mandiall  FittH,  author,  b.
in  Pawtucket,  li.  I.,  26  March.  1845.  He  received
an  aca«iemic  etlucation  and  entere<l  Harvard  medi-
cal school,  but  was  not  graduatetl,  owing  to  ill
health.  In  18?2  he  was  ap|X)inted  U.  S.  commis-
sioner to  the  World's  fair  that  was  held  at  Vienna
in  1873,  where  he  hml  charge  of  the  New  England
department,  and  on  his  return  he  devoted  himself
to  journalism  and  literature.  He  gave  attention  to
the  suljject  of  prison  reform,  and  in  188J^  became
corresponding  secretary  of  the  Prison  association
of  New  York.  In  1885,  with  Franklin  B.  Sanlxirn,
Francis  Wayland.  and  others,  he  reorganized  the
National  prison  association  of  the  United  States,
and  was  elected  its  secretary,  and  in  1886  he  was
sent  as  a  delegate  from  the  United  States  to  the
International  penitentiary  congress  in  Rome,  Italy.
Mr.  Round  laid  out  in  1887-'8  the  general  scheme
for  the  Hurnham  industrial  farm,  an  institution
for  unruly  lK>ys,  bjised  upon  the  principles  that
have  dominated  the  similar  institution  at  Mettray
in  France  and  the  Rauhehaus  near  Hamburu:  in
Germany.  His  books  include  "  Achsah,  a  New
Knghind  Life-Study"  (Boston,  1876);  "Child
Mari<m  Abroml"  (1876);  "Torn  and  Mended"
(1877) :  "  Hal :  the  Story  of  a  Clodhopper  "  (1878) ;
and  "  Ros«'croft "  (1880).

ROrXDS,  sterling  Parker,  printer,  b.  in
IVrkshire,  Vt..  27  .lime.  1828;  d.  in  Omaha,  Neb.,
17  Dec.  18H7.  At  twelve  years  of  age  he  removed
with  his  parents  to  what  is  now  Kenosha,  Wis.,  and
soon  entere«l  the  printing-office  of  the  "Southjwrt
American." He  became  in  1845  foreman  in  the


state  printing-office  at  Mwlison,  afterwanl  was  in
printing-i)ffices  at  Milwauke<>.  l{4icine,  and  HiifTalo,
and  migratetl  to  Chicago  in  1K51.  Hen'  he  ongnged
in  the  printing  business.  an<l  s^nm  afterwanl  o|»«'ne<i
a  printers'  warehouse,  in  which  was  kei»t  in  stock
everything  that  wa.s  needwl  in  the  tnwie.  In  IH-W
the  business  was  extended  by  the  luldition  of  the
printers'  electroty|H'-foundry.  an«l  the  first  niimlter
of  "  Rounds's  Printers'  C'abi'net."  still  in  existence,
was  issuinl.  Kxtending  his  business  still  further,
he  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  printing-presses,
the  first  that  were  made  in  the  northwest.  Mr.
Rounds  was  api>oiiit<Hl  public  printer  in  1881 ;  but
he  removed  to  Omaha  in  1885  and  was  identified
with  the  "  Reimblican  "  till  his  death.

ROr<{UKTTE,  Fran<;oiH  Dominiqne,  poet,  b.
in  New  Orleans,  La.,  2  .Jan.,  1810.  He  studied  at
the  Orleans  college  in  his  native  city,  and  then  fol-
lowed classical  studies  at  the  College  <le  Nantes  in
France.  In  1828  he  returned  to  the  Unite<l  States
and  .studied  law  with  William  Rawle  in  Philadel-
phia. The  active  practice  of  his  profession  be-
ing uncongenial,  he  retunie<l  to  France  and  has
since  devoted  hiin.self  to  writing.  Besides  his  con-
tributions to  "  L'Alwille  de  la  Nouvelle  Orleans,"
the  "  Propagateur  Catholioue,"  and  other  journals,
he  has  published  "  Les  Meschacel)eenes  '  (Paris,
IHUi));  "The  Arkansas  "  (Fort  Smith,  Ark..  1850);
and  "  Heurs  d'Amerique :  Poi^ies  nouvelles  "  (New
Orleans,  1857).  He  has  also  written  in  French  and
English  a  historical  work  on  the  Choctaw  nation.
— His  brother.  Adrien  Emmannol,  author,  b.  in
New  Orleans.  La.,  13  Feb..  1813;  d.  there,  15  July.
1887,  was  educated  at  the  College  de  Nantes,  and
spent  ten  years  thereafter  in  the  capitals  of  Europe.
He  then  returned  to  this  country  and  studiitl  law,
but  becoming  interested  in  the  Chwtaw  Indians,
who  were  located  in  the  parish  of  St.  Tammany,  he
devoted  his  attention  to  their  welfare.  Determin-
ing to  spend  his  life  among  them,  he  settle<l  in
their  miast,  learne<l  their  language,  and,  fixing  it
in  print,  taught  the  Indians  to  read  and  write.
As  the  work  progressed  he  became  interested  in
their  religious  welfare,  and  in  1845  presented
himself  for  ordei*s  in  the  Roman  Catholic  church.
He  continued  among  the  Indians,  who  called  him
"Chatah-iona,"  during  the  troublesome  times  of  the
civil  war,  when  their  territory  was  alteniately  over-
run by  the  6<jldiers  of  both  annies.  Ablx-  Rouquette
worke<l  in  their  behalf  until  the  year  l)efore  his
death,  when  failing  health  compelletl  him  to  return
to  New  Orleans,  where  he  spent  his  last  days,  ten-
derly cared  for  by  the  Sisters  of  Charity  at  the
Hotel  Dieii.  His  scholarly  attainments  were  uni-
versally recognized,  and  his  j)oetry,  written  in  the
emotional  and  sentimental  style  of  Chateaubriand,
was  commended  by  Sainte-Beuve  and  other  French
critics.  His  works  include  "Les  Savanes,  poesies
Americaines"  (Paris.  1841).  in  which  "Souvenir  de
Kentucky  "  is  the  best  known  ;  "  Wild  Flowers :
Sacred  Poetry"  (New  Orieans,  1848);  "I^ThelwTde
en  Amerique,  ou  a|>ologie  de  la  vie  solitaire  et
contemplative"  (1852):  "  L'Antoniade,  ou  la  soli-
tude avec  Dieu,  ix>eme  ereinitiquc  "  (1860) ;  "  Poeines
Eatriotiqiies "  (I860) ;  and  "  Catherine  Tegeh-
witha"(1873).  In  1855  he  translated  into  French
the  select  poems  of  Estelle  Anna  Ijewis,  and  also
edited  "Selections  from  the  Poets  of  all  Coun-
tries." His  last  work  was  a  satire  on  George  W.
Cable's  "  Grandissimes."  eiititUnl  "Critical  Dia-
logue between  Alxx)  and  Calxx)  on  a  New  Iktok,  or
a  Grandissime  Ascension,"  edited  by  K  Junius.

ROrS,  Jolin,  naval  officer,  b.  pr<»bably  in
Massachusetts:  d.  in  Portsmouth,  clngland,  3
April.  1760. He  had  command  of  the  expedition


336


ROUSSEAU


ROUTE


from  Massachusetts  that  in  1744  cut  out  a  fleet  of
French  vessels  from  the  harbor  of  Fishotte,  New-
foundland, and  laid  waste  all  the  French  posts  on
that  coast.  In  1745  he  had  "'The  Shirley"  in  the
expedition  against  Cape  Breton,  and  assisted  in  the
capture  of  the  French  frigate  "  Vigilant "  as  she
was  approaching  the  coast.  After  the  reduction  of
Louisbuig  he  was  sent  to  England  with  despatches,
and  for  his  services  was  commissioned,  on  24  Sept.,
1745,  royal  post-captain.  He  commanded  the  fleet
that  conveyed  the  expedition  against  the  French  in
the  Bay  of  Fundy,  and  afterward  destroyed  their
forts  and  houses  on  St.  John's  river.  Iwo  years
later  he  had  the  frigate  "  Winohelsea  "  in  the  un-
successful expedition  against  Louisburg,  but  was
successful  in  the  capture  of  a  French  sloop  of  six-
teen guns  after  a  stout  resistance.  Subsequently
he  h^  command  of  the  "Sutherland,"  with  which
he  participated  in  1758  in  the  siege  of  Louisburg,
and  in  1759  in  that  of  Quebec.  Capt.  Rous  was  a
meml)er  of  the  colonial  council  in  1754.

ROUSSEAU,  Lovell  Harrison,  soldier,  b.  in
Lincoln  county,  Ky.,  4  Aug.,  1818  ;  d.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  7  Jan.,  1869.  lie  received  but  little
schooling,  and  in  1833  his  father  died,  leaving  a
large  family  in  reduced  circumstances.  On  be-
coming of  age  he
went  to  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  and  be-
{fan  the  study  of
aw.  Subsequent-
ly he  removed  to
Bloomfield,  Ind.,
where  in  Febru-
ary, 1841,  he  was
admitted  to  the
bar.  In  1844-'5
he  was  elected  to
the  Indiana  legis-
lature, of  which
he  became  an  ac-
tive member.  He
raised  a  company
during  the  Mexi-
can war,  and  was
attached  to  the  2d
Indiana  regiment,  with  which  he  participated  in  the
battle  of  iJuena  Vista.  After  losing  nearly  one
third  of  his  men  in  that  contest,  he  fell  back  to  the
hacienda,  doing  good  service  when  the  wagon-trains
were  attacked  by  the  Mexicans.  In  1847,  four  days
after  his  return  from  Mexico,  he  was  elected  to  the
Indiana  senate,  and  served  for  two  terms.  He
removed  to  Louisville,  Ky.,  in  1849,  and  there  fol-
lowed his  profession,  being  very  successful  in  the
management  of  difficult  cases,  especially  in  ad-
dressing the  jury.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  earnest  in  his  efiforts  to  restrain  Ken-
tucky from  joining  the  Confederacy,  and,  resigning
his  seat  in  the  state  senate,  began  the  organiza-
tion of  troops  for  the  National  army,  and  was  ap-
pointed colonel  of  the  5th  Kentucky  volunteers  in
September,  1861.  On  1  Oct.,  1861,  he  was  commis-
sioned brigadier-general  of  volunteers  and  attached
to  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell's  army.  He  took  part
in  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  where  he  led  a  brigade  of
Gen.  Alexander  M.  McCook's  division,  and  partici-
pated in  the  battle  of  Perry ville  on  8  Oct.,  1862,
where  for  his  bravery  he  was  promoted raajor-

general  of  volunteers.  Subsequently  he  succeeded
en.  Ormsby  M.  Mitchel  in  the  command  of  the
5th  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  serv-
ing with  great  credit  in  the  battle  of  Stone  River,
the  TuUahoma  campaign,  the  movement  at  Chatta-
nooga, and  the  battle  of  Chickaraauga. From


fl— V\r»^.A,^'>W — «  L<»AA.>lxx.


November,  1863,  till  November,  1865,  when  he  re-
signed, he  had  command  of  the  districts  of  Nash-
ville, Tenn.,  and  middle  Tennessee,  and  during
this  time  made  a  raid  into  Alabama,  destroying
the  Montgomery  and  Atlanta  lines  of  railway.  In
1864  he  held  the  important  post  of  Fort  Rosecrans
in  the  defence  of  Nashville  against  Gen.  John  B.
Hood.  He  was  elected  to  congress  from  Kentucky
as  a  Republican,  serving  from  4  Dec.,  1865,  to  21
July,  1866,  when  he  resigned  after  being  censured
by  the  house  for  publicly  a.ssaulting  Josiah  B.
Grinnell,  of  Iowa,  in  the  capitol :  but  he  was  re-
elected, serving  from  3  Dec,  1866,  till  3  March,
1867.  He  served  on  the  committee  on  military
affairs,  and  was  one  of  the  representatives  that
were  selected  to  attend  the  funeral  of  Gen.  Winfleld
Scott  in  1866.  President  Johnson  appointed  him
brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army  on  28  March,
1867,  and  he  also  received  at  the  same  time  the
brevet  of  major-general  in  the  U.  S.  army  for
services  during  the  civil  war.  He  was  then  sent
officially  to  receive  Alaska  from  the  Russian  gov-
ernment and  to  assume  control  of  the  territory.
Gen.  Rousseau  was  summoned  to  Washington  to
testify  in  the  impeachment  trial  of  President
Johnson,  and  was  subsequently  assigned  to  the
command  of  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  with
headquarters  at  New  Orleans.  He  succeeded  Gen.
Philip  II.  Sheridan  in  this  command  and  continued
there  until  his  death.

ROUSSEL,  Gabriel  Edmond  (roo-sel),  French
explorer,  b.  in  Dinan  in  1717;  d.  in  Sceaux  in  1T81.
He  accompanied  La  Condamine  {q.  v.)  to  South
America,  and  afterward  was  sent  to  explore  Brazil
and  the  La  Plata  provinces,  returning  in  1779  with
valuable  collections,  which  were  deposited  in  the
Museum  of  natural  history.  At  the  instance  of
the  Academy  of  sciences,  Louis  XVI.  gave  $2,000
from  his  privy  purse  for  the  publication  of  Rous-
sel's  works,  which  include  "  Voyages  d'explorations
k  travers  le  Bresil,  les  Guianes  et  les  contrees
arrosees  par  la  riviere  de  la  Plata  "  (2  vols.,  Paris,
1781);  "Flora  Americana,  seu  genera  plantarum
quas  in  Amazonia  crescent "  (3  vols.,  1784);  "R^
sume  de  I'histoire  et  de  la  decouverte  du  Bresil "
(1785);  and  "Description  generale  de  I'Amerique
du  Slid,  sa  flore  et  sa  faune,  ses  produits,  son  etat
politique  et  social"  (3  vols.,  1787).

ROUSSELOT  DE  SURGY,  Jae^nes  Phlll-
bert  (roo-seh-lo),  French  author,  b.  in  Dijon.  26
June,  1737 ;  d.  in  Paris,  11  March,  1791.  He  held
for  many  years  an  office  in  the  French  treas-
ury department,  and  was  afterward  royal  cen-
sor of  new  publications.  His  "Melanges  interes-
sants  et  cuneux  "  (10  vols.,  Paris,  1763-'5)  treat  of
the  natural,  civil,  and  political  history  of  Asia  and
America ;  the  six  last  volumes  are  devoted  to  the
latter  country,  and  contain  some  interesting  infor-
mation that  IS  scarcely  to  be  found  elsewhere,  as
the  author  in  his  official  capacity  had  access  to  the
French  archives  of  state,  many  of  which  have  been
missing  since  the  revolution  of  1789.  His  other
works  include  "  Memoires  geographiques.  physiques
et  historiques  sur  I'Amerique  au  Sud  "  (2  vols.,
1767).  and  "  Histoire  naturelle  et  politiaue  de  la
Pensylvanie,  et  de  I'etablissement  des  Quakers  dans
cette  contree,"  in  part  translated  from  the  German
of  Kalms  and  Untelll)erger  (3  vols.,  1770).

ROUTH,  Sir  Randolpli  J.,  Canadian  states-^
man,  b.  in  Poole,  Dorset,  England,  in  1787;  d.  in'
London  in  1858.  His  father,  Richard  Routh,  was
at  one  time  chief  justice  of  Newfoundland.  The
son  was  educated  at  Eton,  and  served  in  the  Brit-
ish army  thirty-seven  years.  He  was  present  in
the  penmsula  and  at  Waterloo,  and  in  1826  was


ROUX DK  RCXMIELLR


ROWAN


887


I


made  a  rommiiwary -^ivml.  Having  nettled  in
Canatlo,  he  was  a  int'iiiIxT  of  the  fxwulivo  council
and  re«'»'ive<l  tin*  honor  of  knight h<MMl  l)v  imtent.

ROtX  I>E  ROCHKLLE.  Jean  BaptiHto
OanpArd  (nM>),  Kn-ncli  hi!<toriHn.  b.  in  I/ous-lf
Saulnicr  in  17«W;  d.  in  Paris  in  Man-h,  1H4J».  lie
was  ctMisul  at  N'fw  York  in  lH22-'4,  and  minister  lo
the  Unit«Hl  States  from  188()  till  !«:«.  His  works
include  "  Ix'-s  Turia>fe»,"a  ixwm  (Paris.  IHIO);  "  ha
Byzanciaile."  a  |MH'm  (182*i);  "  I^ettn's  des  Etats-
U'nis"  (1K15);  "Histoiri'  des  Etats-l'nia  "  (2  vols,,
183fi) :  and  "  ftiKHnV  de  Kenian  Cortes,"  a  i)<)etical
history  of  the  conquest  of  Mexico.

ROWAN,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Pennsvlvimia  in
177:J:  d.  in  liouisville,  Ky.,  13  July.  iH.W.  He
movcil  with  his  jwirents  to  Kentucky  in  llKi,  and
was  educated  in  lianlstown.  In  1795  he  was  jwi-
mittcd  to  the  bar,  and  in  1799  he  U'came  a  mem-
ber of  the  State  constitutional  convention.  He
was  chosen  secretary  of  state  in  1804,  and  was
elected  to  con>;ress  from  Kentucky,  serving  from
9  Jan.,  1807,  till  3  March,  1H()9.  During  1819-'21
he  was  judge  of  the  court  of  ap{)cals,  and  he  at-
tained a  high  reputation  as  a  lawyer  in  criminal
cases.  Sul)sequently  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1825,  till  3  March,
1831,  during  which  time  he  made  able  8|)eeches  on
the  amendment  of  the  judiciary  system  and  on
imprisonment  for  debt.  Later  lie  was  apjKiinted
commissioner  of  claims  against  Mexico  under  the
treaty  of  11  April,  1839,  and  was  sent  in  1848  as
minister  to  Naples,  where  he  remained  until  1850.
Judge  Howan  was  president  of  the  Kentucky  his-
torical soc-iety  in  1838-'43.  and  published  in  1830
his  speeches  in  the  senate  on  Henry  S.  Foote's
resolutions  and  on  imprisonment  for  debt.

ROWAN,  Stephen  Cle^,  naval  officer,  b.  near
Dublin,  Ireland,  25  Dec,  1808;  d.  in  Washington,
D. C,  31  March.  1890.  He  was  appointed  mi(lslii|>-
roan  in  the  navy  from  Ohio,  15  Feb.,  1820,  when  he
was  a  student  at  Oxford  college.  He  became
passed  midshipman,  28  F'eb.,  1832,  and  during  the
Seminole  war  criused  in  the  skH)p  "  Vandalia"  on
the  wcjst  coast  of  Florida,  conducting  boat  expe-
ditions and  participating  in  operations  on  shore
from  Noveml>er,  18;i2,  till  October.  18136.  He  was
commissioned  as  lieutenant,  8  March,  18237,  served
in  the  coast  survey  in  1838-'40,  was  executive  of-
ficer of  the  sloop  "  Cyane  "  in  the  Pacific  squadron
in  1846-'8,  and  during  the  Mexican  war  to<jk  part
in  the  capture  of  Monterey  and  San  Diego,  where
he  lande<i  and  hoisted  the  American  flag,  29  July,
1848.  On  b]<K-kade  duty  in  the  Gulf  of  California
the  "  Cyane  "  capturetl  twenty  Mexican  vessels  and
caused  the  destruction  of  several  gun-boats.  Lieut.
Rowan  commande<l  the  naval  brigmle  under  Com.
Ilolx'rt.  F.  Stockton  at  the  victories  of  Sjin  Gabriel
and  lia  Mesa,  9  and  10  Jan.,  1847,  was  slightly
wounde<l  in  the  shoulder,  and  highly  commendwi
for  his  valor  and  ability.  He  subsequently  com-
man<ied  an  ex|>edition  ten  miles  into  the  interior
of  Mexico,  where  he  routed  a  large  force  of  Mexi-
cans, who  then  ceased  to  attack  the  U.  S.  naval
garrison.  He  was  on  onlnance  duty  in  185()-'3
and  again  in  1858-'<51,  comniande<l  the  store-ship
"  Relief"  ill  1853-*5.  and  was  iiromotetl  to  com-
mander, 14  S«^pt.,  1855.  When  ttie  civil  war  opened
he  was  in  charge  of  the  steam  sl<K)p  "  Pawnee."
which  he  brmignt  to  Washington  from  Phihwlel-
phia  in  Feiiruary,  18(n.  Rowan  was  a  resident
of  Norfolk,  Va.,  where  he  hiul  marrie<l,  but,  not-
withstanding this  and  his  affection  to  the  south,
he  announced  his  adhesion  to  the  National  govern-
ment, ami  was  continuinl  in  the  command  of  the
**  Pawnee."  At  the  capture  of  Alexandria  he  cor>
TOL,  v.— 22


ered  the  citv  with  his  guna. On  25  May,  1861,  he

t(K)k  the  "  Pawnee "  to  Ac4juia  creek  and  [>artici>

|>ate«l  in  the  first  naval  engagement  of  the  war  by

the  attack  on  the  Confederate  batteries  there. Ue

commandetl this

vesisel  in  thelK)m-

Itanlment and

capture of the

forts at Hatter-

as inlet by the

s4|ua4lron under

Com.  Stringham.

and  fully  sliariHl

the  honor  of  this

success. Rowan

then destroycnl

Fort Ocracoke,

twenty  miles

south  of  Hatteras.

In  Januar)-,  18«2,

he  led  the  vessels

in  Goldsbo  rough's

expedition  to  the

sounds  of North

Carolina. The

"  Delaware"  was


his  divisional  flag-ship,  and.  in
oke  island,  8  Feb.,  1802.  he  «lire(


the  attack  on  Roan-
irectetl  the  movements
of  the  vessels.  After  the  forts  surrendered,  the  en-
emy's flotilla  was  pursued  by  Rowan  with  fourtwn
improvised  gun-lwats  into  I'asquotank  river,  where
he  completely  destroyed  the  Confederate  vessels
and  defences.  Several  expeditions  were  conducted
by  Rowan  through  the  sounds  of  North  Carolina
On  12  March,  1862.  he  and  Gen.  Burnside  co-oper-
ated in  the  expedition  to  New  Berne,  N.  C,  where
he  compelled  the  forts  to  capitulate.  He  also  cap-
tured Fort  Macon  at  Beaufort,  N.  C.,  25  April,
1862.  and  continued  to  follow  up  his  successes  by
ex|)editions  until  the  authority  of  the  government
was  completely  re-established  in  the  waters  of
North  Carolina.  Rowan  was  commissioned  cap-
tain, 16  July,  1862,  and  for  his  conspicuous  gal-
lantry he  was  also  promoted  to  commodore  on  the
same  day.  He  next  commanded  the  "New  Iron-
sides "  off  Charleston,  and  in  many  months  of
constant  conflict  with  the  enemy  increased  his
reputation.  In  the  spring  of  1864  his  services  in
the  "New  Ironsides"  were  no  longer  required,  and
Rowan  was  relieved.  He  rtH'eive<l  a  vote  of  thanks
from  congress,  and  on  25  July,  1866,  was  promoted
to  rear-admiral  by  selection,  in  recognition  of  his
eminent  services.  He  commande<l  the.  Norfolk
navy-yartl  in  18(JG-'7.  was  commander-in-chief  of
the  Asiatic  s<juadron  in  1868-'70.  and  while  on
this  duty  was  pnmioted  to  vice-adminil.  He  was
in  command  of  the  naval  station  at  New  York  in
1872-'9,  served  as  president  of  the  lK>ard  of  exam-
iners in  1879-'81.  was  governor  of  the  Naval  asylum
at  Philadelphia  in  1881.  and  l>ecame  superintendent
of  the  Naval  oliservatory  in  1882.  Admiral  Rowan
acted  as  chairman  of  the  light-house  Ixwrd  after
January,  1883,  at  Washington.  D.  C.

ROWAN,  Sir  William,  British  general,  b.  in
County  Antrim,  Ireland,  in  1789;  cL  in  Bath,  Eng-
land, 26  Sept.,  1879.  Ho  entered  the  army  as  an
ensign  in  the  52d  regiment  in  180:3,  and  served
with  it  for  twenty-five  vears  in  the  fwninsular
war,  at  Waterloo,  and  in  North  America.  He  was
civil  and  military  secretary  to  Ix>rd  Seaton,  lieu-
tenant-governor of  UpjM^r  Cana<la  from  1832  till
1839.  Tie  was  made  a  majf>r-general,  in  1846,  and
in  1849  was  ap|N)inted  commander  of  the  British
forces  in  Canada,  which  iMjst  he  held  till  1855,
During  part  of  this  time  lie  was  administrator  of


338


ROWLAND


ROWLEY


the  government  of  Canada,  while  the  Earl  of  Elgin
was  absent  in  England.  He  was  knighted  in  1850,
and  wius  a  ficld-ninrshal,  and  colonel  of  the  52d
foot  at  the  time  of  his  death.

ROWLAND,  Henry  AiignstiiH,  clergyman,  b.
in  Windsor.  Conn.,  18  Sept.,  1804;  d.  in' Boston,
4  Sept.,  1859.  He  was  gratluated  at  Yale  in  1828,
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1827.  Dur-
ing the  three  years  following  he  was  agent  of  the
American  Bible  society  in  New  York  and  Con-
necticut, and  he  was  ordained  in  the  Presbytprian
chun-h  on  24  Nov.,  1830.  He  was  called  to  Fay-
etteville,  N.  C,  in  18iil,  and  three  years  later  to
the  pastorate  of  the  Pearl  street  church,  New  York
citv.  In  1843  he  accepted  charge  of  the  Hones-
dale,  Pa.,  parish,  and  from  1855  till  his  death  was
pastor  of  the  Park  Presbyterian  church  in  Newark,
N.  J.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Union  college  in  1853.  He  published  many
single  sermons,  and,  besides  contributions  to  the
religious  press,  was  the  author  of  "  On  the  Common
Maxims  of  Infidelity"  (New  York,  1850);  "The
Path  of  Life"  (1851);  "Light  in  a  Dark  Alley"
(1852);  and  "The  Way  of  Peace"  (1853).  See
"  Memorial  of  the>  Life  and  Services  of  the  Late
Henry  A.  Rowland,"  by  E.  R.  Fairchild  (New  York,
1860). — His  son,  Henry  Augnstus,  physicist,  b.  in
Hoiiesdale,  Pa.,  27  Nov.,  1848,  was  grailuated  at
Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  in  1870  as  a  civil
engineer,  and  engaged  during  1871  in  the  surveying
of  a  railroad  in  western  New  York.  He  then  taught
for  a  time  in  Wooster  university,  but  in  1872  re-
turned to  the  institute  as  instructor  in  physics,
becoming  assistant  professor  in  1874.  Prof.  Row-
land spent  a  yetir  abroad  studying  with  Helm-
holtz  in  Berlin  and  in  examining  physical  labora-
tories in  Europe.  In  1876  he  was  invited  to  accept
the  chair  of  physics,  with  charge  of  the  laboratory,
in  the  newly  founded  Johns  Hopkins  university,  and
he  has  since  held  that  place.  The  honorary  degree
of  Ph.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  that  university
in  1880.  He  was  a  member  of  the  electrical  con-
gress that  met  in  Paris  in  1881,  and  served  on  the
jurv  of  the  electrical  exhibition  there  in  that  year,
and  for  his  services  was  made  a  chevalier  of  the
Legion  of  honor.  Prof.  Rowland  is  a  permanent
member  of  the  International  commission  for  estab-
lishing electrical  units,  is  corresponding  member
of  the  British  association  for  the  advancement  of
science,  one  of  the  twelve  foreign  members  of  the
Physical  society  of  London,  and  is  an  associate  of
the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  from
which  in  1884  he  received  the  Rumford  medal  for
his  researches  in  light  and  heat,  and  in  1881  he
was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.
In  1883  he  presided  over  the  section  on  physics  of
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science  at  Minneapolis,  and  delivered  a  valuable
address  entitled  "  A  Plea  for  Pure  Science."  His
original  work  has  been  extensive,  and  includes
numerous  researches  that  have  been  made  under
his  supervision  at  the  Johns  Hopkins.  While  he
was  in  Berlin  he  showed  experimentally  that  a
moving  charge  of  statical  electricity  has  the  same
magnetic  effect  as  a  current.  He  has  more  recently
gained  reputation  by  his  large  diffraction  gratings,
which  are  ruled,  by  a  method  of  his  own,  directly
on  concave  mirrors.  An  image  of  the  spectrum  is
thus  produced  without  the  aid  of  lenses.  The  pho-
tographs of  the  solar  spectrum  that  he  has  suc-
ceeded in  making  with  the  aid  of  these  gratings
surpass  anything  else  of  the  kind  that  has  ever
been  done.  They  were  exhibited  to  the  National
academy  of  sciences  in  1883.  He  has  also  made  an
extremely  accurate  determination  of  the  value  of


the  ohm,  the  absolute  unit  of  electrical  resistance.
Among  his  papers  are  "  On  Magnetic  Permeabili-
ty" (1873);  "On  the  Magnetic  Permeability  and
Maximum  Magnetization  of  Nickel  and  Cobalt"
(1874) ;  "  Studies  on  Magnetic  Distribution  "  (1875) ;
"  On  a  Magnetic  Effect  of  Electric  Connection "
(1876);  "Research  on  the  Absolute  Unit  of  Elec-
trical Resistance"  (1878);  "On  the  Mechanical
Equivalent  of  Heat"  (1880);  "On  Concave  Grat-
ings for  Optical  Purposes"  (1883);  "On  the  Rela-
tive Wave-Lengths  at  the  Lines  of  the  Solar  S|>ec-
trum"  (1886);  and  the  article  on  "Screws"  in  the
"  EncyclonoHlia  Britannica  "  ;  also  he  has  published
"On  the  Mechanical  Equivalent  of  Heat  "(Balti-
more, 1880),  and  "  Photographs  of  the  Normal
Solar  Spectrum  "  (seven  plates,  1886).

ROWLANDSON,  Mary,  captive.  She  was  a
daughter  of  John  White,  and  wife  of  the  Rev.
Joseph  Rowlandson,  the  first  minister  of  Lan-
caster, Mass.,  who  died  in  1678,  On  10  Feb.,  1676,
during  King  Philip's  war,  the  Indians  surprised
and  burned  Lancaster,  and  took  her  captive.  For
several  days  she  had  no  food,  and  after  her  child
was  frozen  to  death  and  buried  in  the  forest,  she
was  sold  by  her  Narragansett  captor  to  a  Sagamore
named  Quanopin,  in  whose  wife  she  found  a  "  most
uncomfortable  mistress,"  who  treated  her  with
insolence.  The  Indians  with  whom  she  lived  re-
mained near  the  site  of  Petersham,  Worcester  co.,
Mass.,  until  they  crossed  Connecticut  river  on  hear-
ing tliat  they  were  pursued.  Mrs.  Rowlandson
then  met  King  Philip,  who  treated  her  with  much
civility.  Soon  the  Indians  returned  to  Worcester
county.  Timothy  Dwight  says :  "  Mrs.  Rowlandson
went  through  almost  every  suffering  but  death.
She  was  beaten,  kicked,  turned  out  of  doors,  refused
food,  insulted  in  the  grossest  manner,  and  at  times
almost  starved.  Nothing  but  experience  can  enable
us  to  conceive  what  must  be  the  hunger  of  a  person
by  whom  the  discovery  of  six  acorns  and  two  chest-
nuts was  regarded  as  a  rich  prize.  At  times,  in  or-
der to  make  her  miserable,  they  announced  to  her
the  death  of  her  husband  and  children."  Her  cap-
tivity lasted  nearly  three  months,  and  was  ended
through  the  agency  of  a  resident  of  Concord,  Mass.
She  was  redeemed  for  about  eighty  dollars,  which
was  contributed  by  several  women  of  Boston.  She
published  her  experience  in  a  book  entitled  the
"  Narrative  of  the  Captivity  and  Removes  of  Mrs.
Mary  Rowlandson  among  the  Indians  "(Cambridge
and  "London,  1682;  2d  ed.,  Boston,  1720;  new  ed.,
1723).  The  5th  edition  was  edited  by  Joseph  Wil-
lard  (Lancaster,  Mass.,  1828).

ROWLEY  (rhymes  with  Cowlev),  Thomas  Al-
geo,  soldier,  b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.',  5  Oct.,  1808.
He  was  educated  in  private  schools,  held  several
public  offices  in  Pittsburg,  and  entered  the  U.  S.
army  as  2d  lieutenant  of  Pennsylvania  volunteers
to  serve  in  the  war  with  Mexico.  He  was  afterward
promoted  to  captain,  and  served  in  Maryland  and
District  of  Columbia  regiments.  From  1857  till
1860  he  was  clerk  of  the  courts  of  Alleghany  county,
and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  as
captain  in  the  13th  Pennsylvania  volunteers,  and
was  promoted  to  be  major  and  colonel.  Re-enlist-
ing as  colonel  of  the  102d  Pennsylvania  volun-
teers, he  served  three,  years,  was  made  brigadier-
general  for  services  at  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  on  29
Nov.,  1862,  and  resigned  his  commission  on  29  Dec.,
1864.  From  1866  till  1870  he  was  U.  S.  marshal
for  the  western  district  of  Pennsylvania,  and  he
now  (1888)  practices  law  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.

ROWLEY,  William  Renben,  soldier,  b.  in
Gouverneur,  St.  Lawrence  co..  N.  Y.,  8  Feb.,  1824;
d.  in  Chicago,  III.,  9  Feb.,  1886. After  teaching  in


ROWSB


ROYAL


Brown  countT,  Ohio,  he  sottlcnl  in  Galena,  III.,
where  he  held  various  t-ivil  oflU-es,  and  in  Novem-
ber, 1801,  enteriHl  the  military  service  at«  1st  lieu-
tenant in  the  45th  Illinois  refjiment.  After  the
capture  of  Fort  Donelson  he  wius  commi.sNioned
mptAin,  26  Feb.,  1H(]2.  and  apjx)intwl  aide-de-<-amp
on  the  staff  of  (ten.  Ulysj^es  S.  (Jrant.  He  dintin-
guishiHl  himself  at  Shiloh  bv  riding;  from  the  thick-
est of  the  flul'l  «^  the  llornet's  Nest  toward
Crump's  lianding  with  orders  to  (ten.  Ix-wis  Wal-
lace to  bring  his  troops  to  the  field,  for  which  service
he  was  promoted  major,  1  Nov.,  1862.  lie  servetl
on  the  staff  until  the  .siege  of  Vicksburg,  when  he
was  tem|K)nirily  detacheil  from  heathpiarters,  and
actiHl  as  pnivost-marshal-generul  of  the  depart-
ments of  the  Tennessee  and  C'uml)erland,  with
headcjuarters  at  Columbus,  Ky.  When  (ten.  (irant
was  pn)moted  lieutenant-general.  Maj.  Kowley
was  ma<le  lieutenant-colonel  and  military  secretary
on  his  staff,  which  ofllco  he  held  until  30  Aug.,  1864,
when  he  resigned,  owing  to  impaired  health.  He
was  brevetteil  brijmdier-general  of  volunteers  on
13  March,  1865.  He  then  returned  to  Galena,  111.,
was  elected  county  judge  in  1877,  whicJi  office  he
held  at  his  death,  and  was  also  engaged  in  real-
estate  business.  Before  his  deAth  he  was  the  onlv
surviving  member  of  Gen.  Grant's  military  staft
when  he  commanded  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee,
and  he  died  on  the  day  that  closed  the  official  term
of  m«)iirning  for  (ten.  Gmnt.

ROWSE,  Samuel  Worcester,  b.  in  Bath,  Me.,
29  Jan.,  1822.  He  has  devoted  himself  to  drawing
in  black  and  white,  and  his  works  in  crayon,  chiefly

Portraits  and  ideal  heads  of  children,  are  well
tiown  to  the  public.  Many  of  them  have  been
reproduced  by  photography  and  other  processes.
Among  his  portraits  are  those  of  Ralph  Waldo
Emerson  and  Nathaniel  Hawthorne.

ROWSON,  Susanna,  author,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
England,  in  1762;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  2  March,
1824.  She  was  the  onlv  daughter  of  Lieut.  William
Haswell,  of  the  British  navy,  who,  being  engaged
in  the  revenue  service  on  the  American  station,
settled  in  Nantasket,  Mass.  Miss  Huswell's  talents
attracted  th#  attention  of  James  Otis,  who  was  a
frequent  guest  at  her  father's  house,  and  who  called
her  his  "Tittle  scholar."  During  the  early  part  of
the  Revolution,  Lieut.  Haswell's  property  was  con-
fijicated,  and  he  and  his  family  were  removed  on
parole  to  Hingham  in  1775,  and  in  1777  to  Abing-
ton.  He  subsequently  sailed  in  a  cartel  with  his
family  to  England,  and,  after  serving  a^  governess.
Miss  Haswell  married  in  1786  William  Rowson,
a  musician.  In  that  year  she  published  a  novel,
"  Victoria "  (London),  which  was  dedicated  to
the  Duchess  of  Devonshire,  who  introduced  her  to
the  Prince  of  Wales,  from  whom  she  procuretl  a

Cnsion  for  her  father.  Iler  husliand  became
nkruj)t,  and  in  1792-'^  she  appeared  <m  the  stage
with  him  in  Edinburgh.  In  1793  they  came  to
this  country,  api)earing  for  the  first  time  in  An-
na|K)]is,  Md.,  antl  subseciuently  in  Phila<Ielphia
and  Baltimore.  In  1796  she  played  in  Ikiston  at
the  Federal  street  theatre,  appearing  in  several
of  her  own  plavs,  and  closing  with  her  comedy,
"  Americans  m  England,"  in  May,  1797.  She  then
opened  a  school  for  girls.  She  retire<l  in  1822.
Mrs.  Rowson  possesse<l  many  accomplishments,  was
active  iti  charities,  and  was  a  successful  teachen
She  e<lited  the  Boston  "  Weekly  Magazine,"  and
contributed  t«)  other  [>eri<Nlicals.  She  wrote  numer-
ous {topular  otles  and  stmgs.  Her  plays  include
"  The  Volunteers :  a  Farce, '  founded  on  the  whis-
key insumKjtion  in  western  Pennsylvania  (Phila-
delphia, 1793),  and  "The  Slaves  in  Algiers." Her


most  popular  novel  was  "Charlotte  Temple,  or  a
Tale  of  Truth  '  (I/on«lon.  1791)).  Montraville,  the
hero,  was  in  reality  the  author's  kinsman.  Col.
John  Montresor,  while  si-rving  in  the  British  army,

Eer»ua<le<l  Charlotte  .Stanley,  a  descendant  of  the
Mr\  of  Derby,  to  emlmrk  with  him  in  1774  to
New  York,  wlu-re  he  atNindone<l  her.  She  died  in
the  ()l«l  Tni'  House  on  I'ell  and  Doyers  stre«'t»  at
the  age  of  nineteen  years,  and  wa.s  burie<l  in  the
grave-yard  of  Trinity  church.  In  addition  to  the
inscription,  the  slab  bore  the  quarterings  of  the
house  of  Derby,  and  in  after-years  the  name  of
Charlotte  Temple  was  substituted  for  that  of  Stan-
ley. Among  Mrs.  Rowson's  publications  are  "The
Inquisitor,  or  Invisible  Rambler"  (3  vols.,  Ixin-
don,  1788;  Philadelphia.  1794);  "Trials  of  the
Human  Heart  "(4  vols.,  Philadeliihia,  1795);  "  Reu-
l)en  and  Rachel,  or  Tales  of  Old  Times"  (2  vols.,
1798);  and  "Miscellaneous  Poems"  (Boston,  1804).
Her  sequel  to  "Charlotte  Temi>le,"  entitle<l  '*  Lucy
Temple,  or  the  Three  Orphans,"  was  published
after  her  death  (Boston,  1828).  See  a  memoir  by
Elias  Nason  (Alhwny,  1870). —  Iler  sister-in-law,
Charlotte  Rowson,  b.  near  Ix)ndon  alxait  1779;
d.  in  1855,  came  to  this  country  in  1793  and  ap-
[)eared  on  the  stage  in  light  characters  and  sang
popular  songs  with  much  effect.  She  married
William  P.  Johnston,  of  Philadelphia,  publisher
of  the  first  daily  paper  in  that  city.  Their  son,
David  Claypoole  (g.  r,),  became  an  eminent  artist.
ROYAIj,  Joseph,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Repentigny,  Quebec,  7  May,  1837.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Jesuit  college,  Montreal,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in
18(i4.  and  to  that  of  Manitolm  in  1871,  was  coun-
sel in  important  cases,  retired  in  1880,  and  is
now  the  agent  for  Le  credit  foncier  Franco-Cana-
dien  for  Manitoba.  He  has  written  much  for  the
French  Canadian  [>eri(xlical  press  for  many  years,
and  edited  and  established  various  newspapers.
He  was  electe<l  to  the  legislative  a.ssembly  of  Mani-
toba in  1870,  an<l  was  re-elected  in  1875  and  1878.
In  1879  he  was  chos<'n  to  the  Dominion  parliament,
and  he  was  re-elected  in  1882  and  1887.  He  was
elected  speaker  of  the  first  legislative  assembly  of
Manitoba  in  1871,  which  post  he  held  till  March,

1872,  when  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
executive  council  and  provincial  secretary,  but  re-
signed in  July,  1874.  He  was  minister  of  public
works  from  3  Dec.,  1874,  till  he  was  appointed
attorney-general  in  May,  1876.  and  held  the  latter
oflice  till  the  resignation  of  the  government,  when
he  became  minister  of  public  works  in  the  new  atl-
ministration.  He  was  apfwinted  a  meml>er  of  the
executive  council of  the Northwest  territory  in

1873,  and  was  the  first  superintendent  of  educa-
tion for  Manitoba.  He  has  l)een  a  delegate  to  Ot-
tawa on  the  subject  of  obtaining  better  terms  for
Manitolui,  and  also  regarding  the  enlargement  of
her  boundaries.  In  Octol)er,  1875,  he  aided  in  se-
curing a  readjustment  of  the  financial  arrange-
ments of  Manitolui  with  the  Dominion.  Mr.  Royal
was  a  commissioner  to  constilidate  the  statutes  of
Manitoba  in  1877,  and  since  that  year  has  been  1st
vice-chancellor  of  the  University  of  Manitoba.  He
received  the  confederation  meilal  in  1885,  and  in
June,  1888,  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of
the  Northwest  territory.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Le
traite  de  n'-ciprm-ite "  (1864):  "Vie  {K>Iitique  de
Sir  Louis  H.  Lafontaine  "  (18<J4):  "Consideraticms
sur  les  nombreux  changements  constitutionels  de
rAmerique  Britannique  du  Nord,  I'annexion"
(1866);  "Notes  |)ar  un  Nicoletain  "  (1866);  "La
colonisation  en  18(J6"  (1867):  "  I^  sacrifice  et
I'egolsme  "  (1867);  and  "  I^e  goiit-theorie  "  (1867).


340


ROYALL


ROYE


ROYALL,  Anne,  editor,  b.  in  Virginia,  11  June,
17«y;  d.  in  Washington.  D.C.  1  Oct.,  1854.  She
was  stolen  by  the  Indians  in  early  lift\  and  remained
with  them  for  fifteen  years.  Afterward  she  mar-
ried a  ('apt.  Royall  and  settled  in  Alabama,  where
she  learned  to  reatl  and  write.  Subsequently  she
removed  to  Washington,  D.  C,  where  sne  secured
an  old  Ilamage  printing-press  and  a  font  of  bat-
tered type,  and  with  the  aid  of  journeymen  print-
ers published  on  Capitol  hill  a  small  weekly  sheet
called  the  "  Washington  Paul  Pry,"  and  afterward
the  "  Huntress."  John  Quincy  Adams  deserilted
her  as  going  about  "  like  a  virago-errant  in  en-
chanted armor,  redeeming  herself  from  the  cramps
of  indigence  by  the  notoriety  of  her  eccentricities
and  the  forced  currency  they  gave  to  her  publica-
tions." She  was  a  prominent  character  during  the
succeeding  administrations,  and  John  W.  Forney
says:  "She  was  the  terror  of  politicians,  and  espe-
cially of  congressmen.  I  can  see  her  now  tramp-
ing through  the  halls  of  the  old  capitol,  umbrella
in  hand,  seizing  upon  every  passer-by  and  offering
her  l)ook  for  sale.  Any  puolic  man  who  refused
to  buy  was  certain  of  a  severe  philippic  in  her
newspaper.  .  .  .  She  was  a  woman  of  great  indus-
try and  astonishing  memory,  but  at  last  she  seemed
to  tire  of  a  votiution  which  grew  more  and  more  un-
profitable with  better  times  and  milder  manners."
At  last  she  became  so  unendurable  that  she  was
formally  indicted  hj  the  grand  jury  as  a  common
scold,  and  was  tried  m  the  circuit  court  l)efore  Judge
William  Cranch,  and  sentenced  to  ha  ducked,  ac-
cording to  the  English  law  in  force  in  the  District
of  Columbia ;  but  she  was  released  with  a  fine.  Mrs.
Royall  was  the  author  of  "Sketches  of  History,
Life,  and  Manners  in  the  United  States  by  a  Trav-
eller "  (New  Haven,  1826) ;  "  The  Tennessean,  a  Nov-
el founded  on  Facts  "  (1827) ;  "  The  Black  Book,  or
a  Continuation  of  Travels  in  the  United  States "
(Washington,  1828);  "The  Black  Book,  or  Sketch-
es of  History,  Life,  and  Manners  in  the  United
States"  (3  vols.,  1829);  "A  Southern  Tour,  or  a
Second  Series  of  the  Black  Book  "  (2  vols.,  1830-'l) ;
and  "  Letters  from  Alabama"  (1830).

ROYALL,  Isaac,  soldier,  b.  about  1720;  d.  in
England  in  October,  1781.  He  was  a  wealthy  resi-
dent of  Medford,  which  he  represented  for  many
years  in  the  general  court.  For  twenty-two  years
he  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council. He

Earticipated  in  the  French  war,  and  was  appointed
ri^adier-general  in  17G1,  being  the  first  resident
of  New  England  to  bear  that  title.  During  the
Revolution  he  sympathized  with  Great  Britain,
and  left  this  country  on  16  April,  1775.  He  was
proscril>ed,  and  his  estate  was  confiscated  in  1778,
and  it  is  said  that  "  to  carry  on  his  farm  after  his
departure  was  found  to  be  some  times  difficult
for  the  honest  man's  scythe  refused  to  cut  Tory
grass,  and  his  oxen  would  not  plough  Tory  ground.''
Among  numerous  bequests,  tie  left  2,000  acres  of
land  in  Worcester  county,  Mass..  for  the  endow-
ment of  a  law  professorship  in  Harvard.  This  was
established  in  1815,  and  is  known  by  his  name.
The  town  of  Royalston,  Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  was
named  for  him.  One  of  his  daughters  married  the
younger  Sir  William  Penf)erell.

ROYALL,  William  Bedford,  soldier,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia. 15  April,  1825.  He  took  part  in  the  Mexican
war  in  New  Mexico  as  1st  lieutenant  of  Missouri
mountain  volunteei"s,  and  did  jjfood  service  at  the
capture  of  Puebla  de  Taos  and  in  the  skirmish  with
Comanche  Indians  on  Coon  creek,  18  June,  1848.
He  returned  to  civil  life  in  October,  1848.  In  recog-
nition of  his  gallantry  he  received  a  commission  in
the  regular  army,  dating  from  3  March,  1855.  and


he  participated  in  an  expedition  to  the  headwaters
of  Conchos  river  in  the  following  year.  In  1859  he
won  great  credit  by  a  brilliant  defence  of  his  camp
against  hostile  Comanches.  Escaping  from  Texas
in  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  he  was  commis-
sioned as  captain,  21  March,  1861,  and  was  engaged
at  Falling  Waters,  the  siege  of  Yorktown,  Will-
iamsburg. Hanover  Court-Iiouse,  where  he  earned
the  brevet  of  major,  and  Old  Church,  where  he  cut
through  the  enemy  to  esca[)e  capture,  receiving
sabre  wounds  which  disabled  him  for  several  j-cars.
He  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  was  made  a
major  on  7  Dec,  1863,  and  during  the  remaining
period  of  the  war  was  engaged  in  recruiting  ser-
vice. On  13  March,  1865,  he  was  brevette<l  colonel.
In  1868  he  took  the  field  against  the  hostile  In-
dians in  Kansas,  commanding  in  a  combat  at  Prai-
rie Dog  creek.  For  a  part  of  the  time  he  was  the
commander  of  the  Republican  river  expedition  of
1869,  and  was  engaged  in  several  affairs  with  the
hostile  Indians.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colo-
nel on  2  Dec,  1875,  and  in  1876  took  part  in  the
Yellowstone  expedition,  and  was  engaged  at  Rose-
bud creek  and  in  other  actions.  He  was  promoted
colonel  of  cavalry  on  1  Nov.,  1882,  ana  retired
from  active  service  on  19  Oct.,  1887.

ROYCE,  Josiah,  author,  b.  in  Grass  Valley,
Nevada  co.,  Cal.,  20  Nov.,  1855.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  California  in  1875,  studied  at
Leipsic  and  GHttingen  in  1875-'6,  and  in  1876-'8
was  a  fellow  of  Johns  Hopkins  university,  where
he  obtained  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  1878.  He  was
instructor  in  English  literature  and  logic  at  the
University  of  California  in  1878-'82.  and  from  1882
till  1885  instructor  in  philosophy  at  Harvard,  and
since  1885  he  has  been  assistant  professor  of  philoso-
phy there.  He  is  the  author  of  "  A  Primer  of  Logi-
cal Analysis,  for  the  Use  of  Composition  Students  "
(San  Francisco,  1881);  "The  Religious  Aspect  of
Philosophy:  a  Critique  of  the  Basis  of  Conduct
and  Faith*"  (Boston,  1885);  "California  from  the
Conquest  in  1846  to  the  Second  Vigilance  Com-
mittee: a  Study  of  American  Character,"  in  the
"  American  Commonwealth  "  series  (1886)  ;  and
"  The  Feud  of  Oakfield  Creek :  a  Nofel  of  Califor-
nia Life"  (1887).

ROYCE,  Stephen,  governor  of  Vermont,  b.  in
Tinmouth,  Vt.,  12  Aug.,  1787;  d.  in  East  Berkshire,
Vt.,  11  Nov.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Middle-
bury  in  1807,  studied  law,  and  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  from  Sheldon,  Franklin  county,  in
1815-'16,  and  from  St.  Albans.  Franklin  county,
in  1822-'4.  From  1825  till  1827,  and  from  1829
till  1852,  he  was  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
Vermont,  and  he  served  as  chief  judge  from  1846
till  1852.  He  was  governor  of  Vermont  in  1854-"'6
The  University  of  Vermont  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1837.— His  nephew.  Homer  Elfiin,
jurist,  b.  in  East  Berkshire,  Vt.,  14  June,  1820,
was  educated  in  the  common  schools,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1842,  and  practised  in  his  native
town.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  house  of  rep-
resentatives in  184(^'7and  1862,  prosecuting  attor-
ney for  Franklin  county  in  1848-9,  and  state  sena-
tor in  1849-'51,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Re-
publican, serving  from  7  Dec,  1857,  till  3  March.
1861.  From  1870  till  -1882  he  was  associate  judge
of  the  supreme  court  of  Vermont,  and  since  1882
he  has  Ijeen  chief  judge.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  National  Republican  convention  of  18w.

ROYE,  Edward  James,  president  of  Liberia,  b.
in  Newark,  Ohio,  3  Feb.,  1815;  d.  near  Monrovia,
Liberia.  12  Feb.,  1872.  He  was  educated  at  the
high-school  in  his  native  town  and  at  Ohio  uni-
versity, Athens,  Ohio. Emigrating  to  Liberia  in


ROZE


RUFP


341


1846,  ho  bccainp  a  wealthy  mpn-haut,  and  was  the
flrnt  Liljcrian  t<>  i>xi»<>rt  African  comnuKlities  to
Kuro|K>  and  th««  I'nitiMl  Stat«»s  in  his  own  Teasel.
II«>  wan  elwtwl  to  th«'  LiU-rian  house  of  rvnresenta-
tivcs,  servinj;  as  siieakfr  in  1K4W,  was  c-nicf  jtis-
tlce  from  IWtt  till  1868,  and  was  «'lwt«<<l  fifth  prt'si-
dent  of  LilK>ria,  entering  offli-e  in  1H70.  Ihirinf?
his  servioe  the  jh«o|»1p  voted  on  a  |tro|Ktsition  to
change  the  pn»!*ideutial  term  fn>m  two  to  four
roars;  hut  it  was  defeat »h1,  and  a  new  president.
Jos«'ph  .1.  UolHTts,  was  elevte<l  in  1871.  Xotwith-
standinL'  this,  Mr.  Royo  attemi>to<l  to  remain  at
the  hea«T  of  the  >;overnnient,  and  ho  was  conden>ne<l
to  imprisonment.  He  escatxHl,  and.  while  endeavor-
inj<  to  swim  to  a  steamer  that  was  l)ound  for  Liver-
pool, he  was  <lrowned  in  tlie  hartsir  of  Monrovia.

ROZE,  Ph'rre  Wiistave,  French  naval  odlcer,
b.  in  Nimes  in  1812 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  18S2.  lie  en-
tered the  navy  as  midshipman  in  1820,  was  pro-
motoil  iK>st-caj»tain  in  1856  and  attached  to  tho  sta-
tions or  the  West  Indies  and  South  America.  In
January,  1862.  he  was  appointed  commoilore  of  the
fleet  to' operate  in  Mexico,  and  tnmsjwrted  to  Vera
Cruz  the  division  of  Gen.  Ix)rencez  (q.  v).  In  the
followinjr  March  ho  was  ap{M)intcd  military  com-
mander of  Vera  Cruz  and  fortified  tho  city,  holdine
off  the  Mexicans  after  the  retreat  of  Lorencez  and
before  the  arrival  -of  succor  from  France.  For
those  services  he  was  promoted  rear-admiral,  19
July,  1862,  and  he  remainetl  in  command  of  the
French  navy  in  Mexico  till  the  withdrawal  of  Gen.
Bazaine,  when  he  was  sent  to  China.  lie  was  pro-
moted vice-a<lmiral,  26  May,  1800,  and  retireu  in
1877.  He  published  "  Itesumc  des  operations  na-
vales  [X'ndant  la  ^lerre  du  Mexiquo"  (Paris,  1869).

RUCKER.  Daniel  Honry,  soldier,  b.  in  Belle-
ville, N.  .J.,  28  April,  1812.  In  his  youth  he  re-
moved to  Gn)sse  isle,  Mich,  He  entered  tho  U.  S.
army  as  2d  lieutenant  in  the  1st  dragoons  on  13
Oct.",  1837,  became  Ist  lieutenant,  8  Oct.,  1844,  and
captain,  7  Feb.,  1847,  and  served  in  Michigan,  and
against  the  Inilians  in  the  west  and  southwest.  He
participate<I  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  com-
manded a  squadron  at  Buena  Vista,  where  for  gal-
lantry he  was  brevetted  major  on  23  Feb.,  1847.
On  23  Aug.,  1849,  he  was  transferred  to  captain  as-
sistant quartermaster.  He  declined  the  post  of
raaior  of  the  6th  cavalry  on  14  May,  1801,  became
maior  quartermaster  on  3  Aug.,  1861,  and  colonel
and  aiae-«le-camp  on  28  Sept.,  1861.  He  was  ap-
p<}inted  briga«lier-general,  U.  S.  volunteers,  on  23
Slay,  1863,  and  on  5  July,  1864,  was  brevetted  lieu-
tenant-<'olonel,  colonel,  and  brigadier-general,  U.  S.
army,  for  diligent  and  faithful  service  during  the
war.  On  13  March,  1865.  he  received  the  brevets
of  major-general,  U.  S.  army,  and  major-general,
U.  S.  volunteers,  for  faithful  and  meritorious  ser-
vice during  the  war.  He  was  appointed  colonel  and
assistant  quartermaster-general  on  28  July,  1866,
and  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service  on
1  Sept.,  1866.  Since  that  date  he  has  served  as
quartermaster-general  at  various  poirjts,  and  on  13
Feb.,  1882,  was  appointeil  quartermaster-general
of  the  army.  He  was  retired  on  23  Feb.,  Iw2,  and
now  (1888)  resides  in  Washington,  I).  C.

RUI)I>,  John  Churchill,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  24  May,  1779;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  15
Nov.,  1848.  He  was  prejjared  to  enter  Yale,  but
adverse  circumstances  prevented.  He  made  his
way  to  New  York  city  s<H)n  afterwanl,  where  he
became  acquainted  with  I)r.  (afterward  Bishop)
Holmrt,  and  was  baptized  and  conflnned  in  the
Episcopal  church,  ile  studied  for  the  ministry,
chiefly  under  Dr.  Hobart's  direction,  and  was  or-
dained deacon,  2S  April,  1805,  by  Bishop  Benjamin


Moore,  and  priest,  in  Apnl,  1806,  by  the
bishop.  For  a  short  time  ho  was  occupictl  in  mis-
sionary duty  on  liong  Island,  N.  Y.,  but  in  Dec-em-
ber. 1805,  he  t«H)k  charpo  of  St.  John's  parish,  Kliza-
Ix'tiitown,  N.  J.,  and  m  May,  1806,  was  instituted
as  rwtor.  He  nM.'eive<I  tho  degree  of  D.  I),  from
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1H22.  Severe
and  exhaustive  lab<ir  in  striving  to  build  up  the
chun-h  in  Kliziiln'thtown  resulted  in  a  loss  of
health  and  strength,  and  Dr.  Uudd  was  com[H>lled
to  resign  his  charge  in  1826.  In  July  of  the  same
year  he  removed  to  Auburn.  N.  Y..  and  tfMik  gen-
eral oversight  of  tho  aca<leiny  there.  His  health
having  improved,  he  a<fepti><I  tin*  rectorship  of  St.
Peter's  church  in  Auburn,  and  held  that  |M)st  for
seven  years,  during  which  a  stone  church  was
erected  on  the  sp(jt  where  the  previous  «liH<'e  bad
iHt'ii  burned.  Lnder  Bishop  Holwrt's  mlvice.  Dr.
Uuild,  in  1827,  In-gan  tho  publication  of  "The
(losjH'l  Messenger,"  a  religious  weekly,  representing
the  doctrines  and  a<lvocating  the  principles  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  churtth.  He  continued  to  be
its  wlitor  during  tno  rest  of  his  life.  Besides  his
contributions  to  church  literature  in  the  columns
of  the  "  Messenger,"  Dr.  Kudd  published  a  large
numljor  of  sermons  that  ho  preached  on  s|)ecial  oc-
casions between  1822  and  18JJ7.  together  with  ad-
drosses.  Among  these  are  a  "Tribute  to  I)e|Mirted
Excellence,"  an  atldress  on  the  life  and  character
of  Bishop  Hobart  (1830),  and  a  "Sermon  on  the
Reopening  of  St.  Peter's  Church.  Auburn,  with  a
Brief  Sketch  of  the  History  of  the  Congregation
from  its  Organization"  (1833).  Dr.  Rudd  also
e<lited  "The  Churchman's  Magazine"  8<>veral  years
previous  to  1812.  but  the  second  war  with  England
led  to  its  discontinuance.

RUDOLPH,  Michael,  soldier,  b.  in  Maryland
aljout  1754;  d.  after  1794.  With  his  brother  John
he  joinetl  Maj.  Henry  Lee  at  the  head  of  Elk  river
in  1778,  holding  the  rank  of  captain  in  his  legion,
and  served  with  gallantry  in  manv  of  the  lesser
battles  and  sieges  in  the  south.  After  the  war  he
settled  in  Savannah,  and  was  subsequently  a  col-
lector in  Sunbury,  Ga.,  where  he  cultivated  a  farm.
Entering  the  army  in  1790  as  captain  of  the  1st  in-
fantry, he  serveil  under  Gen.  Josiah  Harmar  in  the
northwest. He  became  major  of  cavalry,  5  March,

1792,  and  adjutant  and  ins{>ector  of  the  army  in
F'ebruary,  1793. After  his  resignation  on  17  July,

1793,  he  traded  with  the  West  Indies,  and  sul)se-
quently  embarked  for  France  to  enter  its  military
service,  after  which  nothing  more  was  heard  of  him.

Rl'DORF,  Cornells  van.  South  American  art-
ist, b.  in  Demerara  in  1769 ;  d.  in  Haarlem,  Holland,
in  1813.  He  studiotl  in  Leyden.  and  afterward  ob-
tained an  employment  in  the  administration  of
Dutch  Guiana,  but  resigned  a  few  years  later  and
devoted  himself  to  painting  the  mngniflcent  sce-
nery of  the  virgin  forest.  Among  his  works  are
"Sunset  in  a  Virgin  Forest"  (1790);  "Indian  Ija-
borers  at  the  Harvest"  (1800);  "A  Street  of  Deme-
rara" (1803);  "A  Woman  Fish -Vender"  (1804);
and  "  Moonlight  in  the  Forest "  (1809).

RUFF,  Charles  Frederick,  soldier,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  10  Oct.,  1818:  d.  there.  1  Oct.,  1885.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  militarj'  academy  in
1838,  assigned  to  the  1st  dragoons,  serveil  in  garri-
son antl  frontier  duty  in  Kansas  an<I  Iowa,  and  re-
signe<l  on  31  Dec.,  1843,  Until  lf*46  he  practised
law  in  Lilwrty,  Mo.,  and  on  18  June.  1846,  he  en-
listed for  the  war  with  Mexico  as  lieutenant-colonel
of  Missouri  volunteers,  being  made  captain  in  a
regiment  of  mounted  rifles  m  the  U.S.  army  on
7  July,  1846.  He  was  brevetted  major  for  gallant
and  meritorious  conduct  at  the  skirmish  at  San


342


RUFFIN


RUFZ  DE  LAVISON


Juan  de  los  Llanos,  1  Aug.,  1847.  and  participated
in  the  Iwttles  of  Contreras,  Molino  del  lley  (where
he  was  wounded),  and  Chapuitepec,  and  in  the  cap-
ture of  the  city  of  Mexico,  after  wiiich  he  servetl
on  frontier  duty  in  Washinfjton  territory.  In
1853-'8  he  was  sujierintendent  of  the  cavalry  re-
cruiting service,  and  in  IHS.'i  commaiidetl  the  cav-
alry-school for  practice  at  Jeflfers<in  barracks.  Mo.
He' was  made  major  of  mounted  rifles  on  30  Dec,
1856,  served  on  the  Navajo  expedition  in  1858-'9,
the  Comanche  expedition  in  1800,  and  was  the
bearer  of  despatches  to  the  war  department  in
1860-'l.  He  oecame  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d
cavalry,  10  June.  1861,  was  mustering  and  disburs-
ing officer  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  from  15  April,
1861,  till  29  April,  1863,  acting  inspector-general
of  the  Department  of  the  Susquehanna  from  29
June  till  30  Sept.,  18613,  and  retired  from  active
service,  owing  to  impaired  health,  on  30  March,

1864.  having  mustered  into  service  more  than
50,000  volunteers.  He  was  brevettcd  colonel  and
brigadier-general.  U.  S.  army,  on  13  March,  1865,
for  faithful  and  meritorious  services  in  recruit-
ing the  armies  of  the  United  States.  From  1868
till  1870  he  served  as  professor  of  military  science
in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.

RUFFIN,  Arinaiid  (vustave  (rew-fang),  French
explorer,  b.  in  Landerneau  in  1731 ;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, La.,  in  1789.  He  entered  the  colonial  ad-
ministration in  early  life,  and  held  offices  in  St.
Lucia,  Martinique,  and  Santo  Domingo.  In  1777
he  was  king's  deputy-lieutenant  at  Cayenne,  and  in
1782  was  in  charge  of  the  administration  of  Dutch
Guiana,  which  had  been  retaken  from  the  English.
After  the  conclusion  of  peace  he  set  out  on  a  voy-
age of  exploration  through  the  basins  of  Amazon
and  Orinoco  rivers,  and  during  a  sojourn  of  thirty-
two  months  made  a  valuable  collection  of  speci-
mens in  natural  history.  Toward  the  beginning
of  1789  he  was  sent  to  explore  the  upper  basin  of
Mississippi  river,  but  he  died  in  New  Orleans  of
yellow  fever  a  few  days  after  his  arrival  in  that
place.  His  works  include  "  Tableau  statistique  et
economique  des  Guianes  "  (Paris.  1783) ;  "  Voyage  k
travers  les  deserts  de  rAmazonie"(1787);  "Quinze
mois  sur  Ics  bords  de  I'Orenoque  "  (1787) ;  "  Choix
de  plantes  et  d'insectes  pen  connus  des  Guianes
et  du  Bresil"  (1788);  and  "Observations  sur  les
cannelier  de  la  Guiane  "  (1788).

RUFFIN,  Edninnd  (ruf-fin),  agriculturist,  b.  in
Prince  George  county,  Va..  5  Jan.,  1794;  d.  on  his
estate  of  Redmoor.  in  Amelia  county,  Va.,  15  June,

1865.  In  1810-'12  he  attended  William  and  Mary
college.  He  served  in  the  legislature,  was  secretary
of  the  state  board  of  agriculture,  agricultural  sur-
veyor of  South  Carolina,  for  many  years  was  presi-
dent of  the  Virginia  agricultural  society,  and  was
the  discoverer  of  the  value  of  marl  as  a  fertilizer
of  poor  soil,  by  the  use  of  which  millions  of  dollars
were  added  to  the  value  of  the  real  estate  of  east-
ern Virginia.  He  was  a  state-rights  man  and  a
secessionist,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Palmetto
guard  of  South  Carolina.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  went  to  South  Carolina,  and,  by  order
of  Gen.  Beauregard,  his  company  was  ordered  to
open  fire  on  Fort  Sumter,  and  as  the  oldest  mem-
ber he  was  selected  by  his  comrades  to  fire  the  first
gun,  14  April,  1861.  He  shot  himself  because  he
was  unwilling  to  live  under  the  U.  S.  government.
Among  other  agricultuml  papers  he  edited  the
"Farmer's  Register "  from  1833  till  1842,  and  he
also  pjiblished  "  Essay  on  Calcareous  Manures "
(Richmond,  1831);  "  Essay  on  Agricultural  Educa-
tion" (1833);  "Anticipations  of  the  Future  to
serve  as  Lessons  for  the  Present  Time  "  (1860) ;  and


edited  "  The  Westover  Manuscripts,  containing  the
History  of  the  Dividing-Line  betwixt  Virginia  and
North  Carolina;  a  Journev  to  the  I^nd  of  Eden,
A.  I).  1783;  and  a  Progress  to  the  Mines,"  by
William  Byrd,  of  Westover  (Petersburg,  1841 ;  2d
ed..  2  vols..  Albany,  1866).

RUFFIN,  (jeorge  Lewis,  lawyer,  b.  in  Rich-
mond, Va.,  16  Dec,  1834 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  19
Nov.,  1886.  He  was  of  African  descent,  but  of  free
parentage,  and  was  educated  at  the  public  schools
m  Boston.  He  became  a  barljer,  studied  law,  and
after  graduation  at  Harvanl  in  1869  practised  with
success  in  Boston,  served  in  the  legislature  as  a
Republican,  and  was  appwinted  by  Gov.  Benjamin
F.  Butler  judge  of  the  municipal  court  in  the
Charlestown  district  in  1883,  being  the  only  colored
justice  that  held  office  in  New  England.

RUFFIN,  Thomas,  jurist,  b.  in  King  and  Queen
county,  Va.,  17  Nov.,  1787;  d.  in  Hillsboro',  N.  C,
15  Jan.,  1870.  After  graduation  at  Princeton  in
1805  he  studied  law,  and  removed  to  Hillsboro',
N.  C,  in  1807.  He  served  in  the  legislature  in
1813-'16,  becoming  speaker  in  the  latter  year,  was
jud^e  of  the  supreme  court  in  1816-'18,  and  elected
again  from  1825.  and  was  chief  justice  of  the  state
supreme  court  from  1829  till  1852,  and  again  in
18o6-'8.  after  which  he  served  as  presiding  judge  of
the  county  court.  He  was  opposed  to  nullification
in  1832  and  to  secession  in  1860,  but  voted  for  the
ordinance  of  secession  in  the  convention.  He  was
a  delegate  to  the  Peace  conjjress  that  met  in  Wash-
ington in  1861.  The  University  of  North  Carolina
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1834.

RUFFNER,  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Page  coun-
ty, Va..  19  Jan.,  1789;  d.  in  Maiden,  Kanawha  co.,
Va.,  17  Dec,  1861.  His  father  removed  to  the  val-
ley of  the  Great  Kanawha,  where  he  bought  large
tracts  of  land,  and  was  one  of  the  first  to  manufac-
ture salt  there.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Wash-
ington college,  Va.,  in  1814,  studied  theology,  was
licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  Lexington  in  1819,
and  held  various  pastorates  in  the  vicinity.  He
was  professor  at  Washington  college  (now  Wash-
ington and  Lee  university)  from  1819  till  1837,  and
its  president  from  1837  till  1848,  when  he  resigned
and  retired  to  his  farm.  The  degree  of  D.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  Princeton  in  1838  and
that  of  LL.  D.  by  Washington  in  1849.  He  was  the
author  of  a  "  Discourse  upon  the  Duration  of  Fu-
ture Punishment "  (Richmond,  1823) :  "  Inaugural
Address"  (Lexington,  1837) ;  "  Judith  Bensaadi,  a
Romance "(1840);  "The  Fathers  of  the  Desert,  or
an  Account  of  the  Origin  and  Practice  of  Monk-
ery "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1850) ;  and  several  dis-
courses, among  which  was  an  address  against  slfk-
verv,  known  as  the  "  Ruffner  Pamphlet ' (1847).

RUFZ  DE  LAVISON,  ^tlenne  (roofs).  West
Indian  physician,  b.  in  St.  Pierre,  Martinique,  14
Jan.,  1806.  He  studied  medicine  in  Paris,  was  ad-
mitted among  the  pupils  of  the  Hotel  Dieu  hospi-
tal, and  in  1835  obtained  his  diploma  as  doctor.
In  1836  he  was  sent  by  the  government  to  Mar-
seilles to  inquire  into  the  means  of  checking  an
epidemic  of  Asiatic  cholera.  In  1838  he  returned
to  Martinique  to  practise  his  profession,  and  be-
came afterward  chief  surgeon  of  the  hospital  of
St,  Pierre,  and  superintendent  of  the  lunatic  asylum
of  the  colony.  He  specially  engaged  in  researches
upon  the  poisons  that  were  used  by  the  negroes  and
the  extinct  tribes  of  Carib  Indians,  and  presented
some  interesting  memoirs  to  the  French  academy
of  medicine,  which  were  printed  in  the  annals  of
that  society.  After  the  revolution  of  1848  he  was
president  of  the  state  council  of  the  colony  in
l848-'52. Returning  to  Paris  in  1856,  he  was


RUGENDAS


RUOOLRS


848


manafTcr  of  the  ZoAlof^ical  garden  of  aorlirnatatinn
in  186(>-'5,  was  i>It<ctefl  (Ieleg:at4>  of  MHrtiiiiiiiiu  to
the  colonial  i-ominittee  in  lM(J7-'70.  and  in  18*5  l»e-
oame  an  a.Hsoci»ito  ni(*int)cr  of  the  FrtMich  acailemy
of  mwUfiiu'.  Mis  works  im-ludc  "  Etudiw  histo*
rii|U(>s  ol  statisti(|iies  sur  la  |M>i)ulati()n  dc  Saint
Pierre  do  la  Martiniiiue"  (St.  Pierre.  1854):  "  M^
moire  sur  la  niaiimn  des  aliem^s  de  Saint  Pierre  do
la  Martini(|iie"  ( Purl ^  18.58);  and  "  Kn<iuete 8ur  le
Bothrops  lanceole,  ou  vipere  fer  de  lance,  le  ser-
pent de  la  Martinique"  (1800).

RtMHINUAS.  Johann  Moritz,  German  artist,
b.  in  Au^r;*l.urf;.  251  March,  1802;  d.  in  Weilheim,
WQrteniU-rf;.  2»  May,  1858.  He  devote<i  himself
mon'  partieularly  to  illustrating  with  his  pencil
the  life  and  scenery  of  Mexico  and  Stjuth  America,
where  he  travelled  at  various  times  between  1821
and  1847.  The  sketches  that  he  made  in  Brazil
were  lithogranhe<l  and  publishe<l  with  German
text  (!*aris.  1827-'3.'i),  and  his  jjortfolios  of  South
American  sketches  and  studies  were  purcha.sed  by
the  government  at  Munich.  His  oil-painting,
"Columbus  taking  Possession  of  the  New  World"
(IHr*')).  is  in  the  New  Piniikothek,  Munich.

RUUER,  Thomas  Howard,  soldier,  b.  in  Lima,
Livingston  co.,  N.  Y.,  2  April,  183;i.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1854,
assigned  to  the  engineer  corps,  and  worked  on
the  defences  of  New  Orleans,  Ija.,  but  resigned,
1  April.  1855,  and  from  1856  till  the  civil  war
practised  law  in  Janesvillc,  Wis.  He  became  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  3d  Wisconsin  regiment,  29
June,  1881.  and  its  colonel  on  20  Aug.,  and  com-
manded it  in  Maryland  and  the  Shenandoah  val-
ley till  Atigust,  1862.  after  which  he  was  in  the
northern  Virginia  and  Maryland  campaigns.  He
was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
29  Nov.,  1862,  led  a  brigade  in  the  Rappahannock
campaigns,  and  commanded  a  division  at  Gettys-
burg. In  the  summer  of  1863  he  was  in  New
York  city,  where  he  aided  in  suppressing  the
draft  riots.  He  then  guarded  the  Nashville  and
Chattanooga  railroad  in  Tennessee  till  April,  18(54,
led  a  brigade  in  Sherman's  advance  into  Georgia
till  November,  1864,  and  with  a  division  of  the
23d  corps  took  part  in  the  campaign  against
Gen.  John  B.  Hood's  army  in  Tennessee,  receiv-
ing the  brevet  of  major-general  of  volunteers,
80  Nov.,  IHM,  for  services  at  the  battle  of  i'Vunk-
lin.  He  then  organized  a  division  at  Nashville,
led  it  from  February  to  June,  1806,  in  North
Carolina,  and  then  had  charge  of  the  depart-
ment of  that  state  till  June.  1866,  when  he  was
mustennl  out.  He  accepted  a  colonelcy  in  the
regular  army,  28  July.  1866,  and  on  2  March,  1867,
was  brevetted  brigadier-general.  U.  S.  army,  for
services  at  Gettysburg.  From  January  till  July,
1868.  he  was  provisional  governor  of  (ieorgia.  and
from  1871  till  1876  he  was  superintendent  of  the
U.  S.  military  academy.  From  the  last  year  till
1878  he  was  in  charge  of  the  Department  of  the
South,  and  in  1876  Be  commanded  the  troops  dur-
ing the  trouble  in  South  Carolina  incident  to  the
claims  of  rival  state  governments.  (See  Chamber-
lain,  D.  H.)  He  then  commanded  posts  in  the  south
and  west,  and  on  19  March,  1886,  was  promoted
brigadier-general.  After  temporarily  commanding
the  Department  of  the  Missouri  in  April  and  May,
1886,  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  that  of  Dakota,
with  headquarters  at  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  where  he
is  at  present  (1KH8)  on  duty.

RU(tER,  William  Crawford,  jurist,  b.  in
Bridgewater.  Oneida  to..  N.  Y..  30  Jan..  1824.  He
was  educated  at  liridgewater  academy,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845,  and  practised


'  in  Bridgewater  and  Syracuse.  Ho  was  oounsel  for
the  defendant's  in  the  "canal-ring"  prosecutions
that  were  instituted  by  Gov.  Samuel  J.Tilden.  He
was  a  njemlKT  of  the  Democratic  national  conven-
tion in  1872,  aiul  twice  a  candidate  for  congress.
In  1876  he  was  j)resident  of  the  convention  in
Allwnv  at  which  the  .State  bar  association  was
fornuHl.  In  1882  he  wjus  electe<l  chief  judge  of  the
New  York  court  of  ap|>eals.

RUUOLES,  Benjamin, senator,  b.  in  Windham
county.  Conn.,  in  l48;{;  d.  in  St.  Clairsville,  Ohio,
2  Sept.,  1857.  He  obtained  the  means  for  acquir-
ing a  classical  e<Iucation  by  teaching  during  the
winters,  studied  law,  and  was  admitte<l  to  the  liar.
He  removed  to  Marietta,  Ohio,  and  sul>seqiiently
to  St.  Clairsville,  and  in  1810  became  president
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  for  the  third
ciri'uit.  In  1815  he  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,
and  he  served  until  18*1,  gaining  by  his  habits  of
industry  the  name  of  the  "wheel-horse  of  the
senate.'  In  185^6  he  was  chosen  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Whig  ticket.

RUGtiLES,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Barre.  Mass..
31  Jan..  1810.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1833.  entered  the  5th  infantry,
and  served  on  frontier  and  recruiting  duty  till  the
Mexican  war,  in  which,  after  his  promotion  as  cap-
tain, 18  June,  1840,  he  won  the  brevet  of  major
for  gallantry  at  Contreras  and  Chunibusco,  and
that  of  lieutenant -colonel  for  Chapultepec.  He
then  served  mostly  in  Texas  till  his  resignation  on
7  May,  1861.  for  two  years  before  which  he  had
been  on  sick  leave  of  absence.  He  then  joined  the
Confederate  army,  was  commissioned  brigadier-
general  in  the  same  year,  served  in  New  Orleans,
and  led  a  division  at  Shiloh  and  at  Baton  Rouge.
He  became  major-general  in  18(J3.  and  commanded
the  Department  of  the  Mississippi.  He  repelled
raids  on  the  northern  and  southern  borders  of  the
state  in  18()3-'4.  and  in  1865  was  commissary -gen-
eral of  prisoners.  After  the  war  he  took  charge  of
his  large  estate  near  Palafox,  Tex.,  and  also  re-
sided at  Fredericksburg,  Va.

RUGULES,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Westborough,
Mass.,  in  1790;  d.  in  Thomaston.  Me..  20  June,
1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1813.  studied
law,  and  began  to  practise  in  Skowhegan.  Me.,  but
removed  to  Thomaston  in  1818.  He  served  in  the
lower  house  of  the  legislature  in  1823-'31,  as  its
speaker  in  1825-'9  and  1831,  and  resigned  in  the
last-named  year  to  become  judge  of  the  district
court  of  the  state,  in  place  of  ^muel  E.  Smith,
who  had  been  chosen  governor.  He  was  then
chosen  U.  S.  senator  as  a  Democrat  in  place  of  Peleg
Sprague,  who  had  resigned,  and  served  fi*om  6
Feb.,  1835,  till  3  March.  1841.  He  afterward  re-
turned to  the  practice  of  law.

RTGGLES,  Samuel  Bulkley,  lawyer,  b.  in
New  Milford.  Conn..  11  April,  1800;  a.  on  Fire
island.  N.  Y.,  28  Aug.,  1881.  He  removetl  at  an
early  age  to  Poughkeepsie,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1814.  studied  law  in  the  office  of  his  father,
Philo.  who  was  surrogate  and  district  attorney  at
Poughkeepsie.  and  was  admitted  to  the  luir  in  1&21.
He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  assembly  of  1838,
and,  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  ways  and
means,  presented  a  "  Report  u|Min  the  Finances  and
Internal  Im|)rovementsof  the  State  of  New  York,"
which  led  the  state  to  enter  >ipon  a  new  {K)licy  in
its  commercial  development.  This  report  proposed
to  borrow  sums  of  money  sufficient  to  enlarge  the
Erie  canal  within  Ave  years,  and  not,  as  had  been
at  first  decided,  to  rely  upon  part  of  the  tolls  to
pay  for  the  enlargement  while  waiting  twenty
years. The  enlargement  was  not  made  at  once.


344


RUGGLES


RUGGLES


but  Mr.  Ruggles's  views,  which  were  much  assailed,
were  amply  vindicated  by  the  event.  He  was  a
commissioner  to  determine  the  route  of  the  Erie
niiiroud,  and  a  director  in  1833-'9,  a  director  and
promoter  of  the  Bank  of  commerce  in  1839,  com-
missioner of  the  Croton  aqueduct  in  1842,  dele-
gate from  the  Unit-
ed States  to  the  In-
ternational statis-
tical congresses  at
Berlin  in  1863  and
the  Hague  in  1809,
U.  S.  commission-
er to  the  Paris  ex-
position of  1867,
and  delegate  to
the  International
monetary  confer-
ence that  was  held
there.  He  laid  out
Gramercy  park,  in
the  city  of  New
C^ /7/1  Jd  ^ York,  in  1831,  gave

surrounding  prop-
erty-owners. He  also  had  a  considerable  influence
upon  shaping  Union  square,  where  he  resided,  and
he  selected  the  name  of  Lexington  avenue.  He  was
for  a  long  term  of  years  a  trustee  of  the  Astor  li-
brary, and  he  held  the  same  oflRce  in  Columbia  col-
lege from  1836  till  the  end  of  his  life.  He  was  also
a  member  of  the  Chamber  of  commerce  of  the
state  of  New  York,  and  of  the  General  convention
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  INIr.  Ruggles's
claim  to  distinction  rests  chiefly  upon  his  canal
policy,  and  the  steadfast  attention  that  he  con-
tinued to  give  to  the  Erie  canal,  both  as  a  private
citizen  during  his  life  and  as  canal  commissioner,
in  which  office  he  served  from  1840  till  1842,  and
again  in  the  year  1858.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1859. Among  his  numerous  printed

fapers  are  •'  Report  upon  Finances  and  Internal
mprovements"  (1838);  "Vindication  of  Canal
Policy "  (1849) ;  "  Defence  of  Improvement  of
Navigable  Waters  bv  the  General  Government"
(1852) ;  "  Law  of  Burial "  (1858) ;  "  Report  on  State
of  Canals  in  1858"  (1859);  reports  on  the  Statis-
tical congress  at  Berlin  (1863),  the  Monetary  con-
ference at  Paris  (1867),  and  the  Statistical  congress
at  the  Hague  (1871) ;  "  Report  to  the  Chairman  of
the  Committee  on  Canals"  (1875);  and  a  "Con-
solidated Table  of  National  Progress  in  Cheapening
Food  "  (1880). — His  cousin,  Charles  Herman,  ju-
rist, b.  in  Litchfield  county.  Conn.,  10  Feb.,  1789 ;
d.  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  16  June,  1865,  received
a  good  education,  studied  law,  and  began  practice
in  Kingston,  N.  Y.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New
York  legislature  in  1820,  and  was  elected  immedi-
ately afterward  to  congress,  serving  in  1821-'3.
He  then  served  as  a  judge  of  the  Dutchess  county
circuit  court,  was  again  in  the  legislature,  and  in
1853  became  a  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals  of
the  state  of  New  York,  but  resigned  on  30  Aug.,
1855. — Charles  Herman's  nephew.  Oeorge  David,
soldier,  b.  in  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  11  Sept.,  1833,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1855,
and  assigned  to  the  mounted  riflemen.  He  served
on  frontier  duty,  including  three  Indian  expedi-
tions, till  the  civil  war,  and  in  1858  was  acting  ad-
jutant-general of  the  Department  of  the  West,  at
St.  Louis.  In  July.  1861,  he  was  made  assistant
adjutant-general,  with  the  staff  rank  of  captain,
and  assigned  to  special  duty  in  the  war  department
in  the  organization  of  volunteer  forces. He  be-


came colonel  on  the  staCF  on  28  June,  1862,  was
chief  of  staff  of  the  Army  of  Virginia  in  Gen.  John
Pone's  campaign,  and  continued  to  serve  as  an
additional  aide-de-camp  throughout  the  war.  some-
times with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  of  which  he
was  adjutant-general  from  February  till  June,
1865,  and  sometimes  in  Washington.  He  took  part
in  the  battles  of  Antietam  and  South  Mountain,
and  the  assault  and  capture  of  Petersburg.  On  9
April,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  for  services  during  the  operations  that
resulted  in  the  fall  of  Richmond  anu  surrender  of
the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  under  Gen.  Itobert
E.  Lee,  and  he  was  also  given  brevet  commissions
in  the  regular  army  to  date  from  13  March,  in-
cluding that  of  brigadier-general.  Since  the  war
he  has  served  as  aidjutant-general  of  various  de-
partments, and  on  15  June,  1880,  he  attained  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.

RUGGLES,  Timothy,  lawyer,  b.  in  Rochester,
Mass.,  20  Oct.,  1711;  d.  in  Wilmot,  Nova  Scotia,
4  Aug.,  1795.  He  was  a  son  of  Rev.  Timothy  Rug-
bies, of  Rochester.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvani
m  1732,  and  began  the  practice  of  law  in  Rochester,
but  removed  to  Sandwich  about  1737,  and  thence
to  Hardwick  in  1753  or  1754.  At  Sandwich  he
opened  a  tavern,  and  personally  attended  the  bar
and  stable,  while  continuing  to  practise  his  pro-
fession. He  was  one  of  the  best  lawyers  in  the
province  of  Massachusetts,  and  before  his  removal
to  Hardwick  the  principal  antagonist  of  James
Otis,  senior,  in  causes  of  importance,  as  at  a  later
period  he  was  the  chief  opponent  of  James  Otis,
junior,  in  contests  in  the  general  court.  In  1757
he  was  commissioned  a  judge  of  the  court  of  com-
mon pleas  of  Worcester  county,  and  on  21  Jan.,
1762,  he  became  its  chief  justice.  The  latter  office
he  held  until  the  Revolution.  He  was  also  ap-
pointed, 23  Feb.,  1762,  a  special  justice  of  the  su-
perior court  of  the  province.  Mr.  Ruggles  was
a  representative  in  the  general  court  from  Roches-
ter in  1736,  from  Sandwich  for  eight  years  between
1739  and  1752,  and  from  Hardwick  fifteen  years
between  1754  and  1770.  He  was  speaker  of  the
house  in  1762  and  1763.  In  1765  he  was  chosen
one  of  the  delegates  from  Massachusetts  to  the
stamp-act  congress  of  that  year  in  New  York,  and
was  elected  its  president,  but  refused  to  sign  the
addresses  and  petitions  that  were  sent  by  that  body
to  Great  Britam,  and  was  censured  for  the  refusal
by  the  general  court  of  Massachusetts  and  repri-
manded in  his  place  from  the  speaker's  chair.  Nine
years  later  he  accepted  an  appointment  as  manda-
mus councillor,  and  took  the  oath  of  office,  16  Aug.,
1774.  Ruggles  rendered  service  in  the  French  w^r
that  began  in  1753  and  ended  in  1763.  He  had
the  rank  of  colonel  in  the  expedition  of  Sir  William
Johnson  against  Crown  Point  in  1755,  and  in  the
battle  of  Lake  George,  where  the  French,  under
Baron  Dieskau,  met  with  a  signal  defeat,  he  was
next  in  command  to  Johnson.  In  1758-'60  he
served  as  brigadier-general  under  Lord  Amherst,
and  accompanied  that  general  in  his  expedition
against  Canada.  In  recognition  of  his  services  a
grant  was  made  to  him  by  the  general  court  of
Massachusetts  in  January,  1764,  of  a  farm  in  Prince-
ton. A  few  vears  later  he  was  appointed  a  surveyor-
general  of  the  king's  forests  in  the  province,  and  in
the  northern  part  of  Nova  Scotia.  Lucius  R.  Paige,
who  in  his  "History  of  Hardwick"  (Boston,  1883)
has  given  the  best  and  latest  account  of  Gen.  Rug-
gles, writes  that  he  was  "one  of  the  most  promi-
nent citizens  of  Massachusetts,  and  indeed  of  New
England,  in  both  military  and  civil  affairs."  In
the  years  that  immediately  preceded  the  Revolu-


RUGOLES


RUM FORD


345


tion,  Timothy  Rugf^les  hjul  Ijoen  the  lea<lerof  the
kiiij^'s  ^mrty  iu  the  jeeneral  court;  and  when  the
British  troops  left  Boston  in  1775  he  went  with
them,  but  tliere  is  no  evidence,  however,  that  he
took  an  active  part  in  the  war  airainst  his  country-
men. It  has  been  said  of  him  tnat  "he  applauded
the  spirit  which  le<l  to  the  Revolution,  but  rcfjanl-
e<l  the  violent  efforts  practised  to  efTcct  the  separa-
tion of  the  provinces  from  the  mother  country  as
impolitic  and  pri'inature."  Gen.  Rugbies 's  i>roj>-
erty  was  conflseated  by  the  government  f)f  >lassa-
chusetts,  but  Gnvit  Britain  gave  him  land  in  Nova
Scotia,  and  after  the  close  of  the  Itcvolutionary
war  he  settleil  there  and  8|)ent  the  remainder  of
his  life  in  agricultural  pursuits.  In  his  new  home,
as  before  in  Hardwick,  he  rendered  lasting  ser-
vice to  his  neighl)ors  by  the  use  of  scientific  meth-
ods in  farming  and  by  the  intrtniuction  of  choice
breeds  of  cattle  and  horses.  He  was  more  than
six  feet  in  height,  careful  in  his  dress,  and  had  an
expressive  countenance.  He  was  commanding  and
dignifie<l  in  ap{M.>arance  and  fearless  in  demeanor.
His  wit  was  ready  and  brilliant,  his  mind  was
clear,  comprehensive,  and  pMjnetrating.  He  was  a
forcible  and  c-onvincing  public  sjwaker.  Though
abstemious,  he  was  at  the  same  time  profuse  in
hospitality.  As  a  military  officer  he  was  noted  for
cotti  bravery  and  excellence  of  judgment,  as  well
as  for  knowledge  of  the  art  of  warfare.  '*  There
were  few  men  in  the  province,"  wrote  Joseph  Wil-
lard,  ■'  more  justly  distinguished  than  Ruggles,  and
few  who  were  more  severely  dealt  with  in  the  bitter
controversies  preceding  the  Revolution."  "  Had  he
been  so  fortunate,"  wrote  Christopher  C.  Baldwin,
"as  to  have  embraced  the  popular  sentiments  of
the  time,  there  is  no  doubt  he  would  have  been
ranked  among  the  leading  characters  of  the  Revo-
lution." See  an  article  by  Christopher  C.  Baldwin
on  Timothv  Ruggles  in  the  "  Worcester  Magazine"
(1826),  and  addresses  before  the  Members  of  the
bar  of  Worcester  county,  Mass.,  bv  Joseph  Wil-
lard  (1829),  Kmory  Washburn  (1850),  and  Dwight
Foster  (1878);  also  Fimory  Washburn's  "Sketches
of  the  Judicial  History  of  Massachusetts  from  1G30
to  the  Revolution  in  1775"  (Boston,  1840).

RUGGLES,  >Villiam,  educator,  b.  in  Roches-
ter, Mass.,  5  Sent.,  1797 :  d.  in  Washington,  I).  C,  10
Sept.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1820,
in  1822  became  a  tutor  in  Columbian  college,  D.  C,
and  in  1827  was  advanced  to  the  chair  of  mathe-
matics and  natural  philosophy.  He  remained  in
this  office  until  his  death,  completing  the  term  of
flfty-five  years  as  teacher  in  one  institution.  Prof.
Ruggles  was  a  generous  contributor  to  charitable
objects,  espi'cially  those  of  the  Baptist  denomina-
tion. To  Karen  theological  school,  in  Burmah,  he
gave  during  his  life  $15,000,  and  at  his  death  be
left  it  a  legacy  of  $25,000.  He  received  from  Brown
the  honorary  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1852.

RULISOX  Nelson  Somervllle,  P.E.  bishop,
b.  in  Carthage,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  V..  24  April,  1842.
His  early  education  and  training  were  obtaineil  at
home  and  at  the  Weslevan  academy,  Gouverneur,
N.  Y.  He  entered  the  Episcopal  general  theologi-
cal seminary.  New  York  city,  was  graduated  in
1866,  and  ortlainwl  deacon  in  Grace  church,  Utiea,
N.  Y.,  27  May,  186(J,  by  Bishop  Coxe,  and  priest,
in  the  Church  of  the  Annunciation,  New  York  citv,
30  Nov.,  1866,  by  Bishop  Horatio  Potter.  The  first
year  of  his  ministry  he  serve<l  as  assistant  minister
in  the  Church  of  the  Annunciation,  New  York  city.
In  1867  he  became  rector  of  Zion  church,  Morris,
N.  Y.  Three  years  later  he  went  to  Jersey  City,
founded  and  built  St.  John's  free  church,  and  la-
bored there  for  nearly  seven  years. He  accepted  a


call  to  St.  Paul's  church,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in  1876,
an«l  held  that  i>ost  for  eight  years.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,  in
1879,  was  clerical  deputy  fn>m  Ohio  in  the  general
conventions  of  1880  and  188!},  and  pre*iident  of  the
standing  committee  of  the  diocese  of  Ohio  for  six
years.  He  was  elected  assistant  bisliop  f»f  central
IVnnsylvania  in  the  summer  of  1HK4,  nnd  was  con-
.secraled  in  St.  Paul's  church.  Cleveland,  28  Oct.,
1884.  Bishop  Rulis<m  has  published  several  ser-
mons that  he  has  preached  on  s[M>cial  tx-casions,
and  contributed  freely  t*^  current  religious  litera-
ture in  verse  as  well  as  prose.  He  wrote  also  a
"History  of  St.  Paul's  Church,  Cleveland,  Ohio"
(Cleveland,  1H77).

RUMFORI).  Benjamin  Thompnon.  Count,
scientist,  b.  in  Woburn.  Mass..  26  March.  175ii;  d.
in  Auteuil,  near  Paris,  France.  21  Aug.,  1814.  He
rec-eived  a  common-school  education  and  excelled
in  mathematics  and
mechanics.  In  1706
he  was  apprenticed
to  John  Appleton,  a
merchant  in  Salem,
and  continued  his
studies  by  devoting
his  leisure  to  the
study  of  algebra,
trigonometry,  and
astronomy,  so  that
at  the  age  of  fifteen
he  was  able  to  cal-
culate an  eclipse.
Later  he  Ijegan  the
study  of  medicine
under  Dr.  John  Hay
in  Woburn,  and  at-  ^—r'/?

tended  a few lee-  /hay^y.^ ^^^^t^>__ ^  v^>.^_
tures  at  Cambridge,  ^^^ </;^U>r,V^.>^

but  spent  most  of

his  time  in  manufacturing  surgical  instruments.
Subsequently  he  returned  to  lioston.  ami  there
engaged  as  a  clerk  in  the  dry-goods  business.
The  depressed  condition  of  affairs  soon  threw  him
out  of  employment,  and,  with  his  friend  Loammi
Baldwin,  he  attended  the  lectures  in  ex|K'rimental
philosophy  that  were  delivered  by  Prof.  John  Win-
throp  at  Harvard.  The  experiments  were  re|>eated
by  the  two  students  with  improvised  apparatus  on
their  return  from  the  lectures.  He  also  taught  for
a  short  time  in  Bradford,  Mass.,  and  later  in  Rum-
ford  (now  Concord),  N.  H.  In  1771  he  married
Sarah  Walker  Rolfe.  a  widow  of  ainple  means,
about  thirteen  years  his  senior.  Gov.  John  Went-
worth.  of  New  Hampshire,  recognizing  his  ability,

fave  him  a  commission  of  major  in  one  of  the  New
lampshire  regiments ;  but  this  act  met  with  oppo-
sition from  tnose  who  resented  the  appointment
of  a  younger  man  over  their  heads.  This  feeling  of
hostility  increased  as  the  active  measures  of  the
Revolution  approached,  and  knowledge  of  the  in-
tention of  tarnng  and  feathering  him  on  account
of  his  supposed  Tory  inclinations  caused  his  abrupt
departure  from  Concord  in  Noveml)er,  1774.  leav-
ing his  wife  and  infant  daughter.  He  matle  his
way  to  Boston,  where  his  military  feelings  led  to
his  intimate  relations  with  Gen.  Thomas  Gage.  It
is  said  that  after  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill  he  was
favorably  introduced  to  George  Washington,  who
had  just  assumed  command  of  the  American  army,
and  who  would  have  given  him  a  commission  in
the  artillery  but  for  the  opposition  of  the  New
Hampshire  officers.  In  March,  1775,  he  returned
to  Woburn,  where  he  was  arrestwl,  and,  after  a
public  trial,  was  not  fully  acquitted,  although  not


346


RUM FORD


RUM FORD


condemned.  Unwilling  to  remain  in  obscurity  at
home  under  a  cloud  of  suspicion,  he  determined
to  seek  a  field  of  activity  elsewhere.  Turning  his
property  into  money  as  far  as  possible  he  left  his
family  in  October,  1775,  and  they  did  not  hear  from
him  again  until  after  the  close  of  the  war. It  ap-

fiears  that  he  was  received  on  board  of  the  British
rigate  "  Scarborough "  in  Newport,  and  thence
taken  to  Boston,  where,  on  the  evacuation  of  the
city,  he  was  given  despatches  from  Gen.  William
Howe  to  Lord  George  Germaine,  secretary  of  state
for  the  colonies,  llis  behavior  so  impressed  the
minister  that  he  was  appointed  in  tne  colonial
office.  He  directed  immediate  attention  to  mili-
tary affairs,  improved  the  accoutrements  of  the
horse-guards,  continued  his  experiments  on  gun-
powder, and  improved  the  construction  of  fire-
arms. These  services  received  the  approbation  of
his  superiors,  and  in  1780  he  was  appointed  an
under-secretary  of  state.  Meanwhile  he  investi-
gated various  scientific  subjects,  including  the  co-
hesion of  bodies,  a  paper  on  which  he  submitted  to
the  Iloyal  society,  where,  in  1779,  he  was  elected  a
fellow.'  In  1781,  after  the  retirement  of  Lord
George  Germaine.  he  returned  to  this  country  and
raised  in  New  York  the  "  King's  American  dra-
goons," of  which  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant-
colonel  on  24  Feb.,  1783,  and  was  stationed  chiefly
on  Long  Island,  where  he  built  a  fort  in  Hunting-
ton. Some  authorities  say  that  he  served  in  the
south,  and  at  one  time  defeated  Gen.  Francis  Mar-
ion's men,  destroying  their  stores.  Before  the
close  of  the  war  he  returned  to  England,  and  on
the  establishment  of  peace  he  obtained  leave  of
absence  to  visit  the  continent  with  the  intention
of  offering  his  services  to  the  Austrian  govern-
ment, which  was  then  at  war  with  Turkey.  At
Strasburg  he  met  Prince  Maximilian  of  Deux-
Ponts,  who  furnished  him  with  an  introduction  to
his  cousin,  the  elector  of  Bavaria.  Col.  Thomp-
son was  received  at  Munich  with  consideration,
and  invited  to  enter  the  Bavarian  service,  but  he
refused  to  accept  any  offer  until  he  had  visited
Vienna.  Finding  that  the  war  was  near  its  close,
he  agreed  to  enter  the  service  of  the  elector,  pro-
vided that  he  could  obtain  the  consent  of  the  Eng-
lish authorities.  In  order  to  secure  the  requisite
permission  he  returned  to  England,  where  his  res-
ignation of  the  command  of  the  regiment  was  ac-
ceptetl,  and  he  was  permitted  to  retain  the  half-
pay  of  his  rank  until  his  death.  The  honor  of
Knighthood  was  also  conferred  on  him.  Near  the
end  of  1784  he  returned  to  Munich,  where  the
reigning  prince,  Charles  Theodore,  gave  him  a  con-
fidential appointment  with  the  rank  of  aide-de-
camp and  chamberlain.  He  reorganized  the  entire
military  establishment  of  Bavaria,  introducing  a
simpler  code  of  tactics  and  a  new  system  of  disci-
pline, also  providing  industrial  schools  for  the  sol-
diers' children,  and  improving  the  construction  and
mode  of  marfufacture  of  arms  and  ordnance.  Col.
Thompson  devoted  himself  to  various  other  re-
forms, such  as  the  improvement  of  the  dwellings
of  the  working  class,  providing  for  them  a  better
education  and  organizmg  homes  of  industry.  But
his  greatest  reform  was  the  suppression  of  the  sys-
tem of  beggary  that  was  then  prevalent  in  Bavaria.
Beggars  and  vagabonds,  the  larger  part  of  whom
were  also  thieves,  swarmed  over  the  country,  espe-
cially in  the  larger  towns.  He  removed  them  from
the  cities,  provided  them  with  work,  and  made
them  self-supporting.  For  his  services  he  was
made  a  member  of  the  council  of  state,  and  suc-
cessively major-general,  lieutenant-general,  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  general  staff,  minister  of


war,  and  superintendent  of  the  police  of  the  elec-
torate, and  he  was  also  for  a  short  time  chief  of  the
regency  that  exeivised  sovereignty  during  the  ab-
sence of  the  elector.  He  received  decorations  from
Poland,  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Acatle-
mies  of  Munich  and  Mannheim.  In  1790  the  elec-
tor, becoming  vicar-general  of  the  empire  during
the  interval  between  the  death  of  Joseph  1 1.  and
the  coronation  of  Leopold  II.,  availed  nimself  of
the  prerogatives  of  that  office  to  make  him  a  count
of  tne  Holy  Roman  empire,  on  which  occasion  he
chose  as  his  title  the  name  of  Rumford,  the  town
in  New  Hampshire  where  he  had  married.  While
engaged  with  his  various  reforms  in  connection
with  the  army  he  was  led  to  study  domestic  econ-
omy. He  investigated  the  properties  and  manage-
ment of  heat,  and  the  amount  of  it  that  was  pro-
duced by  the  combustion  of  different  kinds  of  fuel,
by  means  of  a  calorimeter  of  his  own  invention.
By  reconstructing  the  fire-place  he  so  improved  the
methods  of  warming  apartments  and  cooking  food
that  a  saving  in  fuel  of  about  one  half  was  effected.
His  studies  of  cookery  still  rank  high.  He  im-
proved the  construction  of  stoves,  coolcing-ranges,
coal-grates,  and  chimneys,  and  showed  that  the  non-
conducting power  of  cloth  is  due  to  the  air  that  is
inclosed  in  its  fibers.  Among  the  other  benefits  in-
troduced by  him  into  Bavaria  were  improved  breeds
of  horses  and  cattle,  which  he  raised  on  a  farm  that
he  reclaimed  from  waste  ground  in  the  vicinity  of
Munich,  and  changed  it  mto  a  park,  where,  after
his  leaving  Bavaria,  a  monument  was  erected  in  his
honor.  His  health  failed  under  the  pressure  of
these  undertakings,  and  he  obtained  leave  of  ab-
sence in  1795.  After  visiting  Italy  he  spent  some
time  in  England,  and  while  in  that  country  he  was
invited  by  the  secretary  of  state  for  Ireland  to  visit
its  charitable  institutions  with  a  view  of  remedying
their  evils  and  introducing  reforms.  The  war  be-
tween France  and  Austria  caused  his  return  to
Bavaria,  where  he  maintained  its  neutrality,  al-
though the  country  was  overrun  with  the  soldiers
of  both  nations,  llis  health  again  failing,  he  was
obliged  to  leave  Munich,  and  he  was  sent  to  Eng-
land as  minister  of  Bavaria,  but,  being  an  English
subject,  he  could  not  be  received  in  that  capacity
at  the  English  court.  But  he  remained  in  Eng-
land as  the  private  agent  of  Bavaria,  and  in  1799
was  chiefly  instrumental  in  founding  the  Royal  in-
stitution, in  which  he  caused  Sir  Humphry  Davy
to  be  called  to  the  chair  of  chemistry.  About  this
time  he  was  invited  to  return  to  the  United  States,
but,  although  disposed  to  do  so,  he  finally  removed
to  Paris  in  1802,  and  there  married,  in  1804,  the
widow  of  the  great  French  chemist  Lavoisier,  his
first  wife  having  died  on  19  Jan.,  1792,  after  lieing
separated  from  him  sixteen  years.  The  remainder
of  his  life  was  spent  at  the  villa  of  his  wife's  former
husband  in  Auteuil,  busily  engaged  in  scientific  re-
searches. His  greatest  achievements  in  this  direc-
tion were  on  the  nature  and  effects  of  heat,  with
which  his  name  will  ever  be  associated.  The  work
that  has  b)een  done  to  demonstrate  experimentally
the  doctrine  of  the  "  correlation  of  forces  "  was  be-
gun by  him  in  a  series  of  experiments  that  was
suggested  by  the  heat  evolved  in  boring  cannon.
Count  Rumford  gave  |l.'>,000  to  the  Amencan  acad-
emy of  arts  and  sciences,  and  a  similar  amount  to
the  Royal  society  of  London  to  found  prizes  bear-
ing his  name  for  the  most  important  discoveries  in
light  and  heat,  and  the  first  award  of  the  latter  was
made  to  himself.  The  greater  part  of  his  private
collection  of  philosophical  apparatus  and  speci-
mens, and  models  of  his  own  mvention,  were  be-
queathed to  the  Royal  institution,  and  he  also  left


rumiSagui


RUMSEY


347


to  IlHrviinl  tho  funds  with  which  wa»  founded  the
Ruiuford  urufetiiionhip  of  thu  phyt«ical  and  inatho-
llHttif»»l  sciences  as  a[)plied  tu  tiu*  uavf ul  arts,  which
was  established  in  October.  IHIO.  He  nublishtHl
the  results  of  his  investipitiunH  in  {Mimpniets,  and
essajs  in  French,  English,  or  (iornian,  many  of
which  were  issutnl  as  "  hijaays.  Political.  Px-onomi-
cal,  and  Philosophical"  (JJ  vols.,  Ijondon,  1797;
vol.  iv.,  180*2),  .See  "  Life  of  Count  Kumfortl,"  by
James  Ren  wick,  in  .Sparks's  "American  Hit)j;ni-
phy"  (lioston,  184-*)),  and  "  Rumford's  Complete
Works,"  with  a  "  Memoir  of  Sir  Benjamin  Thomj)-
son,"  by  (n-orjje  H  Kills,  published  by  the  Ameri-
can aca<lomy  of  art-s  and  sciences  (5  vols., -Boston,
187«).— llis'daujfhter,  Sarah,  Countess  of  Rum-
ford,  b.  in  Omconl.  N,  H.,  18  Oct..  1774;  d.  there.
2  I)oc.,  18o2.  is  said  to  have  l>een  the  first  Ameri-
can to  inherit  and  bear  the  title  of  countess.  She
remHine<l  in  this  country  after  her  father  went  to
Encland,  but  in  January,  1796,  she  rei(iine«l  him
in  Ixindon  at  his  recpiest.  In  1797  she  was  re-
ceived by  the  Bavarian  elector  as  countess,  and
was  permitted  to  receive  one  half  her  father's  pen-
sion, with  the  privilege  of  residing  wherever  she
chose.  Subsequent  to  the  death  of  the  count  in
1814,  she  divided  her  time  l)etween  London  and  her
house  in  Brompton,  making  nrotracted  visits  to
Paris  of  two  and  three  vears'  uuration,  and  to  her
residence  in  Conconl.  With  her  father  she  estab-
lished the  Rolfe  and  Rumford  asylums  in  Concord,
N.  IL,  for  the  poor  and  nee<ly,  particularly  mother-
less girls.  She  bequeathed  flo.OOO  to  the  New
Hampshire  asvlum  for  the  insane,  and  f  2,000  each
to  the  Concord  female  charitable  society,  the  Bos-
ton children's  friend  society,  and  the  Fatherless
and  widow's  scxnety  of  Bostt)n.

RU.MISA(«UI  (roo-meen-yah-ghe),  Peruvian
soUlier,  b.  in  (^uito  in  the  latter  half  of  the  15th
century;  d.  in  1534.  He  was  a  son  of  one  of  the
princi[»al  generals  of  a  native  prince,  and  entered
the  military  service  of  the  conqueror,  Huaina
Capac,  and  of  his  son,  Atahualpa  (q.  v.).  At  the
time  of  the  invasion  «f  Pizarroin  1532,  Rumiilagui
was  marching  with  5,000  men  to  re-enforce  the
army  that  was  sent  against  Cuzco,  and  advised
Atahualpa  not  to  receive  the  Spaniards  in  Caja-
marca,  but,  seeing  that  his  advice  was  unheeded,
he  retired  with  his  army  to  Quito,  thus  escaping
the  defeat  of  the  Peruvians,  16  Nov.,  1532.  In
Quito,  under  pretence  of  electing  a  regency,  he
summoned  to  the  roval  palace  the  children,  broth-
ers, and  principal  ofticers  of  the  emf)eror,  and  had
them  all  munlered  during  a  Iwnquet  that  was
^iven  in  their  honor.  Then,  proclaiming  himself
independent,  he  becan  a  reign  of  terror  in  Quito.
When,  in  1533,  Sebastian  de  Benalcazar,  at  the
request  of  the  Caflari  Indians,  marched  against
RumiHagui,  the  latter  made  a  heroic  resistance  for
a  long  time  in  the  mountain-passes  that  lead  to
the  capital.  In  Tiocojas  a  twttle  was  fought,
which  resulted  in  favor  of  the  Indians,  but  in  the
night  an  eruption  of  the  volcano  Cotopaxi  began,
which  it  hmi  been  predictetl  by  the  priests  would
be  fatal  to  the  empire  of  Quito,  ana  the  Indian
army  dispersed.  Ruminagui,  unable  to  defend  the
capital,  set  fire  to  the  ])alaceand  the  city,  and  dur-
ing the  confusion  escajjed  to  the  mountains  with
the  emperor's  treasures,  but  was  hotly  pursued  by
the  Spanianls,  and.  as  the  Indians  despised  and
hated  him,  they  revealed  his  retreat,  and  he  was
kille<l  toward  the  Ix'ginning  of  1534.

RUMPLE,  Jethro,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cabarrus
county,  N.  C.  10  March,  1827.  He  worked  on  a
farm,'and  studied  at  intervals  till  he  was  eighteen
years  old,  when  he  began  to  prepare  for  college,


teaching  to  defray  his  expenses.  He  was  ^radu-
ate<l  at  I)avid^ton  college  m  1800,  studied  in  the
theological  seminary  at  Columbia,  S.  ('..  and  was
ordaineii  to  the  Presbyterian  ministry  in  1K57.
After  holding  [lastonUes  in  .Me<'klenburg  county,
he  was  calle<l  in  1860  to  Salisbury,  N.  ('.,  where  fie
has  since  remained.  The  I'niversitv  of  North
Carolina  gave  him  the  degree  of  I >,"!).  in  1882.
Dr.  Rumple  has  taken  an  active  part  in  the  coun-
cils of  his  chuR'h.  and  publishtnl  "  History  of  Row-
an County.  N.  ('."(Salisbury.  N.C.,  1881),  and  "  His-
tory of  the  First  Fifty  Years  of  Davidson  C«illege"
(lialeigh,  1888).  His"  History  of  Presbyterian  Lsm  in
North  Carolina"  is  now  (188N)ap|K-aringasaserial.

Rl'MSEY,  Benjamin,  Continental  congress-
man, b.  alxmt  1730.  His  grandfather,  Charles,
emigrated  from  Wales  to  this  country  al)out  1665,
and  after  living  in  Charleston.  .S.  C..  New  York,
and  PhiliMlelphia,  8ettle<l  in  Cecil  county,  Md.  He
was  the  great-grandfather  of  James  Rumsey,
noticed  IkjIow.  Ik>njamin  was  elec-ted  by  the  Mary-
land convention,  29  Dec.,  1775,  one  of  a  committee
of  five  to  prepare  a  draft  of  instructions  for  the
deputies  of  the  province  in  congress.  On  1  Jan.,
17*6.  he  was  chosen  one  of  a  similar  committee
to  re|)ort  resolutions  for  raising,  clothing,  and
victualling  the  provincial  forces.  On  25  May  he
became  one  of  the  council  of  safety,  and  on  10
Nov,  he  was  chosen  by  the  convention  to  the  Con-
tinental congress.

RUMSEY,  JanieH,  inventor,  b.  in  Bohemia
Manor,  Cecil  co.,  Md„  alx)ut  1743;  d.  in  London,
England.  23  Dec,  1702,  He  was  a  machinist  by
trade,  and  early  turned  his  attention  to  inventing,
making  various  improvements  in  the  mechanism
of  mills.  In  1784  ne  exhibited  to  (ieorge  Wash-
ington the  model  of  a  boat  for  stemming  the  cur-
rent of  rivers  by  the  force  of  the  stream  acting  on
settling  poles,  which  he  patented  in  several  states;
and  he  obtained  in  March.  1785,  the  exclusive
right  for  ten  years  "  to  navigate  and  build  Vraats
cmculated  to  work  with  greater  ease  and  rapidity
against  rapid  rivers"  from  the  assembly  of  Phila-
delphia. Subsequently  he  succeeded  in  launching
a  boat  on  the  Potomac,  which  he  pro|>elle<l  by  a
steam-engine  and  machinery  of  his  own  construc-
tion that  secured  motion  by  the  force  of  a  stream
of  water  thrown  out  by  a  pump  at  the  stem.  In
December,  1787,  a  successful  trial  trip  was  wit-
nessed by  a  large  concourse  of  people,  and  he  was
grante<l  the  rights  of  navigating  the  streams  of
New  York,  Marvland.  and  \  irginia.  The  Rumsey
society,  of  whic}i  Benjamin  Fnmklin  was  a  mem-
ber, was  founded  in  Philadelphia  in  1788  for  the
pumose  of  furthering  his  schemes.  He  then  went
to  England,  where  a  similar  society  was  organized,
and  he  obtained  patents  for  his  inventions  in  Gn-at
Britain,  France,  and  Holland.  A  boat  and  ma-
chinery were  built  for  him.  and  a  successful  trip
was  made  on  the  Thames  in  Dec-ember,  1792,  but
he  died  while  preparing  for  another  experiment.
The  legislature  of  Kentucky  presented  m  lKi9  a
gold  medal  to  his  son  "commemorative  of  his
father's  services  and  high  agency  in  giving  to  the
world  the  benefits  of  the  steaml)oat,"  He  published
a  "Short  Treatise  on  the  Application  of  Steam"
(Philadelphia,  1788),  bv  which  he  l)ecaine  involved
in  a  controversv  with  .7ohn  Fitch  (q.  t'.).

RUMSEY,  JiiUan  Sidney,  men>hant,  b.  in  Ba-
tavia,  N.  Y.,  3  April,  1823;  d.  in  Chicago.  Ill,,  20
April.  1886,  He  removetl  to  Chicago  in  18^37,  and
enteretl  the  service  of  a  lirm  in  which  he  and  his
brother  subsequently  became  partners.  This  firm,
then  known  as  Newl)erry  and  Dole,  sent  out  in
September,  1839,  the  first  shipment  of  grain  from


348


RUNDT


RUSCHENBERGER


Chicago.  In  1852  Mr.  Dole  retired  and  the  firm,
which  was  for  a  time  known  as  Rumsey  Brotliers,
devoted  itself  exclusively  to  the  grain  commission
business.  Mr.  Rumsey  was  identified  with  the
history  of  C'hicago  for  more  than  half  a  century.
During  tluit  period  he  was  mayor,  county  treasurer,
and  president  of  the  board  of  trade.  Of  the  latter
institution  he  was  a  charter  member,  and  through
his  eflforts  the  present  system  of  grain  insjtection
and  grading  was  atlopted.  This  achievement  gave
him  the  title  of  the  "  Father  of  Grain  Inspection."
Mr.  Rumsey  always  took  an  interest  in  national
and  state  j)olitics.  In  18(51,  during  the  period  that
preceded  the  civil  war,  he  did  much,  as  mayor,  to
arouse  the  enthusiasm  of  his  fellow  -  citizens  in
favor  of  the  preservation  of  the  L'nion,  and  at  the
mass-meeting  in  Metropolitan  hall  a  few  days  after
the  firing  on  Fort  Sumter,  he  delivered  a  stirring
address.  He  was  a  member  of  the  first  war  finance
committee,  and  of  the  Republican  state  committee
the  same  year.  During  the  panic  of  IHTJi  he  was
president  of  the  Corn  exchange  national  bank.

RUNDT,  Charles  Godfrey,  missionary,  b.  in
Konigsberg.  Germany,  30  May,  1713;  d.  in  Beth-
lehem, Pa.,  17  Aug.,  17(54.  lie  entered  the  army  of
Holsteiu  as  a  musician,  but  in  1747  united  with
the  Moravians  in  Saxony.  In  1751  he  was  sent  to
Pennsylvania,  and  l)ecanie  an  itinerant  missionary
among  the  Indians  and  white  settlers.  While  re-
siding at  Onondaga  in  1752  with  David  Zeisbergcr
he  was  adojited  into  the  tribe,  receiving  the  name
of  Thanenujuechta.

RUNKLE,  John  Daniel,  mathematician,  b.  in
Root.  Montgomery  co.,  N.  V.,  11  Oct.,  1822.  He
worked  on  liis  father's  farm  until  he  was  of  age,
and  then  studied  and  taught  until  he  entered
Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1851.  Meanwhile  his  ability  as
a  mathematician  led  in  1849  to  his  appointment  as
assistant  in  the  preparation  of  the  "American
Ephemeris  and  Nautical  Almanac,"  in  which  he
continued  to  engage  until  1884.  He  was  called
to  the  professorship  of  mathematics  in  the  Massa-
chusetts institute  of  technology,  and  still  (1888)
holds  that  chair,  being  also  acting  president  in
18(58-70.  ami  i)resident  in  1870-'8.  Prof.  Runkle
has  taken  great  interest  in  the  subject  of  manual
training,  and  that  system  was  introduced  in  the
Institute  of  technology  largely  in  consequence  of
his  efforts.  He  received  the  honorary  degrees  of
A.  M.  from  Harvard  in  1851.  Ph.  I),  from  Hamilton
in  18(5!),  and  LL.  D.  from  Wesleyan  in  1871.  In
185!)  he  founded  the  "  Mathematical  Monthly,"
which  he  published  until  1861,  and  he  had  charge
of  the  astronomical  department  of  the  "  Illustrated
Pilgrim's  Almanac."  Besides  many  papers,  in-
cluding *•  The  Manual  Element  in  Education "
in  the  "Reports  of  the  Massachusetts  Board  of
Education"  for  187(5-'7  and  1880-'l  and  "Report
on  Industrial  Education  "  (1883),  he  has  published
"New  Tables  for  Determining  the  Values  of  the
Coefficients  in  the  Perturbative  P\nictionof  Plane-
tary Motion  "  (Washington,  185(5)  and  "Elements
of  Plane  and  Solid  Analytic  Geometry"  (Boston,
1888). — His  brother,  Cornelius  A.,  lawyer,  b.  in
Montgomery  county,  N.  Y.,  9  Dec.  1832 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  i9  March,  1888,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard law-school  in  1855,  began  practice  in  New
York  city,  and  was  subsequently  made  deputy
collector  and  given  charge  of  the  law  division  of
the  New  York  custom-house.  This  rendered  him
familiar  with  the  legal  questions  involved  in  tariff
and  internal  revenue  litigation,  and  resulted  in  his
devoting  himself  largely  to  that  class  of  business.
Mr.  Runkle  for  about  twenty-five  years  acted  as


counsel  for  *'  The  Tribune  "  association. — Cornelius
A.'s  wife,  Lncia  Isabella^  author,  b.  in  North
Brookfleld,  Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  20  Aug..  1844.
Her  maiden  name  was  Gilliert,  and  after  receiving
her  education  in  Fall  River  and  Worcester,  Mass.,
she  removed  to  New  York  city.  In  18(52  she  mar-
ried Mr.  Calhoun,  and  in  18G9  Mr.  Runkle.  For
many  years  she  was  an  editorial  writer  and  con-
tributor to  the  New  York  "  Tribune,"  in  which  she
published  a  brilliant  series  of  articles  on  "Cook-
nig,"  treated  from  an  artistic  standpoint,  which
attracted  much  attention.  She  has  also  written
frefjuently  for  other  journals  and  for  magazines.

KUPP,  Israel  Daniel,  author,  b.  in  Cundier-
land  county.  Pa.,  10  July,  1803 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
31  May,  1878.  He  was  bom  upon  a  farm  and  had
few  educational  advantages,  but  at  the  age  of
twenty  he  had  mastered  eight  languages,  and  be-
came a  teacher.  In  1880  he  translate  into  and
from  the  German  a  large  number  of  religious
works,  the  principal  of  which  was  the  "  Blutige
Schau-Platz,  oder  Geschichte  der  Martyren  "  (Cin-
cinnati, 1830),  which  was  originally  published  in
German  by  the  Ephrata  brethren.  About  1827  he
began  the  preparation  of  the  "  History  of  the  Ger-
mans of  Pennsylvania,"  which  was  not  complet-
ed at  his  death.  While  gathering  materials  for
this  work  he  collectetl  a  large  amount  of  data  re-
lating to  the  early  history  of  the  different  counties
in  Pennsylvania.  In  1830  his  first  historical  com-
pilation was  issued  from  the  press,  while  other
volumes  of  local  history  followea  in  rapid  succes-
sion. He  was  an  indefatigable  worker,  an  excellent
German  scholar,  with  good  conversational  powers,
and  in  his  lifetime  collected  much  historical  mate-
rial. He  had  the  peculiar  faculty  of  obtaining  facts
that  few  possessed,  and  hence  all  his  local  histories
are  repositories  of  zeal  and  industry.  He  was  not  a
polished  writer,  and  lacked  method  in  his  historical
arrangement.  He  translated,  wrote,  compiled,  and
prepared  for  the  press  about  thirty  volumes,  but
the  great  work  of  his  life.  "  The  llistory  of  the
Germans  of  Pennsylvania,"  remains  unpublished.
Apart  from  his  translations,  Mr.  Rupp's  historical
writings  are  "Geographical  Catechism  of  Pennsyl-
vania "  (183(5) ;  "History  of  Lancaster  County,  Penn-
sylvania" (1844):  "  History  of  Religious  benomi-
nations  of  the  United  States  "(Philadelphia,  1844);
"  Historv  of  Berks  and  Lebanon  Counties"  (Lan-
caster, 1*844):  "History  of  York  Count  v  "  (1845);
"Events  in  Indian  History"  (1842);  "llistory  of
Northampton,  Lehigh,  iVIonroe,  Carbon,  and
Schuylkill  Counties  "  (Harrisburg,  1846) ;  "  History
of  Western  Pennsylvania"  (1846);  "History  of
Dauphin,  Cumberland,  Franklin,  Bedford,  Adanrs,
and  Perry  Counties  "  (Lancaster,  1848) ;  "  Historv
of  Somerset,  Cambria,  and  Indiana  Counties''
(1848) ;  "  History  of  Northumberland,  Huntingdon,
Mifflin,  Centre,  Union,  Columbia,  Juniata,  and
Clinton  Counties"  (1847);  "Collec-tion  of  Names
of  Thirty  Thousand  German  and  other  Immigrants
to  Pennsylvania  from  1727  to  1776"  (Harrisburg,
1856) ;  "  Genealogy  of  the  Descendants  of  John
Jonas  Rupp  "  (1874).

RUSCHENBERGER,  William  S.  W.,  naval
surgeon,  b.  in  Cumberland  county,  N.  J.,  4  Sept.,
1807.  After  attending  schools  in  Philadelphia  and
New  York  he  entered  the  navy  as  surgeon's  mate,
10  Aug.,  1826,  was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1830,  and  was  com-
missioned surgeon,  4  April,  1831.  He  was  fleet
surgeon  of  the  East  India  squadron  in  1835- '7,
attached  to  the  naval  rendezvous  at  Philadelphia
in  1840-'2,  and  at  the  naval  hospital  in  Brooklyn
in  1843-'7,  when  he  organized  tne  laboratory  for


RUSH


RUSH


349


supplying  the  sorvieo  with  unmlultoratpd  dnics.  I
He  vi&s  tiguin  lUt't  surgfon  <>f  the  Knst  Iiulia
suuwinni  in  1847- "5(1,  of  the  Pm;ittc  8<|Utulron  in
1854-'7,  and  of  the  Meditermneun  stinutlron  fron>
August,  1H<M),  till  July.  IWM.  During  the  inter-
vals between  cruises  he  wius  on  <luty  at  Philiulel-
phia.  During  the  civil  war  he  wjls  surgeon  of  the
Boston  nnvy-yanl.  He  was  on  sin-cial  duty  at
Philatlelphia  in  180.V70,  was  the  senior  officer  in
the  uunlical  corjis  in  1866- '9.  and  was  retireti  on
4  Sept..  18(M).  lie  was  president  of  the  Acmleniv
of  natunil  si-ienc»»s  of  Philmlelphia  in  IS^O-'S'i,
and  president  of  the  C'ollego  of  physicians  of
Philadelphia  in  1879-'83.  lie  was  conimisHionwl
medical  director  on  the  retired  list.  3  March.  1871.
Dr.  Huscheiiberger  has  published  some  of  the
results  of  his  investigations  during  his  cruises,  by
which  ho  has  acquirwl  a  wide  reputation.  Among
his  works  are  "Three  Years  in  the  Pacific"  (Phila-
delphia, 18;J4;  2  vols.,  London,  1835);  "  A  Vovage
around  the  World,  1835-'7"  (Philadelphia.  ikW;
omitting  strictures  on  the  British  government,  2
vols.,  London,  1838);  "Elements  of  Natural  His-
tory "  (2  vols.,  Philatlelohia.  1850) ;  "  A  Lexicon  of
Terms  use<l  in  Natural  Historv  "  (1850) ;  "  A  Notice
of  the  Origin,  Progress,  and  "Present  Condition  of
the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences  of  Philadelphia"
(1852) ;  and  "  Notes  and  Commentaries  during
Voyages  to  Brazil  and  China,  1848  "  (Richmond,
1854).  He  has  also  published  numerous  articles
on  naval  rank  and  organization  (1845-'50),  and
contributed  jMipers  to  medical  and  scientific  jour-
nals, and  he  etiited  the  American  edition  of  ^Irs.
Somerville's  "  Physical  Geography,"  with  additions
and  a  glossary  (1850;  new  ed.,  1853).

RUSH,  lienjaniin,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Inde|>endence,  b.  in  Bybern*  township.  Pa.,  24
Dec.,  174,5;  d.  in  Philatlelphia,  19  April,  1813.  His
ancestor,  John,  who  was  a  captain  of horse  in

Cromwell's  army,
emigrated  to  this
country  in  1G83,
and  left  a  large
number  of  de-
scendants, Benja-
min's father  died
when  the  son  was
six  years  old.  His
earliest  instructor
was  his  uncle,  liev.
Samuel  Finley,
subsequently  pres-
ident of  Prince-
ton, who  prepared
him  for  tnat  col-
lege. H  e  was  grad-
uated in  1700,  and
subsequently  in
the  medical  de-
partment of  the
University  of  Kdin-
burijh  in  1708,  after  studying  under  Dr.  John  Hed-
nuin.  of  Philadelphia.  Ho  also  attended  medical  lec-
tures in  Kngland  and  in  Paris,  where  he  enjoyed  the
friendship  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  who  atlvanced
the  means  of  f)aymg  his  expenses.  In  August.
1709,  he  returned  to  the  United  States  and  settled
in  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  elected  professor  of
chemistry  in  the  City  me<lical  college.  In  1771
he  published  essays  on  slavery,  tem|)erance,  and
health,  and  in  1774  he  delivered  the  annual  oration
before  the  Philosophical  society  on  the  "Natural
History  of  Mtnlieine  among  the  Indians  of  North
America."  He  early  engaged  in  pre-Revolutionary
moreraents,  and  wrote  constantly  for  the  press  on


/7^n/iJe^yT-^*t. /?^<t</^


colonial  rights.  He  was  a  memlier  of  the  provin-
cial conference  of  Pennsylvania,  and  chairman  of
the  cornniitti«c  that  re|H)rttHl  that  it  had  Itocome
expedient  for  congress  to  declare  inde|iendenee,
and  surgeon  to  the  Pennsylvania  navy  from  17
Sept..  1775.  to  1  July,  1770.  He  was  then  elected
to  the  latter  Uxlv,  and  on  4  July.  1770,  signed
the  dedanition.  He  marritnl  J idia,  a  daughter  of
Richard  Sltx-kton,  the  same  year,  was  apiK>iiited
surgtH)n-general  of  the  middle  department  in  April,
1777,  and  in  Jidy  Ix-came  nhysician-general.  Al-
though in  constant  attemiance  on  the  wounded
in  the  liattles  of  Trenton.  Princeton,  the  Brandy-
wine,  Oermantown,  and  in  the  sickness  at  Valley
Forge,  he  found  time  to  write  four  long  jaiblic  let-
ters to  the  people  of  Pennsylvania,  in  which  he
commentetl  severely  on  the  articles  of  confedera-
tion of  1776,  and  urged  a  revision  on  the  ground
of  the  dangers  of  giving  legislative  powers  to  a
single  house.  In  February,  1778,  he  resigned  his
military  office  on  account  of  wrongs  that  had  l)een
done  to  the  soldiers  in  regard  to  the  hospital  stores,
and  a  coldness  between  himself  and  Gen.  Wash-
ington, but,  though  he  was  without  means  at  that
time,  he  refused  all  com{»ensation  for  his  service
in  the  army.  He  then  returnwl  to  Philadel[)hia,
resumed  his  practice  and  duties  as  [)rofeRsor,  and
for  twenty-nine  years  was  surgeon  to  the  Pennsyl-
vania hospital,  .i"nd  port  physician  to  Philadelphia
in  1790-'3.  He  was  a  founder  of  Dickinson  college
and  the  Philadelphia  dispensary,  and  was  largely
interested  in  the  establishment  of  public  schools,
concerning  which  he  published  an  address,  and  in
the  foundmg  of  the  College  of  phvsicians,  of  which
he  was  one  of  the  first  censors.  He  was  a  member
of  the  State  convention  that  ratified  the  constitution
of  the  United  States  in  1787.  and  of  that  for  form-
ing a  state  constitution  in  the  same  year,  in  which
he  endeavored  to  procure  the  incorf)oration  of  his
views  on  public  schools,  and  a  penal  cfnle  on  which
he  had  previously  written  essays.  After  that  ser-
vice he  retired  from  political  life.  While  in  occu-
pation of  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  Philadelphia
medical  college,  he  was  elected  to  that  of  the  theory
and  practice  of  medicine,  to  which  was  added  the
professorship  of  the  institutes  and  practice  of  medi-
cine and  clinical  practice  in  1791.  and  that  of  the
t)ractice  of  physic  in  1797,  all  of  which  he  held  until
lis  death.  During  the  epidemic  of  vellow  fever
in  1793  he  rendered  g(X)d  service,  visiting  from  100
to  120  patients  daily,  but  his  Itold  and  original
practice  made  him  enemies,  and  a  paper  etiited  by
William  Coljlx'tt,  called  "Peter  Porcupine's  Ga-
zette," was  so  violent  in  its  attacks 'upon  him
that  it  was  prosecuted,  and  a  jury  rendered  a
verdict  of  !f5.000  damages,  which  1")^  Rush  dis-
tributed among  the  poor.  His  practice  during
the  epidemic  convinced  him  that  yellow  fever
is  not  contagious,  and  he  was  the  first  to  j)ro-
daim  that  the  disease  is  indigenous.  F'rom  1799
till  his  death  he  was  treasurer  of  the  U.  S.  mint.
"His  name,"  says  Dr.  Thomas  Young,"  was  fa-
miliar to  the  medical  world  as  the  Sydenham  of
America.  His  accurate  observations  and  correct
discrimination  of  epidemic  diseases  well  entitled
him  to  this  distinction,  while  in  the  original  energy
of  his  reasoning  he  far  exceetled  his  prototype."  He
was  a  memlxT  of  nearly  every  medical,  literary,
and  l)enevolent  institution  in  this  country,  and  of
many  foreign  societies,  and  for  his  replies  to  their
queries  on  the  subject  of  yellow  fever  receivetl  a
me<lal  fmm  the  king  of  Pnissia  in  1805.  and  gifts
from  other  crownwl  heads.  He  succee<led  Ben-
jamin Franklin  as  president  of  the  Pennsylvania
society  for  the  abolition  of  slavery,  was  pivsident


360


RUSH


RUSH


of  the  Philadelphia  medical  society,  vice-president
and  a  founder  of  the  Philadelphia  Bible  society,
advocating  the  use  of  the  Scriptures  as  a  text-
book in  the  public  schools,  an  originator  of  the
American  philosophical  society,  of  which  he  was
a  vice-president  in  1799-iyOO.  He  taught,  more
clearly  than  any  other  physician  of  his  day,  to
distinguish  diseases  and  their  effects,  pave  great
impulse  to  the  study  of  medicine  in  this  country,
ana  made  Philadelphia  the  centre  of  that  science
in  the  United  States,  more  than  2,250  students
having  attended  his  lectures  during  his  professor-
ship in  the  Medical  college  of  Philadelphia.  Yale
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1812.  His  pub-
lications include  *'  Medical  Inquiries  and  Obser-
vations" (5  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1789-98;  8d  ed.,
4  vols..  1809) ;  "Essays,  Literarv.  Moral,  and  Philo-
sophical" (1798;  2d  ed„  1806); '"Sixteen  Introduc-
tory Lectures"  (1811);  and  "Diseases  of  the  Mind"
(1812 ;  5th  ed.,  1835).  He  also  edited  several  medical
works. — His  son,  Richard,  statesman,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 29  Aug.,  1780;  d.  there,  80  July,  1859,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1797,  and  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Phihulelphia  in  1800,  and  early  in  his  career
won  distinction  by  his  defence  of  W'illiam  Duane,
editor  of  the  "  Aurora,"  on  a  charge  of  libelling
Gov.  Thomas  ^IcKean.  He  became  solicitor  of  the
guardians  of  the  poor  of  Philadelphia  in  1810,  and
attorney-general  of  Pennsylvania  in  1811,  comp-
troller of  the  U.  S.  treasury  in  November  of  the  same
year,  and  in  1814-'17  was  U.  S.  attorney-general.
He  became  temporary  U.  S.  secretary  of  state  in  1817,
and  was  then  appointed  minister  to  England,  where
he  remained  till  1825,  negotiating  several  impor-
tant treaties,  especially  that  of  1818  with  Lord
Castlereagh  respecting  the  fisheries,  the  northwest
boundary-line,  conflicting  claims  beyond  the  Rocky
mountains,  and  the  slaves  of  American  citizens  that
were  carried  off  on  British  ships,  contrary  to  the
treaty  of  Ghent.  He  was  recalled  in  1825  to  ac-
cept the  portfolio  of  the  treasury  which  had  been
offered  hiin  by  President  Adams,  and  in  1828  he
was  a  candidate  for  the  vice-presidency  on  the
ticket  with  Mr.  Adams.  In  1829  he  negotiated  in
Holland  a  loan  for  the  corporations  of  Washing-
ton, Georgetown,  D.  C,  and  Alexandria,  Va.  He
was  a  commissioner  to  adjust  a  boundary  dispute
between  Ohio  and  Michigan  in  1835,  and  in  1836
was  appointed  by  President  Jackson  a  commis-
sioner to  obtain  the  legacy  of  James  Smithson
{q.  v.),  which  he  left  to  found  the  Smithsonian  in-
stitution. The  c^se  was  then  pending  in  the  Eng-
lish chancery  court,  and  in  August,  1838,  Mr,  Rush
returned  with  the  amount,  $508,318.46,  He  was
minister  to  France  in  1847-'51,  and  in  1848  was
the  first  of  the  ministers  at  that  court  to  recog-
nize the  new  republic,  acting  in  advance  of  in-
structions from  his  government.  Mr,  Rush  began
his  literary  career  in  1812,  when  he  was  a  member
of  the  Madison  cabinet,  by  writing  vigorous  arti-
cles in  defence  of  the  second  war  with  England.
His  relations  with  John  Quincy  Adams  were  inti-
mate, and  affected  his  whole  career.  He  became
an  anti-Mason  in  1831,  in  1834  wrote  a  powerful  re-
port against  the  Bank  of  the  United  States,  and  ever
afterward  co-operated  with  the  Democratic  party.
Ho  was  a  member  of  the  American  philosophical
society.  His  publications  include  "  Codification  of
the  Laws  of  tne  United  States  "  (5  vols.,  Philadel-
phia, 1815) ;  "  Narrative  of  a  Residence  at  the  Court
of  London  from  1817  till  1825"  (London,  1833);  a
second  volume  of  the  same  work.  "Comprising  In-
cidents, Official  and  Personal,  from  1819  till  1825"
(1845;  3d  ed.,  under  the  title  of  the  "Court  of  Lon-
don from  1819  till  1825,  with  Notes  by  the  Author's


Nephew,"  1873):  "Washington  in  Domestic  Life,"
which  consists  of  personal  letters  from  Washing-
ton to  his  private  secretary,  Col.  Tobias  Ijear,  and
some  personal  recollections  (1857);  and  a  volume
of  "  Occasional  Productions,  Political,  Diplomatic,
and  Miscellaneous,  including  a  Glance  at  the  Court
and  Government  of  Louis  Philippe,  and  the  French
Revolution  of  1848,"  published  by  his  sons  (I860).—
Richard's  son,  Beiijaiilin,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  23
Jan.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  30  June,  1877,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1829,  studied  law,  and  in
1833  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Philadelphia.  In
1837  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  legation  at  Lon-
don, where  he  served  for  a  time  as  charge  d'affaires.
He  published  "An  Appeal  for  the  Union"  (Phila-
delphia, 1860)  and  "Letters  on  the  Rebellion"
(1862). — Another  son  of  the  first  Benjamin,  James,
physician,  b,  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  March,  1786;
d.  there,  26  May,  1869,  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1805,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  18()9.  He  subsequently
studied  in  Edinburgh,  and,  returning  to  Philadel-
phia, practised  for  several  years,  but  afterward  re-
linquished the  active  duties  of  his  profession  to
devote  himself  to
scientific  and  lit-
erary pursuits.  He
left  $1,000,000  to
the  Philadelphia
library  company
for  the  erection
of  the  Ridgeway
branch  of  the  Phil-
adelphia library.
His  publications
include  "  Philoso-
phy of  the  Hu-
man Voice  "  (Phil-
adelphia, 1827) ;
"Hamlet,  a  Dra-
matic Prelude  in
Five  Acts  "(1834);
"  Analysis  of  the
Human  Intellect"
(2  vols.,  1865);  and jn^ /  / /O /

"  Rhymes  of  Con- ^*%?^  ..^^ (MjaA
trast  on  Wisdom

and  Folly"  (1869).— His  wife.  Phflebe  Ann,  b.  in
Philadelphia  in  1797 ;  d.  there  in  1857,  was  a  daugh-
ter of  Jacob  Ridgeway,  She  was  highly  educated
in  early  life,  well  versed  in  the  languages  and  lit-
erature of  modem  Europe,  and  by  her  social  tact
and  brilliant  conversational  powers  became  one  of
the  most  noted  American  women  of  her  time.  Her
house  in  Philadelphia  was  one  of  the  finest  in  this
country,  and  her  entertainments  were  on  the  largest
and  most  luxurious  scale. — A  brother  of  the  first
Benjamin.  Jacob,  jurist,  b,  in  Byberry  township.
Pa.,  in  1746;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  fa.,  5  Jan.,  1820,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1765,  settled  in  the
practice  of  law  in  Philadelphia,  was  a  judge  of  the
nigh  court  of  errors  and  appeals  of  Pennsylvania  in
1784-1806,  president  of  the  court  of  common  pleas
of  Philadelphia  in  1806-'20,  and  at  an  earlier  date
was  a  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state.  In
the  controversy  between  Joseph  Reed  and  John
Dickinson  as  to  the  character  of  Benedict  Arnold
(o,  v.).  Judge  Rush  espoused  the  latter's  cause.
Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1804.  His

Kublications  include  "  Resolve  in  Committee  Cham-
er  6  Dec,  1774"  (Philadelphia,  1774):  "Charges
on  Moral  and  Religious  Subjects"  (1803):  "Char-
acter of  Christ "  (1806) ;  and  "  Christian  Baptism  "
(1819). — His  daughter,  Rebecca,  published  "Kel-
roy,"  a  novel  (Philadelphia,  1812).


RUSH


RUSS


351


RUSH.  ChrlMto^her,  A.  M.  E.  Zion  bishop,  b.
in  Craven  count  v,  N.  ('.,  in  1777;  «l.  in  New  Yoric


citv.  KUuly.  187;J.
ami  born  a  siavi*.


lilt  wtusa  fiill-l)l(MMi«'(l  Africnn,
He  went  to  N'»>w  York  in  17HH,


and  was  subswiuontly  fnH'<l,  and  licensed  to  nri-afh
in  the  MethiMlist  K|iis<;o|ial  church  in  IHlo.  Ho
was  ordainiHl  a  MU|MTintfndent  or  bishop  in  IH2H.
He  was  largely  instrumental  in  the  M>parution  of
the  colored  from  the  white  branch  of  the  MetluMl-  '
ist  church,  and  his  address  U'f»)re  Hi>hop  Kn(H-h
Georjfo  ftnailv  carried  the  measure,  and  he  was  thus
a  founder  o{  what  is  now  the  African  Meth(Mlist
Kpis(*oiial  Zion  church.  At  that  time  the  African
Melhouists  numbered  only  UK),  but  Hishm)  Hush
lived  to  see  it  a  comparatively  larj;e  and  nourish-
ing organization.  He  published  a  history  of  his
denomination.

RUSH.  WilHam,  sculptor,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa..  4  July,  175«;  d.  there,  17  Jan.,  1838.  In  his
youth  he  was  apprenticed  to  Edward  Cutbush,  a
carver,  and  he  nrst  became  known  Jis  a  maker  of
fipire-heads  for  ships.  Especially  noticeable  among
his  ship-carvings  were  the  figures  "Genius  of  the
United  States  and  "Nature"  for  the  frigates
"United  States"  and  "Constellation,"  and  busts
and  figures  of  Voltaire,  Rousseau,  lienjamin  Frank-
lin. W  illiara  Penn,  and  others,  for  various  vessels.
The  figure  of  the  "Indian  Trader  "for  the  ship
"William  Penn"  excited  great  admiration  in  Lon-
don. The  carvers  there  sketched  it  and  took  casts
of  the  head.  Another  figure,  that  of  a  river-gwl,
carved  for  the  ship  "Ganges,"  won  the  admiration
of  the  Hindoos,  who  came  in  numerous  boats  to
reverence  this  image.  But  he  did  not  confine
himself  to  figure-heads,  although  he  never  worked
in  marble,  but  always  in  wood  or  clay.  In  1812  he
exhibited,  at  the  Pennsylvania  academy,  figures  of
"  Exhortation,"  "  Praise,"  and  cherubim,  and  busts
of  Linnu'us,  William  Bartnim,  and  Rev.  Henrv  M.
Muhlenber|?.  He  executed  also  statues  of  "  ^'in-
ter," "  Agriculture,"  a  figure  of  Christ  on  the  cross,
which  last  two  were  destroyed  by  fire,  several  por-
trait-busts, including  Gen.  Lafayette  (1824),  and
other  works.  His  best-known  statue  is  that  of
Washington  (1814),  which  was  bought  by  the  city
of  Philtulelphia.  Mr.  Rush  served  in  the  Revolu-
tionary army,  and  was  a  member  of  the  councils  of
his  native  city  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century.
RUSK,  Jeremiah  McLain,  governor  of  Wis-
consin, b.  in  Morgan  county,  Ohio,  17  June,  1830.
He  divided  his  time  between  farm-work  and  the

acquisition  of  a
common-school  ed-
ucation till  he  at-
tained his  majority,
and  in  1853  re-
moved to  Wiscon-
sin and  engaged
in  agriculture  in
Vernon  county.
He  entered  the  Na-
tional army  in  18G2,
was  commissioned
major  of  the  25th
Wisconsin  regi-
ment, rose  to  tlie
rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  served
with  Gen.  William
T.  Sherman  fnim
the  siege  of  Vicks-
burg  till  the  close
of  the  war.  In
1805  ho  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  for  meritorious  service  at  the  battle  of


Jk^


/


Salkehatchi(>.  He  wait  elected  bank  comptrr>ller  of
Wisi-onsin  in  18(16,  which  jjost  he  held  till  1870,
was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  I{ei»ubli<an  in  the  lat-
ter year,  serveil  three  terms,  and  as  chairman  of  the
conimitte4>  on  jwusions  jn-rfornu-d  important  ser-
vices in  readjusting  the  |H-nsion  rates.  He  declinetl
the  ap|)ointment  of  charge  irafTaires  in  Paraguay
and  Uruguay,  and  that  of  chief  of  the  bureau  of
engraving  and  printing,  which  were  offeretl  him
by  President  (tarfield.  Since  1882  he  has  l*een
governor  of  Wisconsin,  having  iK'cn  elected  for
three  successive  terms.  During  the  threatened
Milwaukee  riots  in  May,  1S8<J.  he  did  g'Knl  ser^'ice
by  his  prompt  action  in  ordering  the  militia  to  fire
oh  the  dangerous  mob  when  they  attempted  to
destroy  life  and  pro|)ertv.

RUSK,  Thomas  Jefferson,  senator,  b.  in  Cam-
dem,  S.  C,  8  Aug..  1802;  d.  in  Na<ogdf>ches.  Tex.,
29  July.  1856.  He  received  an  academic  education,
practised  law  with  success  in  Georgia,  and  in  the
early  part  of  1835  removed  to  Texas.  He  then
identified  himself  with  the  history  of  that  n>public,
was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  declared  its
independence  in  March,  1836,  was  its  first  secre-
tary of  war,  participated  in  the  battle  of  San  Ja-
cinto, and  became  commander  of  the  army  after
Gen.  Samuel  Houston  was  wounded,  continuing
to  hold  that  office  till  the  organization  of  the  con-
stitutional government  in  October,  1836.  He  was
again  chosen  secretary  of  war,  but  resigned  after
a  few  months'  service,  subsequently  commanded
several  ex|>editions  against  the  Indians,  and  was  a
member  of  the  legislature.  He  was  a  justice  of  the
supreme  court  in  1838-'42.  president  of  the  conven-
tion that  consummated  the  annexation  of  Texas  to
the  United  States  in  1845.  and  upon  its  admission
to  the  Union  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  in  1846-'56.  He  had  been  re-elected
to  a  third  term,  but  in  a  fit  of  insanity,  caused  by
domestic  misfortune,  he  committed  suicide.  Dur-
ing his  senatorial  service  he  was  chairman  of  the
committee  on  the  post-office,  and  was  interested  to
a  large  extent  in  tne  overland  mail  and  the  wagon-
road  to  the  Pacific.

RUSS,  Horace  P.,  inventor,  b.  in  1821 ;  d.  in
Halifax,  N.  S.,  31  Dec,  186^3.  He  invented  the
pavement  that  bears  his  name.  It  consists  of
granite  blocks,  and  was  laid  in  Broadway,  New
York  city,  but  proved  impracticable  on  account  of
its  iK'ing  too  slippery.  Subsequeiitly  he  turned  his
attention  to  metallurgical  projects,  and  for  some
time  prior  to  his  death  was  engaged  in  gold-min-
ing in  Nova  Scotia.

RUSS,  John  Denison,  physician,  b.  in  Chebacco
(now  p]ssex),  Mass.,  1  Sept.,  1801 :  d.  in  Pompton,
N.  J.,  1  March,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1823,  and  in  the  me<lical  department  in  1825.
After  spending  a  vcar  abroad  in  hospital  practice,
he  settletl  in  New  York  city,  but  in  June.  1827,  he
went  with  a  cargo  of  supplies  to  aid  the  Greeks  in
their  struggle  for  independence.  He  remained,  su-
perintending the  development  of  a  hospital  service
in  Greece,  for  several  years,  but  the  failure  of  his
health  compelled  his  retuni.  and  he  entered  again
upon  practice  in  New  York  city.  Dr.  Russ  l)e<'ame
interested  at  once  in  the  condition  of  the  poor  that
were  suffering  from  ophthalmia  in  the  city  hospi-
tals, and  at  his  own  cost,  in  March,  1832,  made  the
first  attempt  in  the  Unitetl  States  for  the  instruc-
tion of  the  blind.  He  was  apiKiinted  superintend-
ent of  the  newly  chartered  Sew  York  institution
for  the  blind  in  the  same  year,  and  in  this  office
introduceil  many  mcthcxls  of  teaching,  some  of
which  have  been  |>ermanently  useful.  He  invented
the  phonetic  alphabet,  which  consists  of  forty-one


352


RUSSELL


RUSSELL


characters,  sufficiently  like  the  Roman  letters  to  be
read  easily,  to  which  he  added  twenty-two  prefixes
and  suffixes.  This  system  of  writinc  never  was  in-
troduced generally,  but  he  simplified  mathematical
characters,  and  his  printed  maps,  from  raised  de-
signs, in  which  he  used  wave-lines  for  water,  are
still  in  use.  He  went  abroad  for  his  health,  but
on  his  return  he  engaged  in  numerous  philan-
thropic schemes.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  New  York  prison  association,  its  corresponding
secretary  in  1846-'54,  and  subsequently  a  vice-
president,  was  superintendent  of  the  Jfew  York
juvenile  asylum  in  1851-8.  and  a  member  of  the
board  of  education  in  1848-'51.  He  also  established
in  1850  a  house  of  employment  for  women,  which
institution  was  under  the  care  of  his  wife  and
daughter.  During  his  old  age  he  made  further  im-
provements in  printing  for  the  blinil.

RUSSELL,  Lord  Alexander  Oeorge,  British
soldier,  b.  in  England  in  1821.  He  is  a  son  of  the
sixth  Duke  of  Bedford,  entered  the  army  in  1839,
and  was  promoted  captain  in  1846,  major  in  1853,
lieutenant-colonel  in  1850,  colonel  in  1861,  major-

Smeral  in  1874,  and  lieutenant-general  in  1877.
e  was  aide-de-camp  to  the  governor-general  of
Canada  in  1847,  served  in  the  Caffir  war  in  1853-'3
as  deputy  assistant  quartermaster-general  to  the  1st
division,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Berea,
for  which  he  obtained  a  medal.  He  took  part  in
the  Crimean  war,  was  at  the  siege  of  Sebastopol,
and  for  gallant  conduct  presented  with  the  Crimea
medal  and  clasp,  and  with  Sardinian  and  Turkish
medals  and  the  order  of  the  Medjidie.  He  com-
manded at  Shonicliflfe  in  1873-'4,  and  in  southeast-
ern England  in  1877-'8,  served  in  Canada  from
1883  till  1888,  and  at  the  latter  date  was  succeeded
by  Gen.  Sir  John  Ross.  His  headquarters  were
at  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia.

RUSSELL,  Alexander  Jamieson,  Canadian
engineer,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scotland.  29  April,  1807.
He  settled  with  his  parents  in  1822  in  Megantic
county,  Can.,  where  his  father  was  crown-lands
agent.  The  son  tecame  deputy  provincial  surveyor
in  1829,  entered  the  commissariat  department  in
1830,  served  tor  two  years  on  the  construction  of
the  Rideau  canal,  and  afterward  was  engaged  dur-
ing eight  years  in  the  work  of  the  department  at
Quebec.  He  resigned  in  1841,  and  became  civil
engineer  in  charge  of  public  works  in  the  mari-
time counties  of  Lower  Canada,  where  for  five  years
he  projected  and  constructed  roads  and  bridges.
In  1846  he  was  transferred  to  the  crown  timber
office  at  Ottawa  to  settle  diflFerences  between  lum-
bermen, and  to  grant  licenses  to  cut  timber  on  Ot-
tawa river  and  its  tributaries.  Afterward  the  col-
lection of  the  timber  revenues  and  the  inspection  of
the  other  crown  timber  agencies  in  Lower  and
Upper  Canada  were  added  to  his  duties.  He  has
published  a  geographical  work  (Ottawa,  1869).

RUSSELL.  Archibald,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Ed-
inburgh, Scotland,  in  1811 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  12
April,  1871.  His  father,  James,  was  for  many  years
president  of  the  Royal  society  of  Edinburgh.  The
son  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  E^dinburgh
in  philosophy,  law,  and  medicine,  and  subsequently
studied  at  the  University  of  Bonn,  Germany.  He
settled  in  New  York  city  in  1836,  where  he  devoted
his  time  and  fortune  to  benevolent  and  educational
enterprises,  founding  the  Five  Points  mission,  of
which  he  was  president  for  eighteen  years,  and  aid-
ing in  establishing  the  Half-Orphan  asylum,  of
which  he  was  k  vice-president.  He  was  an  active
member  of  the  Christian  commission  during  the
civil  war,  gave  largely  to  its  support,  and  was  chair-
man of  the  famine  relief  committee. He  made  his


summer  home  in  Ulster  county,  opposite  Hyde  Park,
N.  Y.,  from  1844  until  his  death,  and  was  connected
with  the  most  important  internal  improvements  in
that  region.  He  established  its  present  system  of
common  schools,  founded  the  Ulster  county  sav-
ings bank,  and  was  its  president  from  its  establish-
ment until  his  death,  and  built  a  Presbyterian
church  at  his  own  cost  near  his  country-seat,  Glen-
Albyn.  Mr.  Russell  married  Helen  Rutherford,  a
daughter  of  Dr.  John  Watts.  He  published  "  Prin-
ciples of  Statistical  Inquiry  "  (New  York,  18139),  and
"Account  of  11,000  Schools  in  New  York"  (1847).

RUSSELL,  Benjamin,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  13  Sept.,  1761 ;  d.  there,  4  Jan.,  1845.  He
was  apprenticed  to  Isaiah  Thomas,  at  Worcester,
Mass.,  but  before  completing  his  term  enlisted  in
the  Revolutionary  army,  and  contributed  war  news
to  the  "  Spy,"  Thomas's  paper.  He  Itegan  the  pub-
lication of  the  "  Columbian  Centinel '  about  1784,
a  semi-weekly  journal,  which  had  no  equal  in  its
control  of  public  sentiment.  He  was  aided  by
Stephen  Higginson,  John  Lowell,  Fisher  Ames,
Timothy  Pickering,  and  George  Cabot.  In  1788
Russell  attended  the  Ma.ssachusetts  convention  for
ratifying  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  and
made  the  first  attempt  at  reporting  for  any  Bos-
ton newspaper.  His  enterprise  was  conspicuous  in
collecting  foreign  intelligence,  and,  in  order  to  ob-
tain the  latest  news,  he  visited  all  the  foreign  ves-
sels that  came  into  Boston  harbor.  The  "Centi-
nel "  kept  regular  files  of  the  "  Moniteur,"  which
brought  Louis  Philippe  and  Talleyrand  frequently
to  its  office  during  their  stay  in  Boston.  An  atlas,
which  w!is  the  gift  of  the  former,  was  of  constant
service  to  Russell  in  preparing  his  summaries  of
military  news  from  the  continent.  When  congress
was  holding  its  first  session,  Russell  wrote  to  the
department  of  state,  and  offered  to  publish  gratu-
itously all  the  laws  and  other  official  documents
— the  treasury  then  being  almost  bankrupt — which
offer  was  accepted.  At  the  end  of  several  years
he  was  called  upon  for  his  bill.  It  was  made  out,
and  receipted.  On  being  informed  of  this  fact.
Gen.  Washington  said:  "  This  must  not  be.  When
Mr.  Russell  offered  to  publish  the  laws  without
pay,  we  were  poor.  It  was  a  generous  offer.  We
are  now  able  to  pay  our  debts.  This  is  a  debt  of
honor,  and  must  be  discharged."  A  few  days  after-
ward Mr.  Russell  received  a  check  of  $7,000,  the
full  amount  of  his  bill.  In  1795-1830  he  published
a  Federalist  paper,  called  the  "  Gazette,"  which  was
a  violent  enemy  of  France,  Jefferson,  and  the  Re-
publican newspapers,  and  held  its  influence  under
the  same  management  until  1830.  Russell  retired
from  the  "  Centinel "  in  1828.  He  originated  the
phrase  the  "  era  of  good  feeling  "  on  the  occasion
of  President  Monroe's  visit  to  Boston  in  1817,  when
the  chiefs  of  both  parties,  the  Republicans  and
Federalists,  united  in  the  support  of  the  executive.
He  represented  Boston  in  the  general  court  for
twenty-four  years,  served  several  terms  in  the  state
senate,  and  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council
and  of  the  Constitutional  convention  of  1820.

RUSSELL,  Henry,  vocalist,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, about  1810.  lie  was  the  son  of  a  Hebrew
merchant,  and  in  infancy  appeared  in  Christma.s
pantomimes.  Later  he' studied  music,  and  subse-
quently taught.  He  settled  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in
1843,  as  teacher  of  the  piano-forte,  and  became  wide-
ly known  as  a  composer  and  vocalist.  For  years  he
travelled  in  this  country,  giving  monologue  enter-
tainment*! of  his  own  compositions.  He  was  also
engaged  for  the  concerts  of  oratorio  and  philhar-
monic societies,  and  recited  the  soliloquies  in  "  Ham-
let," "Richard  III.,"  and  "Macbeth"  to  his  own


RUSSELL


RUSSELL


863


music.  Ru««>ll  hn<l  »  ln^avy  Itaritone  voice  of  small
4H)nipajw.  but  in  (Icclaiiiatorv  delivery  it  was  hig:hly
iinprfssivc.  On  the  »inj{er\  ri'turn  to  Euro|H?.  he
uppenrtMl  in  niuny  cities  of  Great  Hritain  and  Ire-
liUid  to  n>|R>at  his  American  success.  Finally  he
retired  fnun  the  i-oncert-nnMn,  and  settled  in  Lon-
don as  an  opulent  money-lender  and  bill-broiier.
All  his  song><  were  sold  at  lar>;e  prices,  and  for
years  returne<l  him  a  handsome  income.  They  are
i-omjjosed  in  a  manly  vein,  entirely  fr»'e  frfun  puerile
sentunentality.  and  many  of  them  bid  fair  to  en-
dure for  future  generations.  They  include  "  The
Ivy  Green,"  "  The  Old  Arm-Chair,"  "  A  Life  on  the
Ocean  Wav«',"  "  Some  love  to  Koara,"  "  I'm  Afloat,"
and  "  W(M>dman,  spare  that  Tree."

Rl'SSELL,  Israel  Cook,  creolojyist,  b.  near  Gar-
rattsville.  N.  V..  10  Dec.,  l!<3a.  He  was  jjraduated
at  the  Tniversity  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1872,
after  which  he  siwut  two  years  in  studyini;  science
at  the  School  oi  mines  of  Columbia  college.  In
1874  he  accompanietl  one  of  the  parties  sent  out
bv  the  V.  S.  government  to  observe  the  transit  of
Venus,  and  was  stationed  at  Queenstown,  New
Zealand.  On  his  return  in  1875  he  was  api>ointed
assistant  in  giH)logy  at  the  SchfH)!  of  mines,  and  in
1878  he  Ix'came  assistant  gi'ologist  on  the  U.  S.  geo-
logic^il  and  geographical  survey  west  of  the  100th
meridian.  In  1880  he  was  appointed  to  a  similar
office  on  the  \J.  S.  geological  survey,  which  he  still
(18H8)  holds.  Besides  large  contributions  on  geologi-
cal subjects  to  various  scientific  periotlicals,  he  has
publishe<l  scientific  memoirs,  which  have  Iwen  is-
sued by  the  government  in  the  annual  rei)orts  of
the  survey,  or  as  seiMirate  monogranhs.  These  in-
clude'•  Sketch  of  the  Geological  History  of  Lake
Ijahontan  "  (1883);  "A  Geological  Reconnoissance
in  Southern  Oregon"  (1884);  "Existing  Glaciers
of  the  United  States"  (1885);  "Geological  History
of  Lake  Ijah(mtan"(1885);  "Geological  History  of
Mono  Valley"  (1888);  and  "Sub- Aerial  Decay  of
Rocks"  (1H88).

RrsSELIi,  John  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Frederick  citv,  Md.,  4  July,  1837.  He  entered  the
navv  as  a  midshipman,  10  Sept.,  1841,  was  attached
to  the  "St.  Mary  s"  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  1844-'6,
and  (wrticipated  in  the  first  operations  of  the  Mexi-
can war  and
the  blockade  at
Vera  Cruz  prior
to  the  capture
of  that  city.  He
became  a  passed
midshipman,  10
Aug.,  1847,  and
was  graduated
at  the  naval
academy  in
1848.  He  was
attached  to  the
North  Pacific
exploring  exf>e-
dition  in  1853-
Vi.and  served  in
the  sloop  "  Vin-
cennes '  under
an  appointment
as  acting  lieu-
tenant, and  also  as  navigator.  In  this  cruise  the
U.  S.  envoy  to  China  was  indebted  to  Lieut.  Rus-
sell for  opening  communication  with  the  Chinese,
who  had  refus«'d  all  intercourse. Russell  Ixtidly

Sushed  his  way  alone  to  the  senior  mandarin,  and
elivered  des|>atches  by  which  American  and  Eng-
lish envoys  were  admitted  to  audience. He  was
oommissioned  master,  14  Sept^  1855,  and  lieuten-
voL.  v.— 28


^^^l-^?^!';?^^^^.^^^


ant,  15  Sept.,  1855.  and  in  1800-*1.  when  on  ord-
nance duty  at  the  Wa.shington  navy-yanl,  he  was
one  of  two  officers  there  that  remaineJi  loyal,  not-
withstanding that  his  tics  and  affections  were  with
the  south.  He  went  to  Norfolk  to  assi.^t  in  pre-
venting vessels  at  the  navy-yard  from  falling  mto
the  hands  of  the  secessionists,  and  had  charge
of  the  last  boat  that  left  the  yanl,  28  April,  1861.
He  was  next  attached  to  the  frigate  "Colorado,"
and  on  14  Sept.,  18(il,  he  commandiMl  a  Imat  expedi-
tion to  cut  out  the  privateer  "  Judah  "  at  Pensacola,
under  the  protection  of  shore  batteries  and  about
9.000  men.  Russell  boldly  approached  during  the
night,  and  after  a  severe  hand-to-hand  conflict,  in
which  20  of  his  force  of  100  sailors  were  killed  or
wounded,  himself  among  the  latter,  he  succeeded  in
destroying  the  "Judah"  and  regained  the  "Colora-
do." Admiral  Porter,  in  his  "  Naval  History,"  says
that  "  this  was  without  doubt  the  most  gallant  cut-
ting-out affair  that  occurred  during  the  war."  The
navy  department  c-omplimented  Russell.  The  state
of  Maryland  gave  him  a  vote  of  thanks,  and  Presi-
dent Lincoln  personally  expressed  his  gratitude.
Russell  was  then  placed  in  command  of  the  steamer
"  Kennebt'c  "  in  Farragut's  S(|uadron,  was  jircsent
at  the  surrender  of  the  forts  below  New  Orleans,
and  received  the  garrison  of  Fort  Jackson  as  pris-
oners on  his  ship.  Fari-agut  thanked  him  for  his
service  in  saving  lives  of  officers  and  men  in  the
flag-ship's  boat  during  a  guerilla  attack  at  Baton
Rouge.  He  was  commissioned  lie»itenant-com-
mander,  16  July,  1862,  wjis  on  ordnance  duty  at
Washington  in  1864,  and  commanded  the  sloop
'•  Cyane,"  of  the  Pacific  stjuadron,  in  1864-'5.  After
Ix'ing  commissioned  commander  on  28  Jan.,  1867,
he  took  charge  of  the  steamer  "  Os.sij)ee,"  of  the
Pacific  squadron,  in  1869-'71,  and  during  a  gale  in
the  Gulf  of  California  rescued  the  passengers  and
crew  of  the  Pacific  mail-steamer  "  Continental  "  in
September,  1869.  He  became  captain,  12  F'eb.,
1874,  commanded  the  sloop  "  Plymouth  "  in  1875,
and  by  prompt  measures  saved  the  vessels  of  the
North  Atlantic  squadron  from  an  epidemic  of  yel-
low fever  at  Key  West.  In  1876-'7  ne  commaniJed
the  steamer  "  Powhatan  "  on  special  stTvice.  He
wjis  made  commodore,  30  Oct.,  1883,  had  charge  of
the  Mare  island  navy-yard  in  1883-'6.  was  promoted
rear-admiral,  4  March,  1886,  and  voluntarily  went
upon  the  retired  list,  27  Aug.,  of  the  same  year.

RUSSELL,  Jonathan,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  in  1771 ;  d.  in  Milton,  Majss.,  19  Feb.,
1832.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1791,  and
educated  for  the  law,  but  engaged  in  business,  and
subsequently  in  politics.  He  was  U.  S.  minister  to
Norway  and  Sweden  in  1814-'18,  and  one  of  the
five  commissioners  that  negotiated  the  treaty  of
Ghent  in  the  former  year.  He  settled  in  Meniion,
Mass.,  on  his  return  to  this  country,  took  an  active
part  in  ix)litics,  and  in  1821-'3  was  a  member  of
congress,  having  been  elected  as  a  Denuxrat.  He
was  a  versatile  and  graceful  writer,  but,  with  the
exception  of  his  diplomatic  correspondence  while
in  Paris,  London,  and  St<x'kholm,  and  a  Fourth-of-
July  oration  that  reached  its  twentieth  edition
(Providence,  1800).  he  published  nothing.

Rl'SSELL,  Noadiah,  clerg>nian.  b.  in  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  in  1659;  d.  there".  3  Dec,  1713.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1681.  taught  at  Ijts-
wich.  and  in  October,  1688.  was  onlaine<l  minister
of  the  church  in  Middletown,  where  he  remained
until  his  death.  He  wa-s  one  of  the  twelve  found-
ers of  Vale,  and  a  trustee  of  that  college.  His
"  Diary"  is  publishe<l  in  the  "New  England  His-
torical Register"  for  January,  1853. — His  son,
William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  20


354


RUSSELL


RUSSELL


Nov.,  1690;  d.  there,  1  June,  1761,  was  ^n^uated
at  Yale  in  1709,  studied  theology  under  his  father,
was  a  tutor  in  Yale,  and  from  1718  until  his  death
served  as  pastor  of  the  church  in  Middletown.  He
declined  the  presidency  of  Yale  collejje,  was  one
of  its  trustees,  and  published  a  sermon  entitled
"  The  Decay  of  Love  to  God  in  Churches "  (New
liondon.  Conn.,  1731).

RUSSKLL,  Peter,  Cana<lian  administrator,  b.
in  Eiii,'land  about  1755;  d.  there  about  1825.  In
175)1  he  accompanied  Ocn.  John  G.  Simcoe,  first
lieutenant-governor  of  Upper  Canada,  to  that  prov-
ince as  ins{)ector-general,  and  becjime  a  meml)er  of
its  first  parliament  and  of  the  executive  council.
After  Gen.  Siracoe's  resignation,  in  1790,  Gen.  Rus-
sell a<iministered  the  government  of  the  province
until  the  arrival  of  Gen.  Hunter  in  1799.  During
Gen.  Russell's  administration,  among  other  acts
passed  by  the  legislature  were  the  act  incorporating
the  legal  nrofcssion,  and  that  for  establishing  trade
with  the  United  States.

RUSSELL,  Richard,  colonist,  b.  in  Hereford-
shire, England,  in  1612 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,
14  May,  1674.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1640,
was  a  representative  in  1646,  speaker  of  the  house  in
,  1648-9,  1654,  1656,  and  1658,  assistant  in  1659-'76,
and  treasurer  of  Massachusetts  from  1644  until  his
death. —  His  son,  James,  jurist,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  1  Oct..  1640:  d.  there,  28  April,  1709,  was  a
representative  in  1679.  an  assistant  in  1680-'6,  and
one  of  Gov.  Joseph  Dudley's  council.  He  wjis  a
member  of  the  council  of  safety  in  1689,  a  leader
in  the  Revolutionary  movement  of  that  day,  a
councillor  under  the  new  charter  in  1692,  and  was
a  judge  and  treasurer  of  Massachusetts  in  1680-'6.
"  He  discharged  all  his  duties  with  fidelity,  was  a
lil)eral  friend  to  the  noor,  and  respected  the  insti-
tutions of  religion. ' — James's  great  grandson.
Chambers,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,  4  July,  1713;  d.
in  Guilford,  England,  24  Nov.,  1767,  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1731,  became  executive  councillor,
representative,  and  subsequently  judge  of  the  su-
perior court  and  of  the  admiralty. — Chambers's
descendant,  David,  congressman,  b.  in  Massachu-
setts in  1800;  d.  in  Salem,  N.  Y.,  24  Nov.,  1861,
received  a  common-school  education,  removed  to
Salem,  N.  Y.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  there,  and
established  a  practice.  He  was  in  the  legislature
in  1816  and  in  1830,  subsequently  U.  S.  district
attorney  for  northern  New  York,  and  in  1835-'41
was  a  member  of  congress,  having  been  elected  as
a  Whig.  He  afterward  resumed  his  profession,  in
which  he  continued  until  his  deatn. — His  son,
David  Allan,  soldier,  b.  in  Salem,  N.  Y.,  10  Dec,
1820;  d.  near  Winchester,  Va.,  19  Sept.,  1804,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1845,
served  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  received  the  brevet
of  1st  lieutenant  in  August,  1847,  for  gallant  and
meritorious  conduct  in  the  several  affairs  with
guerillas  at  Paso  Ovejas,  National  Bridge,  and
Cerro  Gordo.  He  became  captain  in  1854,  was  en-
gaged in  the  defences  of  Washington,  D.  C.  from
November,  1861,  till  January,  1862,  when  he  was
appointed  colonel  of  the  7th  Massachusetts  volun-
teers, served  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  the
Virginia  peninsular  campaign,  and  was  engaged  at
Yorktown,  Williamsburg,  Pair  Oaks,  and  tlie  seven
days'  battles  around  Rielimond.  He  was  brevetted
lieutenant-colonel,  U.  S.  army,  1  July,  1862,  for
these  services,  became  major  of  the  8th  U.  S.  in-
fantry on  9  Aug.  of  the  same  year,  and  nartieipated
in  the  battles  of  Crampton's  Gap  and  Antietam.
In  November,  1862,  he  became  brigadier-general  of
volunteers.  He  commanded  a  brigade  of  the  6th
corps  in  the  Rappahannock  campaign,  was  engaged


at  Fredericksburg,  Salem,  and  Beverly  Ford,  and
at  Gettysburg,  for  which  battle  he  was  brevetted
colonel,  1  July,  1863.  During  the  Rapidan  cam-
paign he  participated  in  the  capture  of  the  Con-
federate works  at  Iiappahann(x.-k  station,  com-
mandetl  a  division  in  the  0th  corps  in  the  battles
of  the  Wilderness,  Si»ottsylvania,  and  North  Anna,
was  brevetted  brigatUer-general,  U.  S.  armv,  6
May,  1864,  and  participated  in  the  actions  at  Cold
Harbor  and  the  siege  and  battles  around  Peters-
burg. He  was  then  engage<l  in  the  defence  of
Washington,  D.  C,  and  in  August  and  September,
1864,  served  in  the  Shenandoah  campaign  in  com-
mand of  his  former  division.  He  wiu>i  killed  at  the
heatl  of  his  column  in  the  battle  of  Ofwquan,  Va.
He  was  brevetted  major-general  in  the  United
States  armv,  19  Sept.,  1864.

RUSSELL,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Culpeper
county,  Va.,  in  1758;  d.  in  Fayette  county,  Ky.,
3  July,  1825.  He  removed  with  his  father  to  the
Virginia  frontier  in  early  boyhood,  joined  Daniel
Boone's  Indian  expedition  when  he  was  fifteen
vears  of  age,  and  was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the
kevolutionary  army  the  next  year,  in  which  capa-
city he  served  at  King's  Mountain.  In  that  battle
he  was  the  first  to  reach  the  summit  of  the  moun-
tain, and  to  receive  a  sword  from  the  enemy.  He
was  then  promoted  captain,  served  against  the
Cherokee  Indians,  and  negotiated  a  treaty  of  peace
with  that  tribe.  He  subsequently  fought  at  the
battle  of  Whitsell's  Mills  and  at  Guilford  Court-
House.  He  removed  to  Kentucky  at  the  end  of
the  war,  and  bore  an  active  part  in  almost  every
general  expedition  against  the  Indians  until  the
settlement  of  the  country,  commanding  the  ad-
vance under  Gen.  John  Hardin,  Gen.  Charles  Scott,
and  Gen.  James  Wilkinson.  In  the  expedition
under  Gen.  Anthony  Wavne  he  led  a  regiment  of
Kentucky  volunteers.  lie  was  a  delegate  to  the
Virginia  legislature  in  1789  that  passed  the  act
that  separated  Kentuckv  from  that  state,  and  on
the  organization  of  the  Kentucky  government  was
annually  returned  to  the  legislature  till  1808.  At
that  date  he  was  appointed  by  President  Madison
colonel  of  the  7th  U.  S.  infantry.  He  succeeded  Gen.
William  H.  Harrison  in  command  of  the  frontier
of  Indiana,  Illinois,  and  Missouri  in  1811,  and
planned  and  commanded  the  expedition  that  was
sent  against  the  Peoria  Indians  in  1812.  He
served  again  in  the  legislature  in  1823,  and  de-
clined a  nomination  for  governor.  Russell  county^
Ky.,  is  named  in  his  honor.

RUSSELL,  William,  elocutionist,  b.  in  Glas-
gow, Scotland,  28  April,  1798  ;  d.  in  Lancaster,
Mass.,  17  May,  1878.  He  was  educated  in  the  Latjn-
school  and  the  university  of  his  native  city,  and
came  to  this  country  in  1819.  in  which  year  he  took
charge  of  Chatham  academy.  Savannah,  Ga.  He
removed  to  New  Haven  a  few  years  later,  and
taught  in  the  New  Township  academy  and  Hop-
kins grammar-school.  He  then  devoted  himself
to  the  instruction  of  classes  in  elocution  in  An-
dover,  Harvard,  and  Boston,  edited  the  "  American
Journal  of  Education  "  in  1826-'9,  and  subsequently
taught  in  a  girls'  school  in  Germantown,  Pa.  He
resumed  his  elocution  classes  in  Boston  and  An-
dover  in  1838,  and  lectured  extensively  in  New
England  and  New  York.  He  establishetl  a  teach-
ers' institute  in  New  Hampshire  in  1849.  which  he
removed  to  Lancaster,  Mass.,  in  1853.  His  subse-
quent life  was  devoted  to  lecturing,  for  the  most
part  before  the  Massachusetts  teachers'  institutes,
under  the  care  of  the  state  board  of  education.  He
publishetl  "  Grammar  of  Composition  "  (New  Haven,
1823) ;  "  Lessons  in  Enunciation  "  (Boston,  1830) ;


RUTER


RUTHERFOORD


366


"  Riuliincnts  of  Owturp"  (1888);  "  Aracriean  Elo-  ]
cutionis't "  (1844) :  "  Orthophony,  or  Cultivution  of  '
thu  Voiw"  (184.*)):  "  KU'im-nts  "of  Mui«ii'nl  Articu-
lation" (1845):  "Pulpit  Klofulion"  (18.W):  "  Kx-
erpises  in  NVnnls"  (1>C>»);  uml  fclitod  numontus
8chool-tMKiks  uml  scvenil  minor  (Mliicationnl  man-
ualu.— His  Muj.  FranriH  Thayer,  ckrjfyinan,  l».  in
Roxbury,  Mass..  10  June,  1N28.  wa;*  i*<lufate«l  at
An<lovtT.  );riuluat4><l  at  the  theoloijiral  dt'imrtnicnt
of  Trinity  in  IKVI.  ami  onlainoKl  [•nivt  in  ISfl."),
Aft<?rwaril  ho  InH-anie  paj<tor  of  Protestant  Kpis-
e4>|)al  churches  in  New  Britain,  Uiil^efiel*!,  ami
Waterbury,  Conn.,  antl  was  professor  of  eltK-ution
at  Iloljart,  Trinitv,  the  lk«rkeley  divinity-school,
an«l  the  (leneral  theolopical  seminary,  New  York
city.  Since  1875  he  has  l)een  rector  of  St.  Mar-
mn>t'8  difx-esan  school  for  jjirls  in  Waterbury,
Conn.  Mr.  Russell  has  won  n'putation  as  an  elo-
cutionist, still  holding  professorships  in  two  theo-
logical seminaries.  He  has  published  ".Juvenile
S|K«aker"  (New  York,  1846),  "Practical  Kemler"
(1853),  and  etlited  a  revised  edition  of  his  father's
work  under  the  title  of  "  Vwal  Culture"  (1882),
and  is  the  author  of  "  I'se  of  the  Voice"  (1882).

Rl'TER,  Martin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charlton,
Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  3  April,  1785;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, Tex.,  16  May,  18Ji8.  He  receive<l  a  common-
acmx)l  education,  studied  theology,  and  in  June.
1801,  was  admitted  to  the  New  York  conference  of
the  Methmlist  EpiscoiMil  church.  He  preached  in
New  Hampshire  and  Montreal.  Canada,  became  an
elder  at  the  age  of  twenty,  was  stationed  at  Boston,
Mas.s.,  Portland.  Me.,  and  other  places,  had  charge
for  a  time  of  New  Market  academy,  and  in  1820-^8
conducteil  the  Book-concern  in  Cincinnati.  Ohio.
When  Augusta  college,  Ky.,  was  established  in
1828  he  was  selected  for  the  presidency,  and  he
held  that  office  until  he  resignea  in  order  to  return
to  the  ministry  in  18JJ2.  He  preached  in  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  for  two  years,  and  then  became  presi-
dent of  Allegheny  college.  Obtaining  the  appoint-
ment of  superintendent  of  the  mission  to  Texas,  ho
resigned  in  July,  1837.  He  went  to  the  field  that
he  had  selected,  rode  more  than  2,000  miles  through
Texas,  organized  churches,  made  arrangements  for
establishing  a  college,  and  laid  out  the  greater  part
of  the  state  into  circuits.  The  fatigues  and  priva-
tions that  he  endure<l  destroye<l  his  health,  and  he
died  after  slotting  out  on  the  homeward  journey.
He  was  the  first  Methodist  clergyman  in  the  United
States  to  receive  the  degree  of  I).  D.,  which  was
conferretl  on  him  by  Transylvania  university  in
1830.  Rutersville,  Tex.,  was  namcil  for  him,  and
the  college  there  was  founded  in  his  honor.  Dr.
Ruter  published  a  "  Collection  of  Miscellaneous
Pieces'  ;  "  Explanatory  Notes  on  the  Ninth  Chap-
ter of  Romans  ' ;  "  Sketch  of  Calvin's  Life  and  Doc-
trine" ;  "  Letter  on  Calvin  and  Calvinism  "  (1816) ;
"Hebrew  Grammar";  "  Historv'  of  Martyrs";
"  Ecclesiastical  History,"  which  was  long  a  stand-
ard text-lxwk  in  theological  seminaries;  and  sev-
eral educational  text-lxxiks.  He  left  unfinished  a
"  Plea  for  Africa  as  a  Field  for  Missionary  l^abor"
and  a  "  Life  of  Bishop  Asbury."

Rl'KiERS,  Henrv,  patriot,  b.  in  New  York
city  7  Oct.,  1745;  d,  there,  17  Feb.,  18:30.  He  was
gra<lualed  at  Columbia  in  17(M),  serve<l  as  a  cap-
tain in  the  American  army  at  the  battle  of  White
Plains,  and  8ul)se<juently  wius  a  colonel  of  New
York  militia.  During  the  British  occupation  of  New
York  city  his  house  was  used  as  a  barrack  and  hos-  I
pital.  ( 'ol.  Rutgers  was  a  memlter  of  the  New  York
It';;is!titure  in  1784.  and  was  fre<|uently  re-elected,  i
He  WHS  the  proprietor  of  land  on  VmhI  river,  in  the
vicinity  of  (I'hatham  stjuare.  and  in  other  parts  of  |


the  oitv.and  gave  sites  for  streets,  »chools,  churches,
and  cfiarities.  Ho  preitided  over  a  meeting  that
was  held  on  24  June,
1812.  to  pn'|»aro
against  an  exiMftinl
attmk  of  the  Brit-
ish, and  contribute<l
toward  defensive
works.  From  1802
till  1826  he  was  one
of  the  regents  of  the
.State  university.  He
gave  1|;5.(HK)  for  the
purp<>so  of  reviving
Queen's  college  in
New  Jersey,  the
name  of  which  was
changed  to  Rutgers
college  on  5  Dec.,
1825.  See  memoir
in  "  New  York  (ten-
ealogical  and  Bio-
graphical Record  "


//U/TiA/y  "^AA^^Jtyi^


^


of  April.  1886;  and  "The  Rutgers  Family  of  New
York."  by  Ernest  H.  Crosby  (N*ew  York,  1886).

Rt'TriERI''OORI),  ThomaK,  merchant,  b.  in
Gla.sgow.  Scotland.  7  Jan..  1766;  d.  in  Richmond,
Va..  31  Jan.,  1852.  He  was  designed  by  his  family
for  the  churc'h,  but  at  the  age  of  fifteen  years  entered
the  counting-house  of  Hawkesley  and  Kutherfoord,
Dublin.  Ireland,  at  the  head  of  which  was  his  eldest
brother,  John.  In  1784  he  was  sent  to  Virginia
in  charge  of  two  vessels  with  valuable  cargoes,  and
went  to  Richmond,  where  he  establishetla  ware-
house. In  1788  he  returned  to  Dublin  and  became
a  partner  in  the  firm,  but  he  came  again  to  Rich-
mond in  1789.  made  that  city  his  home,  and  married
there  in  1790.  Beginning  with  a  capital  of  £600,
he  accumulate*!  a  handsome  fortune.  He  was  suc-
cessful both  in  the  shipping  and  milling  business,
was  public-spirited,  and  exercised  great  lil>erality.
He  gave  to  the  city  of  Richmond  the  ground  on
which  the  penitentiary  now  stands,  and  ma<le  other
gifts  of  city  property  to  private  citizens.  When
too  old  to  continue  in  active  business,  he  collected
around  him  his  many  friends  and  relatives  and
was  the  centre  of  a  charming  circle,  whom  he
entertained  by  his  bright  conversation  and  witty
sayings.  He  left  a  manuscript  autobiography  in
his  own  handwriting,  which  is  preserved  uy  his
descendants.  During  the  congressional  session  of
1820  the  question  of  a  protective  tariff  was  raised
for  the  first  time.  The  merchants  of  Richmond,
in  September,  1820.  a<lopte<l  a  memorial  pmtcsting
against  a  course  so  injurious  to  their  interests,  and
>Ir.  Rutherfoord  was  selectetl  to  draft  it.  It  was
presented  in  their  Ix'half  by  John  Tyler;  and  in
after-years,  when  ex-President  Tyler" was  invited
to  lecture  in  Richmond,  he  selected  for  his  subject
"  Richmond  and  its  Memories " — one  of  those
memories  being  "Thomas  Rutherfoord.  his  Anti-
Tariff  Memorial  and  other  Political  Writines." —
His  eldest  son,  John,  b.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  6
Dec.,  1792;  d.  at  Richmond.,  Va..  in  July,  1866,
received  his  e<Iucation  at  Princeton,  and  studied
law.  but  practised  his  profession  only  a  short  time.
He  was  for  many  years  president  of  the  Virginia
mutual  assurance  society,  the  first  institution  of
this  kind  in  the  state,  ami  held  this  post  until
his  death.  He  was  the  first  captain  of  the  Rich-
mond Fayette  artillery  and  became  colonel  of  the
regiment,  and  was  known  thenceforth  as  "Colo-
nel John."  Col.  Rutherf<K)rd  became  lieutenant-
governor  of  Virginia  in  1840.  and.  u|>on  the  death
of  Gov.  Thomas  Gilmer  in  1841,  succeedetl  him  as


366


RUTHERFORD


RUTHERPURD


governor,  which  place  he  filled  for  more  than  a
year.  During  this  period  he  conducted  a  corre-
spondence with  Gov.  William  H.  Sewanl,  of  New
York,  concerning  a  demand  that  he  had  made,  as
governor  of  Virginia,  upon  the  latter  for  the  ren-
dition of  fugitives,  which  discussion  of  constitu-
tional obligations  won  him  reputation  as  a  states-
man and  as  a  writer.  For  years  he  was  associated  in
intimate  correspondence  with  the  first  public  men
of  the  day,  among  them  ex-President  John  Tyler
and  his  relatives,  William  C.  Rives,  and  President
Madison.  He  was  always  active  in  public  affairs
and  of  proverbial  integrity,  and  won  friends  by  his
courteous  manners  and  profuse  and  elegant  hospi-
tality. His  portrait  is  in  the  capitol  at  Richmond
with  those  of  the  other  governors  and  distinguished
men  of  Virginia.  At  an  entertainment  at  his
house  Gen.  Winfleld  Scott  pronounced  his  eulogy
upon  Robert  E.  Lee,  saying  that  "  he  was  a  head
and  shoulders  above  any  man  in  the  army  of  the
United  States,  and  that  in  case  of  war  on  the
Canatla  question  he  would  be  worth  millions  to  his
country.  This  expression  of  opinion  had  great  in-
fluence in  Lee's  being  called  by  Virginia  to  assume
command  of  the  state  forces  at  the  opening  of  the
civil  war.  —  John's  onlv  son.  John  Coles,  b.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  20  Nov.,  182.'5 ;  d.  at  Rock  Castle,
Goochland  co.,  Va.,  in  August,  1866,  received  a
good  education,  studied  one  year  at  Washington
college.  Va.,  and  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Virginia  in  1842.  Subsequently  he  studied  law,
and  practised  with  success  in  Goochland  and  the
adjoining  counties.  At  the  age  of  twenty-seven
he  was  elected  to  the  house  of  delegates,  and  he
represented  his  county  for  twelve  consecutive  years.
He  was  at  different  times  chairman  of  the  most
important  committees  of  the  house,  and  was  favor-
ably known  as  a  debater  and  writer.  He  contrib-
uted, under  the  signature  of  "  Sidney,"  some  able
articles  to  the  press;  one, on  "Banking,"  published
in  pamphlet-form,  especially  gained  him  literary
reputation.  He  possessed  great  popularity  both
as  a  public  man  and  as  a  j)rivate  citizen.  lie  died
within  the  week  after  his  father's  death.

RUTHERFORD,  Friend  Smith,  soldier,  b.  in
Sc-henectady,  N.  Y.,  25  Sept.,  1820;  d.  in  Alton,  111.,
20  June,  1864.  He  was  the  ^reat-grandson  of  Dr.
Daniel  Rutherford,  of  the  University  of  Edinburgh,
who  is  regarded  as  the  discoverer  of  nitrogen,  lie
studied  law  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  removed  to  the  west,
and  settled  in  practice  at  Alton,  111.  On  30  June,
1862,  he  was  commissioned  as  captain  and  commis-
saiT  of  subsistence,  but  he  resigned  on  2  Sept.  in
order  to  assume  the  command  of  the  97th  Illinois
regiment.  He  participated  in  the  attack  on  the
Confederate  worKsat  Chickasaw  Bayou,  near  Vicks-
burg,  led  the  assault  on  Arkansas  Post,  and  served
with  credit  at  the  capture  of  Port  Gibson  and  in
the  final  operations  against  Vicksburg.  He  subse-
quently served  in  Louisiana,  and  died  from  expos-
ure and  fatigue  a  week  before  his  commission  was
issued  as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers. — His
brothers,  Reuben  C.  and  George  V.,  served  also
in  the  volunteer  army  during  the  civil  war,  and
were  both  made  brigadier-general  by  brevet  on
13  March.  1865.

RUTHERFORD,  GriiHth,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1731 ;  d.  in  Tennessee  about  1800.  He  set-
tled in  North  Carolina,  west  of  Salisbury,  and  sat
in  the  Provincial  congress  that  met  in  i77o.  He
was  a  member  of  the  council  of  safety,  and  was
api)ointed  a  brigadier-general  by  the  Provincial
congress  at  Halifax  on  22  June,  1776.  In  Septem-
ber, 1776,  he  marched  at  the  head  of  2,400  men
into  the  country  of  the  Cherokees,  who  with  the


Tories  had  been  ravaging  the  frontier  settlements,
and.  in  co-operation  with  a  force  that  had  Iwen
raised  in  South  Carolina  by  Col.  Andrew  William-
son, killed  a  great  number  of  the  Indians,  destroyed
their  crops  and  habitations,  and  compelled  them  to
make  {leace  and  surrender  a  part  of  their  lands.
He  commanded  a  brigade  at  the  liattle  of  Sanders
Creek,  near  Camden,  16  Aug.,  1780,  where  he  was
taken  prisoner.  He  was  confined  at  Charleston
and  afterward  at  St.  Augustine  until  he  was  ex-
changed on  22  June,  1781,  when  he  took  the  field
again,  and  was  in  command  at  Wilmington  when
the  town  was  evacuated  by  the  British  at  the  close
of  the  war.  He  served  in  the  North  Carolina  sen-
ate, with  intermissions,  till  1786.  Subsequently  he
removed  to  Tennessee,  and  in  September,  1794,  on
the  creation  of  the  separate  territory  of  Tennessee,
was  am)ointed  president  of  the  legislative  council.
RUTHERFURD,  John,  senator,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  Septemi)er,  1760;  d.  in  Rutherford,
N.  J.,  23  Feb.,  1§40.  His  father,  Walter,  a  son  of
Sir  John,  of  Edgerston,  Scotland,  ser\'ed  in  the
British  army  from  the  age  of  seventeen,  and.  after
taking  part  in  the  Canadian  camj)aign  of  Sir  Jef-
frey Amherst,  resigned  his  commission,  married  a
daughter  of  James  Alexander,  and  became  a  citi-
zen of  New  York.  The  son  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1776,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  married  a  daughter  of  Lewis  Morris,
was  elected  clerk  of  the  vestry  of  Trirtity  church,
and  had  charge  of  much  of  the  property  of  that
corporation.  In  1787  he  removed  to  'tranquil-
lity, Sussex  CO.,  N.  J.  He  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  of  New  Jersey,  and  a  presidential
elector  in  1788,  and  was  twice  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  serving  from  24  Oct.,  1791,  till  Februarj-,
1798,  when  he  resigned  to  devote  his  attention  to  the
management  of  his  estate  in  New  Jersey,  engaged
extensively  in  agriculture,  and  was  a  promoter  of
public  improvements.  He  was  president  of  the
(ward  of  proprie-
tors of  eastern
New  Jersey.  In
1826  he  served  on
a  commission  to
adjust  the  boun-
dary between  New
York  and  New  Jer-
sey, and  in  1829
and  18^33  was  one
of  a  joint  commis-
sion to  settle  boun-
dary questions  be-
tween those  states
and  Pennsylvania.
— H  is  grandson,
Lewis  Morris,
physicist,  b.  in
Morrisania.  N.  Y.,
25  Nov.,  1816,  was
graduated  at  Will-
iams in  1834,  and
studied  law  with  William  H.  Seward  in  Auburn.
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1837,  and  practised  as
the  associate  of  Peter  A.  Jav.  and.  after  his  death,
of  Hamilton  Fish,  in  New  Vork  city.  In  1849  he
abandoned  the  practice  of  law  and  thereafter  de-
voted his  leisure  to  science,  principally  in  the  di-
rection of  astronomical  photography  and  spectral
analysis.  In  January,  1863,  he  published  in  the
"American  Journal  of  Science'  a  paper  on  the
spectra  of  stars,  the  moon,  and  planets,  with  dia-
grams of  their  lines  and  a  description  of  the  instru-
ments that  he  used,  which  was  the  first  published
work  on  star-spectra  after  the  great  revelations  of


y^yX^  y^i^S^^I^'^^^'''-'^-^


RUTHEKFURD


RUTLEDOE


897


Huni^on  and  Kin-hhofT.  ami  the  flrxt  nttomnt  to
cloiwify  the  stars  Hct'onlinjf  to  thi'ir  s|)ectm.  Wliilo
engH|;i*<l  in  iiiakiiij;  his  ol)s<-rvntions  u[>on  st^ir-
s{»ectrH  Mr,  Hulht-rfunl  disfoverfd  the  us4'  of  the
star-sjK'ftroscope  to  show  the  vxaci  stato  of  a<'hro-
niatic  correelion  in  an  ohjwt-glass.  particularly  for
the  rays  that  aro  used  in  photography.  In  1H04,
after  many  exj»eriment8  in  other  dir»«ctions  but
for  the  same  end.  he  succeede*!  in  devising  and
construeting  an  ohjective  of  11 J  inches  ajn-rture
and  aljout  15  feet  ii>cal  length,  corrected  for  pho-
tography alone.  This  objective  was  a  great  suc-
cess, and  was  in  constant  use  in  making  negatives
of  the  sun,  moon,  and  star-groups,  until  it  was
replaced  in  1808  by  another,  whicli  ha<l  about  the
same  focal  length  but  was  18  inches  in  aperture.
This  glass  was  an  ordinary  achronuitic,  such  as  is
UiK**!  for  vision,  and  was  converted  into  a  photo-
graphic objective  by  the  addition  of  a  third  lens
of  flint  glass,  which  made  the  proj)er  correction
and  couhT  l»e  aflixed  in  a  few  minutes.  Mr.  Kuther-
funl  constructed  a  micrometer  for  the  measure-
ment of  astnmomical  photograj>hs,  for  use  u|K)n
pictures  of  solar  eclipses  or  transits  and  upon
groups  of  stars,  of  which  he  has  measured  several
hundreil,  showing,  as  he  claims,  that  the  photo-
graphic method  is  at  least  equal  in  accuracy  to
that  of  the  heliometer  or  filar-micrometer,  and  far
more  convenient.  The  photographs  of  the  moon
nuule  by  Mr.  Itutherfunl  are  of  remarkable  beauty
and  have  not  yet  Ix'en  surpassed.  A  German  writer
having  suggested  that  the  collodion  film  was  not
reliable,  Mr.  Kutherfurd  published  in  1872  a  series
of  measurements  that  conclusively  demonstrated
its  fixity  under  pro{>er  conditions.  In  1864  he  pre-
sented to  the  National  academy  of  sciences  a  plio-
togniph  of  the  solar  swctnun  that  he  had  obtamed
by  means  of  bisulphiile  of  carlK)n  prisms.  It  con-
taine<l  more  than  three  times  the  number  of  lines
that  had  been  laid  down  within  similar  limits  on
the  chart  by  Hunsen  and  Kirchhoff.  He  construct-
ed a  ruling-engine  in  1870  which  produced  inter-
ference-gratings on  glass  and  speculum  metal  that
were  superior  to  all  others  until  the  recent  produc-
tions of  Prof.  Henry  A.  Rowland.  With  one  of
these  gratings,  contaming  alxjut  17,000  lines  to  the
inch,  he  [)roduced  a  photograph  of  the  solar  spec-
tnim  which  was  for  a  long  tune  unequalled.  In
1870  he  i)ublished  a  paper  describing  an  instru-
ment in  which  the  divided  circle  was  of  glass  and
showed  by  readings  that  it  gave  a  far  greater  ac-
curacy than  could  be  obtained  from  divisions  on  me-
tallic circles  of  the  same  dimensions.  Mr.  Ruther-
furd  was  named  by  the  president  of  the  United
States  one  of  the  American  delegates  to  the  Inter-
national meridian  conference  that  met  in  Washing-
ton in  Octolwr,  1885,  and  he  took  an  active  part  in
the  work  and  framed  and  presented  the  resolution
that  finally  expressed  the  conclusions  of  the  con-
ference. He  was  invite<l  by  the  French  academy
of  sciences  to  become  a  meml)er  of  the  Interna-
tional conference  on  astronomical  photography  in
Paris  in  1887,  and  was  appointed  by  the  president
of  the  National  academy  of  sciences  as  its  repre-
sentative, but  was  oldiged  to  decline  on  account  of
failing  health.  In  1858  he  l)ecame  a  trustee  of
Columbia,  but  he  resigned  in  1884.  after  giving  his
astronomical  instruments  to  that  institution,  in
whose  ol)servatory  they  are  now  mounted.  Mr.
Rutherfurd  was  one  of  the  original  meml)ers  named
in  the  act  of  congress  in  18<W  creating  the  National
.•u"a<lemy  of  science,  and  is  an  associate  of  the
Royal  astronomical  society,  and  his  work  has  been
recognized  by  the  gift  of  inany  diplomas,  member-
ships, orders,  and  medaU,  both  tlomestic  and  foreign.


RUTLEIMiE,  John.  staU>Kman.  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C.,  in  17:}«;  «I.  there,  28  July,  1800.  Ho
was  the  eldest  son  of  Dr.  John  Rutledge,  who
camo  to  South  Carrjlina  from  the  north  of  Ireland
alMuit  1735,  practised  medicine  in  Charleston,  and
inarrie<l  a  lady  of
fortune,  leaving
her  a  widow  with
s<'ven  chihlren  at
the  age  of  twenty-
seven.  The  son,
who  was  si'iit  to
Kngland  to  study
law  at  the  Tem-
ple, returned  to
Charleston  in  1761,
and  acquired  a
high  reputation  as
an  advocate.  Ho
was  an  earnest  op-
jxment  of  the
stamp-act  when  it
was  discussed  in
the  provincial  as-
sembly, was  sent
to  the  congress  at
New  York  in  October,  1765,  and  with  his  col-
league, Christopher  Gadsden,  boldly  advocated
colonial  union  and  resistance  to  oppression.  He
was  a  member  of  the  South  Carolma  convention
of  1774,  in  which  he  argued  in  favor  of  making
common  cause  with  Massachusetts,  and  carried  a
resolution  that  South  Carolina  should  take  part
in  the  proposed  congress,  and  that  her  delegates
should  go  unhampered  bv  instructions.  He  was
one  of  those  that  were  cliosen  by  the  planters  to
represent  them  in  the  first  Continental  congress
at  Philadelphia.  Patrick  Henry  pronounced  him
"by  far  the  greatest  orator"  in  that  assembly.
In  1775  he  was  again  chosen  a  delegate  to  con-
gress. He  was  chairman  of  the  committee  that
framed  a  constitution  for  South  Carolina  in  1776,
and  on  27  March  was  electetl  president  of  the  new
government,  and  commander-in-chief  of  the  mili-
tary forces.  When  the  British  fleet  arrived  in  Cape
Fear  river  he  fortified  Charleston,  and  insisted  on
retaining  the  post  on  Sullivan's  island  when  Gen.
Charles  Lee  proposed  its  evacuation.  During  the
battle  he  sent  500  pounds  of  powder,  and  directed
Col.  William  Moultrie  not  to  retreat  without  an
order  from  him,  adding  that  he  would  "sooner
cut  oflf  his  right  hand  than  write  one."  He  was
dissatisfied  with  changes  in  the  constitution,  and
in  March,  1778,  resigned  his  office,  but  in  the  fol-
lowing year  he  w»is  chosen  governor  again  by  an
almost  unanimous  vote  of  the  legislature,  super-
setling  Rawlins  Lowndes.  He  was  clothed  with
dictatorial  powers,  and  prepared  to  rejK^l  the  Brit-
ish invasion.  When  Gen.  Augustine  Prevost  ad-
vancetl  upon  Charleston  in  May.  1779,  the  city  was
defenceless.  Gen.  lienjamin  Lincoln  with  the'Con-
tinental  troops  being  150  miles  away.  The  latter
hastened  to  the  .succor  of  Charleston  by  forced
marches,  and  state  troops  were  gathered  for  the
same  object.  It  was  projwsed  by  the  governor's
council  that  the  British  should  retire,  on  condition
that  South  Carolina  should  remain  neutral  during
the  rest  of  the  war,  and  that  her  fate  should  be  de-
termined by  the  issue  of  the  conflict.  This  meas-
ure, which  the  historian  Ramsay  thinks  was  a  ruse,
devisetl  for  the  purpK)se  of  gaining  time,  was  favored
by  Rutledge,  but  opi>osetl  by  (JadMlen.  the  youngt^r
Laurens,  and  Moultrie.  On  Lincoln's  approach,
the  enemy  retreated,  and  Rutledge,  at  the  head  of
the  militia,  took  the  field  against  the  invaders.


368


RUTLEDGE


RUTTENBER


When  Charleston  was  captured  by  Sir  Henry  Clin-
ton in  1780,  Ciov.  Rutledge  retired  into  North  Caro-
lina, and  until  the  close  of  hostilities  accompanied
the  army  of  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene,  and  partici-
pated in'its  operations.  When  South  Carohna  was
partly  redeemed  from  the  conquerors,  he  resumed
the  duties  of  governor,  summoning  the  assembly
at  Jacksonlx)rough  in  January,  1782.  He  retired
from  the  governorship  in  that  year,  and  was  elect-
ed to  the  Continental  congress.  In  that  iMxly  he
opiMJsed  a  general  impost,  except  for  the  purpose
of  paying  the  army,  lie  wjis  returned  to  congress
in  1783,  and  in  March,  1784,  after  declining  the
mission  to  the  Hague,  he  was  apjMiinted  chancellor
of  South  Carolina.  He  was  a  member  of  the  con-
vention that  framed  the  Fe<leral  constitution,  in
which  he  was  one  of  a  committee  of  five  that  re-
portetl  a  ratio  of  representation  more  favorable  to
the  south  than  that  which  was  finally  adopted,
and  was  chairman  of  the  committee  of  detail.  He
advocated  the  assumption  of  all  the  state  debts
by  the  Federal  government,  threatened  a  secession
of  the  south  if  the  slave-tratle  were  prohibited,  pro-
posed that  congress  should  elect  the  president,  and
in  the  discussion  of  the  powers  and  constitution  of
the  judiciary  exercised  an  influential  voice.  When
the  constitution  went  into  operation  he  was  nomi-
nated a  justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  but  de-
clined in  order  to  accept  the  chief  justiceship  of
his  native  state.  On  1  July,  1795,  he  was  appoint-
ed chief  justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  He
presided  at  the  August  term,  but  when  the  senate
met  in  December  his  mind  had  become  diseased,
and  the  nomination  was  rejected. — His  brother,
Hugh,  jurist,  b.-in  Charleston,  S.  C,  about  1741 ;
d.  there  in  January,  1811,  acquired  his  legal  edu-
cation in  London,  returned  after  completing  his
term  at  the  Temple,  and  took  high  rank  at  the  bar
of  South  Carolina.  He  was  appointed  judge  of
admiralty  at  Charleston  in  1776,  and  was  speaker
of  the  legislative  council  in  1777-'8.  After  Charles-
ton surrendered,  he  was  sent  with  his  brother
Edward  and  other  patriots  to  St.  Augustine.  In
1782-'5  he  was  speaker  of  the  state  house  of  repre-
sentatives. In  1791  he  was  chosen  by  the  legisla-
ture one  of  the  three  judges  of  the  court  of  equitv
as  reconstituted  by  a  lately  enacted  law,  which
office  he  filled  till  his  death. — Another  brother,
Edward,  statesman,  b.  in  Charleston.  S.  C,  23
Nov.,  1749  ;  d.  there,  23  Jan.,  1800,  was  the  young-
est of  the  family.
After  acquiring  a
classical  education
and  reading  law
with  his  brother,
he  was  entered  as
a  student  at  the
Temple,  London,
in  1769.  He  at-
tended the  courts
of  law  and  the
houses  of  parlia-
ment for  four
years,  and,  on  be-
ing called  to  the
bar,  returned  to
Charleston  and
entered  into  prac-
tice. He  married
Harriet,  a  daugh-
ter of  Henry  Middleton,  soon  after  his  arrival.  In
1774  he  was  sent  to  the  Continental  congress.  He
took  an  active  part  in  the  discussion  that  preceded
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  of  which  he  was
one  of  the  signers,  and  remained  a  member  of  con-


Qf^L^vL^'^;^:^^^^^^^^


gre.ss  till  1777.  On  12  June,  1776,  he  was  appointed
on  the  first  lx)ard  of  war.  He  was  delegated,  with
John  Adams  and  IJenjamin  Franklin,  to  confer
with  Lord  Howe  with  reference  to  Howe's  pro-
posals for  a  reconciliation.  The  representatives  of
congress  met  the  British  admiral  on  Staten  island,
11  Sept.,  1776,  but  refused  to  treat  with  him  ex-
cept on  the  basis  of  a  recognition  of  American
inde|)endence.  In  1779  he  was  again  elected  to
congress,  but  he  was  unable  to  attend  on  account
of  sickness.  As  captain  in  the  Charleston  artillery,
of  which  he  afterward  became  lieutenant-colonel,
he  assisted  in  dishxlging  British  regulars  from  the
island  of  Port  Royal  in  1779.  While  Charleston
was  invested,  in  May,  1780,  he  was  sent  out  by
Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln  to  hasten  the  march  of  re-
enforcements,  but  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.
With  others  who  were  called  dangerous  relx>ls,  he
was  sent  to  St.  Augustine  after  the  capitulation,
and  confined  there  for  a  year.  After  he  was  ex-
changed he  resided  in  Philadelphia  until  the
British  withdrew  from  South  Carolina.  He  was
a  member  of  the  legislature  that  assembled  at
Jacksonborough  in  1782,  and  assented  to  the  bill
of  penalties  against  the  Tories  that  was  subse-
quently rescinded.  On  the  evacuation  of  Charles-
ton he  returned  to  his  home  and  resumed  profes-
sional practice,  which  he  continued  with  success
for  seventeen  years.  During  that  time  he  was  an
active  member  of  the  legislature.  He  eflfectually
resisted  the  efforts  that  were  made  to  revive  the
slave-trade  as  long  as  he  had  a  voice  in  the  public
business  of  the  state.  He  was  a  memljer  of  the
State  constitutional  convention  of  1790,  and  the
author  of  the  law  abolishing  the  rights  of  primo-
geniture that  was  enacted  in  1791.  He  declined
the  office  of  associate  justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme
court  in  1794,  and  was  elected  governor  of  South
Carolina  in  1798,  but  did  not  live  to  complete  his
term. — John's  son,  John,  member  of  congress,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  C.,  in  1766;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  1  Sept.,  1819,  studied  law  with  his  father.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist,  and
twice  re-elected,  serving  from  15  May,  1797,  till
3  March,  1803. — The  first  John's  grandson,  Ed-
ward, clergyman,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in
1797;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  13  March,  1832,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1817.  and  was  admitted  to
orders  in  Christ  church.  Middletown,  Conn.,  17
Nov.,  1819,  by  Bishop  Brownell.  Several  years
afterward  he  became  professor  of  moral  philosophy
in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  he  was
president-elect  of  Transvlvania  university  at  the
time  of  his  death.  Mr.  Rutledge  published  "  The
Family  Altar"  (New  Haven,  1822),  and  a  "His-
tory of  the  Church  of  England"  (Middletown,
Conn.,  1825). — Hugh's  son,  Francis  Hiiger,  P.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  11  April,  1799;
d.  in  Tallahassee,  Fla.,  6  Nov.,  1866,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1821,  studied  at  the  General
theological  seminary.  New  York  city,  and  was  or-
dained deacon  in  1823  and  priest  on  20  Nov.,  1825.
He  had  charge  of  a  church  on  Sullivan's  i^jland  in
1827-'39,  was  rector  of  Trinity  church,  St.  Augus-
tine, Fla.,  in  1839-'45,  then  became  rector  of  St.
John's  church.  Tallahassee,  and  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Florida  on  15  Oct.,  1851.  The  degree  of
D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Hobart  in  1844
He  published  occasional  sermons.

RUTTENBER,  Edward  Manning,  antiquary,
b.  in  Bennington,  Vt.,  17  July,  1824.  He  leanied
the  printer's  trade  in  Newburg.  N.  Y.,  and  was
the  publisher  of  the  "Telegraph."  except  during
two  years,  from  1850  till  1870.  He  has  published
a  "  History  of  Newburg  "  (Newburg,  1859) ;  "  Ob-


RUXTON


RYAN


809


struct  ions  to  the  Navigation  of  lludwn's  River"
(AUwiiv.  18«6);  "IlisU.rv  of  tlu«  Flap*  of  thn  Vol-
untecrl^'ifiinont.sof  ihc  At«t«of  N«'w  York  "  (I8ft5) :
*'  Historv  of  the  ImliHti  TriU*s  of  Iludsun's  Uivrr"
(18«7):  ami  n  "  History  of  Oriinjro  County"  (1H75).

RrXTON,  (ieory«*  FrcMlcrlfk  AugUMtiiH,  Kutt-
lish  travflliT.  h.  in  Kmt,  Kn^'laml,  in  1S20;  d.  in
St.  Ix^ui^s  Mo..  2U  St'pt.,  1S4«.  He  wa.s  educated
at  Sandhurst  military  eolleife,  whii-h  he  left  at
tho  a|f«>  of  seventeen,  and  volunteereil  in  lheS|mn-
i»h  service  during  the  t'arlist  war  of  IHJW-'U.  He
was  comniissione<l  as  a  lieutenant  in  tho  British
army  after  retuniing  home,  went  with  his  regi-
ment to  Canada,  resigned  s4M)n  afterward,  and
spent  M'veral  years  among  the  Indians  and  tni|>|H'rs
of  the  wi»st.  Ho  substHiuently  travelled  in  Africa.
and  just  lN>fore  the  Mexican  war  made  a  tour
through  all  the  provinces  of  Mexico,  and  sj)ent  the
following  winter  in  the  region  of  the  Rocky  moun-
tains, returning  to  Kngland  in  August,  1847.  He
set  out  on  a  second  trip  to  tho  far  west,  but  died
on  the  way.  He  was  the  author  of  "Adventures
in  Mexico' and  the  Kocky  Mountains"  (London,
1847),  "  Life  in  the  Far  VVest"  (1849);  a  p»»mphlet
on  the  Oregon  question,  and  napers  in  the  "  Trans-
actitms"  of  the  British  ethnological  society.

BrZ,  Joaquin  (nK)th),  Mexican  linguist,  b.  in
Merida  in  17i2;  d.  there,  15  Sept.,  1850.  He  en-
tered the  onlerof  St.  Francis  in  his  native  city  in
1794,  studio*!  philosophy  in  the  convent  of  his
order  in  1805,  was  graduated  there,  and  in  1810
became  a  priest.  He  was  imnjodiately  assigned  to
the  missions  of  the  Maya  Indians,  of  whose  lan-
guage he  p<jssessed  a  thorough  knowledge.  Be-
sides numerous  religious  works,  he  wrote  in  the
Maya  language  "Catecismo  hisU^rico  y  Doctrina
Cristiana  (Merida.  1822);  "GramAtica  Yucateca"
(1844);  "Cartilla  6  Silabario  do  la  lengua  Maya,
para  la  ensef5anza  do  los  niflos  indijenas"  (1845);
"  Analisis  del  idioina  Yucatoco  "  (1851) ;  and  "  Leti
u  cilich  Evangelio  Jesucristo  hebix  San  Lucas,"
edited  by  W.  M.  Watts  (London,  1865).

RYAS\  Abrani  Jo.sei»h,  poet,  b.  in  Norfolk,
Va.,  15  Aug.,  1839 ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  22  April,
1886.  At  an  early  age  he  decided  to  enter  the
Roman  Catholic  priesthood,  and,  after  the  usual
classical  and  theological  studies,  he  was  ordained,
and  shortly  afterward  became  a  chaplain  in  the
Confederate  army,  serving  until  the  close  of  the
war.  He  wrote  "The  Conquered  Banner"  soon
after  Lee's  surrender.  In  1865  he  removed  to
New  Orleans,  where,  in  addition  to  his  clerical
duties,  he  edited  the  "Star,"  a  weekly  Roman
Catholic  paper.  From  New  Orleans  he  went  to
Knoxville.  Tenn.,  after  a  few  months  to  Augusta,
Ga.,  and  founded  the  "  lianner  of  the  South,"  a
religious  and  political  weekly.  This  he  soon  relin-
quished, and  for  several  years  was  pastor  of  St.
Mary's  church.  Mobile,  Ala.,  but  in  1880  his  old  rest-
lessness returned,  and  ho  went  to  the  north  for  the
twofold  object  of  publishing  his{X)ems  and  lectur-
ing. He  spent  the  month  of  I)ecemlx?r  in  Balti-
more, where  his  *'  Poems.  Patriotic,  Religious,  and
Mist-ellaneous,"  were  published.  There  also,  al)out
the  same  time,  he  delivered  his  first  lecture,  the
subject  l>eing  "  Some  Aspects  of  Modern  Civiliza-
tion." During  this  visit  he  made  his  home  at
Loyola  college,  and  in  return  for  the  hospitality
of  the  Jesuit  fathers  he  gave  a  public  reading
from  his  poems,  and  devoted  the  proceeds.  $300.  to
found  a  me<lal  for  poetry  at  the  collep;.  His
lecturing  tour  was  not  successful,  and  m  a  few
months  he  returne<l  to  the  south,  where  he  contin-
ued to  k«d  the  same  restless  mmie  of  life.  Father
Ryan  was  engaged  on  a  "  Life  of  Christ "  at  the


time  of  his  death.  Ili»  most  r»opular  poems.  )>eside«
that  mentione«l  alxA'c,  are  "The  I<ost  Caus**,"  "The
Sword  of  L***',"  "  The  Flag  of  Krin,"  and  the  epic
"Their  Storv  runneth  Thus."

RYAN,  l^dward  (tporirc,  jurist,  b.  at  Newcastle
House,  County  Meath.  Ireland.  13  Nov.,  1810;  d.
in  Milwaukee!  Wis..  I»  Oct..  1880.  He  had  l)een
int«nded  for  the  priesthixMl.  but  lM>gan  the  study
of  law,  came  to  the  LJniti-<l  States  in  IK^O.  and
sul)sequently  was  a  memlter  of  tlie  Kpiscottal
church.  Ho  taught  and  continue<l  his  law  stuuies
in  New  York,  was  admitted  to  the  l)ar  in  1886,
and  in  that  year  removetl  to  Chicago,  where  he
edited  a  pafn-r  C4ille<l  the  "Tribune"  frouj  1889
till  its  discontinuance  in  1841.  He  went  to  Racine,
Wis,,  in  1842,  and  to  Milwaukee  in  1848,  and  be-
came one  of  the  most  powerful  a<lvo<.-ates  at  the
Wisconsin  bar.  Among  the  cases  in  which  he  won
reputation  were  the  imt)eachment  trial  of  Judge
Levi  Hubl)cll  in  1853,  the  Joshua  Glover  fugitive-
slave  case  in  1854,  and  tho  case  of  Bash  ford  !•«.
Barstow  in  1856  to  determine  the  title  to  the  office
of  governor  of  the  state,  in  which  Coles  Bashford,
Mr.  Ryan's  client,  was  successful.  Ho  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  State  constitutional  convention  of  1846,
and  to  the  Democratic  national  convention  in  1848.
In  1862  Mr.  Ryan,  as  chairman  of  a  committee  of
the  Democratic  state  convention,  drew  up  an  ad-
dress to  the  j)eople  of  Wisconsin  that  became  known
as  the  "  Ryan  Address."  He  was  city  attorney  of
Milwaukee  in  1870-'2,  and  on  17  June,  1874,  was
appointed  chief  justice  of  the  state  to  fill  a  vacancy,
lie  was  elected  to  the  office  in  the  following  April,
and  served  until  his  death.

RYAN,  Georgre  Parker,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  8  May,  1842;  d.  at  sea,  24  Nov.,
1877.  He  was  apix)inted  a  midshipman,  30  Sept.,
1857,  and  graduated  at  the  naval  acaflomy  second
in  his  class  in  1860.  He  was  commissioned  lieu-
tenant, 16  July,  1862,  and  was  navigator  of  the
steamer  "  Sacramento  "  on  s}»ecial  service  in  chase
of  the  "  Alabama"  and  "  Florida"  in  1862-'4.  He
was  promotetl  to  lieutenant-commander,  16  July,
1866,  and  attached  to  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  as
assistant  professor  of  astronomy  and  navigation  in
1866-'9.  He  was  again  on  duty  at  the  i^val  acad-
emy in  1871-'4,  and  was  promoted  to  commander,
3  Oct.,  1874.  He  organized  parties  for  the  obser-
vation of  the  transit  of  Venus  of  1874,  and  was  se-
lected to  take  charge  of  the  expedition  to  Kergue-
len  islands.  He  was  ordered  to  take  command  of
the  iron  steamer  "Huron"  in  1876,  and  on  23
Nov.,  1877,  he  sailed  for  Havana.  The  vessel  was
wrecked  on  Body  island,  N.  C.,  and  .Ryan,  with
most  of  his  officers  and  crew,  was  drowned.  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  one  of  the  most  sci-
cntifip  navigators  of  the  service.

RYAN,  James,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Thurles, Coun-
ty Tipi>erary,  Ireland,  in  1848.  He  came  to  the
Cnitetl  States  when  a  child,  and  studied  for  the
priesthood  in  the  seminaries  of  St.  Thomas  and
St.  Joseph,  Bardstown,  Ky.  Ho  was  sul)sequontl^
professor  in  St.  Joseph's  seminary.  After  his  ordi-
nation he  was  on  the  Kentucky  mission  for  seven
years,  principally  at  St.  Martin's.  Meade  co.,  and
at  Klizabethtown,  Hardin  co.  He  removetl  to  the
Peoria  diocese  in  Illinois  in  1878,  and  was  ap-
pointed pastor  at  Watjiga.  He  was  afterward
transferred  to  Danville,  an<l  in  1881  he  wjis  made
rector  of  Ottawa,  where  his  a«lministration  was
very  successful.  In  1888  he  was  nominated  to  the
bishopric  of  Alton.

RY'aN,  Patrick  John,  R.  C  archbishop,  b.  in
Cloneyharp,  near  Thurles,  Ireland.  20  Feb..  1881.
Ho  was  educated  at  Thurles  and  Dublin,  and  en-


360


RYAN


RYDER


tered  Carlow  college,  with  a  view  of  preparing  him-
self for  the  American  mission,  lie  was  ordained
deacon  in  1853,  and  set  out  the  same  year  for  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  finished  his  ecclesiastical  stud-
ies in  Carondelet  seminary,  and  was  raised  to  the

I)riesthotxl  in  lb54.
ie  rose  to  be  vicar-
general,  on  15  Feb.,
1872.  was  elected
coadjutorarchbish-
op  of  St.  Louis,  and
consecrated  under
the  title  of  bishop
of  Tricomia  on  14
April.  Owing  to
the  great  age  of
Archbishop  Ken-
rick,  most  of  the
work  of  governing
the  diocese  fell  to
his  share,  and  his
administration  was
energetic  and  suc-
cessful. He  was
nominated  arch-
bishop of  Philadelphia  on  8  June,  1884.  Bishop
Ryan  was  one  of  the  prelates  that  were  selected  in
1883  to  represent  the  interests  of  the  Roman  Catho-
lics of  the  United  States  in  Rome.  Me  was  present
at  the  third  plenary  council  of  Baltimore  in  1884,
at  which  the  opening  discourse,  "  The  Church  in
her  Councils."  was  pronounced  by  him.  He  went
to  Rome  again  in  1887  on  business  connected  with
the  plan  of  establishing  a  Catholic  university  in
Wasnington.  He  has  published  lectures  on  '*  \^hat
Catholics  do  not  Believe"  (St.  Louis,  1877)  and
"  Some  of  the  Causes  of  Modem  Religious  Skepti-
cism "  (188:3).

RYAN,  Stephen  Vincent,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  near
Almonte,  Upper  Canada,  1  Jan.,  1825.  His  parents
settled  in  Pottsville,  Pa.,  when  he  was  a  child,  and
he  entered  St.  Charles's  seminary,  Philadelphia,  in
1840,  and  in  1844  became  a  member  of  the  Lazarist
order.  After  studying  theology  in  the  Seminary
of  St.  Mary's  of  the  Barrens,  Mo.,  he  was  ordained
a  priest  in.  St.  Louis  on  24  June,  1849,  and  imme-
diately held  professorships  in  St.  Mary's  and  Cape
Girardeau  colleges.  He  was  afterward  president
of  the  College  of  St.  Vincent,  and  in  1857  was
elected  visitor  of  the  Lazarist  order  tliroughout
the  United  States.  He  was  instrumental  in  es-
tablishing the  mother-house  and  novitiate  of  the
community  at  Germantown,  and  transferred  his
residence  thither  from  St.  Louis.  In  1868  he  was
nominated  to  the  bishopric  of  Buffalo,  and  conse-
crated on  8  Nov.  Bishop  Ryan  has  frequently  been
called  to  important  missions  abroad.

RYAN,  William  Albert  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in
Toronto,  Canada,  28  March,  1843 ;  d.  in  Santiago,
Cuba,  4  Nov.,  1873.  He  was  educated  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  enlisted
in  the  New  Y''ork  volunteers,  serving  through  the
war,  and  rising  to  the  rank  of  captain.  He  volun-
teered in  the  service  of  the  Cuban  junta  in  18G9,
and  when  Thomas  Jordan  was  made  commander-
in-chief  of  the  revolutionary  army  became  his
chief  of  staff  and  inspector-general.  He  displayed
bravery  and  military  skill  in  conflicts  with  the
Spanish  troops,  and  several  times  returned  to  the
United  States  to  recruit  new  forces  for  carrying
on  the  insurrection.  Ilis  last  expedition  was  in  the
"  Virginius,"  which  was  captured  by  the  Spanish
man-of-war  "Tornado"  on  31  Oct.,  1873.  seven
days  after  leaving  tlie  port  of  Kingston,  Jamaica,
and  taken  into  Santiago. The  passengers  and


crew  were  tried  by  court-martial,  and  all  were  con-
demned to  death  as  pirates.  After  the  sentence
ha<l  been  executed  on  Gen.  Ryan  and  fifty-one
others,  the  massacre  was  arrested  through  the  in-
terference of  the  captain  of  a  British  war  vessel,
and  the  surviving  prisoners  were  subse(iuently  re-
leased on  the  demand  of  the  U.  S.  government,

RYAN,  William  Redmond,  author,  b.  in  Eng-
land. He  had  resided  for  many  years  in  the  Unitwi
States,  when  in  1847  he  joined  a  body  of  U.  S.  vol-
unteers, and  went  with  them  to  California.  On
their  arrival  they  were  disbanded,  and  Ryan  en-

faged  in  gold-mining  till  his  return  late  in  1849.
le  published  "Personal  Adventures  in  California"
(2  vols.,  London,  1850),  which  was  illustrated  from
his  own  drawings,  and  contains  many  interesting
details  of  early  pioneer  life  in  California.

RYAN,  William  Thomas,  Canadian  author,  b.
in  Toronto,  3  Feb.,  1839.  He  was  educated  at  St.
Michael's  college,  Toronto,  and,  entering  the  armv,
served  during  the  Crimean  war,  and  subseouently
in  the  100th  royal  Canadian  regiment.  On  leaving
the  army  he  devoted  himself  to  journalism  and  lit-
erature. He  edited  "  The  Volunteer  Review,"  pub-
lished at  Ottawa,  "  The  Evening  Mail,"  of  wnich
he  was  proprietor,  the  "  Daily  Free  Press"  at  Ot-
tawa, and  the  "  Daily  Sun,"  and  is  now  (1888)  edi-
tor of  the  Montreal  "  Daily  Post "  and  the  "  True
Witness."  He  has  contributed  poems  and  articles
to  various  magazines,  has  lectured,  and  been  active
as  a  political  speaker  on  the  Liberal  side.  He
is  known  as  an  author  under  the  name  of  Car-
roll Ryan,  which  he  took  in  1853.  He  has  pub-
lished "  Oscar,  and  other  Poems  "  (Hamilton,  1857) ;
"Songs  of  a  Wanderer"  (Ottawa,  1867);  "The
Canadian  Northwest  and  the  Canadian  Pacific
Railway  "  (1875) ;  and  "  Picture  Poems  "  (1884).—
His  wife,  Mary  Ann  MacIver,  whom  he  married
in  1870,  has  published  "  Poems"  (Ottawa,  1879).

RYDER,  Albert  PInkham,  artist,  b.  in  New
Bedford,  Mass.,  19  March,  1847.  He  studied  art
under  William  E.  Marshall  and  at  the  Academv  of
design,  where  he  began  to  exhibit  in  1873.  In  1877,
1882,  and  1887  he  went  abroad,  visiting  London
and  Paris,  and  travelling  in  Holland,  Italy,  Spain,
and  Germany.  His  paintings  are  notable  rather
for  color  and'  effect  tnan  for  form,  and  he  might
be  classed  as  a  representative  of  the  impressionist
school  in  this  country.  Among  his  works  are
"  Wandering  Cow,"  "  Curfew  Hour,"  "  Pegasus,"
"Farm-Yard,"  "The  Waste  of  Waters  is  their
Field"  (1884),  "Little  Maid  of  Arcady"  (1886),
"  Temple  of  the  Mind,"  and  "  Phantom  Ship."

RYDER,  James,  educator,  b.  in  Dubhn,  Ire-
land, 8  Oct..  1800;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13
Jan.,  1860.  He  was  brought  to  the  United  States
when  a  child,  entered  the  novitiate  of  the  Society
of  Jesus  at  the  age  of  thirteen,  studied  for  five  years
at  Georgetown  college,  and  afterward  completed
his  theological  studios  in  Rome,  Italy,  where  lie  re-
mained five  years.  He  was  ordained  a  priest  in
1825,  and,  after  teaching  theology  and  the  sacred
scriptures  for  three  vears  at  the  College  of  Sp<ileto,
he  returned  to  the  United  States,  and  was  for  sev-
eral years  professor  of  theology  and  philosophy  and
vice-president  of  Georgetown  college.  In  1839  he
became  pastor  of  St.  Mary's  church,  Philadelphia,
and  in  the  following  vear  he  took  charge  of  a
church  in  Frederick,  ISld.,  which  he  soon  left  to
assume  the  presidency  of  Georgetown  college.
From  1843  till  1845  he  was  superior  of  the  Jesuit
order  in  the  United  States.  In  1846  he  became
president  of  the  College  of  the  Holy  Cross,  which
had  been  established  three  years  before  at  Worces-
ter, Mass.,  but  in  1848  he" returned  to  his  former


KYDER


KYLE


361


post,  in  which  ho  remained  till  \H!i\.  lie  was  a
popiilnr  Iwturer  and  pn'ac'hor,  ami  published  oc-
oasiotukl  iiddrt-sM-s  and  M'rimms.

RYDKK,  IMatt  Powell,  artist,  b.  in  Brooklyn.
N.  Y.,  11  Jum-.  1H21.  IIo  Htudie«l  under  Ix'on
Bonnat  in  Paris  in  18(Jl>-'70.  and  also  in  l^ondon.
Aiuun^  his  jrenre  {Miintings  an;  *'  Life's  Evening."
"Spinning."  and  "An  Interior"  (1879);  "Fare-
well" (IHSO);  " Spinning- VVhtid"  (IHHl);  "Read-
ing the  Cup"  (1883):  "Weleome  Step"  (1883);
"Clean  Shave,"  "  Washing  -  Da  v."  and  "Hill  of
Fare"  (1884):  "  Fireside"  (188.'i)':  and  "Watching
and  Waiting  "  (188(5).  He  was  elected  an  assoc-iute
of  the  National  academy  in  18U8.  and  was  also  a
foun<ler  of  the  Brooklyn  academy  of  design.

RYDER.  WiUiaiii  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in
Provincctown,  Mass..  \'.i  July.  1822:  «•  i»  Chicago,
III..  8  .Marfh.  1888.  He  received  no  collegiate  edu-
cation, but  at  nineteen  years  of  age  Ix'gan  tt>  preach
the  doctrine  of  universal  salvation.  At  twenty-one
he  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Universalist  society  in
Concord,  N.  H..  and  he  subsequently  preached  at
Nashua  two  years,  after  whic-h  he  travelled  two
years  in  Eurojto  and  the  Holy  Land,  On  his  re-
turn he  became  pastor  of  the  Universalist  church
in  Itoxbury.  Mass..  where  he  remained  ten  years.
He  resigned  this  jjost  to  accept  a  call  to  St,  Paul's
church.  Chicago, in 18(M). Lombard university

Eve  him  the  degree  of  I),  D.  in  18(i3.  Dr.  Ryder
queathed  more  than  half  a  million  dollars  to
charitable,  educational,  and  religious  institutions.
Among  the  bequests  is  one  that  provides  for  free
annual  lectures,  to  be  under  the  control  of  the  pas-
tors of  the  1st  Universalist,  1st  Presbyterian,  and
1st  Congregational  churches  and  the  mayor  of  Chi-
cago "in  aid  of  the  moral  and  social  welfare  of  the
citizens  of  Chicago.  u|K)n  an  anti-sectarian  basis.'"

KYERSON,  Adolphus  Egerton,  Canadian  edu-
cat<^r.  b.  in  Charlotteville,  Upper  Canada,  24  March,
1803;  d.  in  Toronto,  19  Feb..  1882.  His  father.
Joseph  (1700-1854),  was  an  American  loyalist  from
New  Jersey.  The  son  received  a  classical  edu-
cation, and  in  1829  founded  the  "Christian  Guard-
ian," of  which  he  was  apjx)inted  associate  editor.
He  was  chosen  the  first  president  of  Victoria  col-
lege in  1841.  and  in  1844  was  appointed  superin-
tendent of  education  for  Upj>er  Canada.  In  1846
he  induced  the  legislature  to  pass  a  school  act  that
he  had  drafted,  and  he  afterward  published  an
elaborate  report  on  methods  of  education  (Mon-
treal. 1847).  He  drafted  the  bill,  in  1850,  under
which  the  public  schools  of  Ontario  are  still  main-
tained. In  1855  he  founded  meteorological  sta-
tions in  connecti(m  with  county  grammar-schools,
and  in  18(50  draft e<l  a  bill  for  the  further  develop-
ment of  the  system  of  public  instruction.  In  18i6
he  rt'signed.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Wesleyan  university.  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1842,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Victoria  college  in  18G0.
Dr.  Ryerson  published  "  Ijetters  in  Defence  of  Our
School  System  "  (Toronto,  1859)  and  "The  Loyalists
of  Americ^i  and  their  Times— 1G20-181«"  (1880).
"The  Story  of  My  Life,"  an  autobiography,  which
he  left  unflnishe<{  at  his  death,  was  completed  and
published  by  John  George  Hodgins  (1883).

KYKKS<>N,  John,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in
Norfolk.  Out..  12  June.  1800;  d.  in  Simcoe,  Ont„
5  Oct.,  1878.  He  received  a  fair  education,  l»ecame
a  Wesleyan  preacher  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and
aidinl  in  founding  many  institutions  of  the  Meth-
o<list  Episcopal  church.  In  18.">4  the  Canadian  con-
ference, with  a  view  to  assuming  the  <lirection  and
tnaintenance  of  the  missions  of  the  Ijondon  Wes-
leyan committee  in  the  Northwest  territory,  sent
M'r.  Ryerson to  explore  the  field. He  travelled


nearly  8.(X)0  miles  in  the  yacht  of  the  Hudson  bay
conifMiny  and  in  >wrk  canoes,  and,  U*fore  returning,
went  to  England  and  arranged  for  the  transfer  of
the  missions.  His  journey  is  descritK'<i  in  "Hud-
son's Bay.  or  a  Missioiuiry  Your  in  the  Territory  of
the  Hon.  Hudson's  Bay  Com|>any  "  (Toronto,  ItiTtH).
RYERSON,  Martin,  lH>nefactor,  b.  in  Paterson.
N.  J.,  «  Jan..  1818;  d.  in  lioston.  Mass.,  «  .Sept..
1887.  His  early  educational  advantag«>s  were  lim-
ited. At  sixteen  y»'ars  of  age  he  left  home  alone,
and  in  Detroit  found  employment  with  a  fur-dealer.
In  183(J  he  went  to  Muskegon,  Mich.,  and.  while
trailing  with  the  Indians,  learned  to  i!i|K-ak  the  Ot-
tawa and  Chippewa  languages.  In  1841  he  em-
barked in  the  lumber  business  on  a  limited  scale,
and  in  1851  he  established  a  yard  at  Chicago,  by
which  his  business  was  greatly  increastil.  and  he
Ix'came  wealthy.  Mr.  Ryerson  gave  freely  to  chari-
table institutions  and  public  enterprises,  and.  as  a
token  of  his  friendship  and  appreciation  of  Indian
character,  he  erected  in  Lincoln  park,  Chicago,  a
bronze  group  in  memory  of  the  Ottawa  nation,  of
which  tribe  his  wife  was  a  member.  He  expressed  a
wish  to  his  son  that  the  income  from  a  large  busi-
ness block,  valued  at  |225,0O().  should  be  forever
set  apart  and  distributed  equally  aniong  eight  char-
itable institutions  of  Chicago.  The  family  have
placed  the  property  in  trust  for  this  purjMise.

RYLANCE,  Joseph  HIne,  clergyman,  b.  near
Manchester.  England,  16  June.  1826.  He  was
graduated  at  King's  college.  London,  in  1861,  and,
after  ofllciatine  as  a  curate  in  London  for  two  years,
came  to  the  United  States  in  18(>3.  and  Int'ttme
rector  of  St.  Paul's  church.  Cleveland.  Ohio.  In
1867-'71  he  was  rector  of  St.  James's  church,  Chi-
cago. III.,  and  since  1871  he  has  l)ecn  rector  of  St.
Mark's  church.  New  York  city.  He  receivetl  the
degree  of  I).  I),  from  Western  Reserve  college  in
1867.  Dr.  Rylance  l)elongs  to  the  school  of  Chris-
tian rationalists.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Preachers
and  Preaching;  "  (London,  1862) ;  "  Essays  on  Mira-
cles "(New  \ork.  1874);  "Social  Quesdons :  Lec-
tures on  Competition.  Communism.  Co-operation,
and  Christianity  and  So<-ialism  "  (New  Yorlc.  1880);
and  Pulj)it  Talks  on  Topics  of  the  Time"  (1881).

RYLANI),  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  King  and
Queen  county,  Va.,  14  March.  1805. He  wa.s  gradu-
ated at  Columbian  college.  Wjishington,  D.  C..  in
1826,  ordained  to  the  Christian  ministry  in  1827,
and  in  1827-'32  was  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church
in  Lynchburg,  Va. In  1832  he  took  cnarge  of  the
Manual-lal)or  school  in  Richmond,  and  when  that
school  was  chartered  in  1844  as  Richmoiid  college
he  was  made  its  president,  serving  until  1866. For
twenty-five  years  he  acted  as  pastor  of  the  1st  Af-
rican Baptist  church  of  Richmond,  during  which
time  he  baptized  into  its  fellowship  nearly  4.(X)0
persons. In  1868  he  removetl  to  Kentucky,  where
he  has  been  engae:e<l  in  the  work  of  teaching  and
preaching. Dr.  Ryland  has  been  a  friend  of  the
co|or<'<l  people,  anJa  promoter  of  higher  education.
RYLE,  John,  manufacturer,  b.  in  liollington,
near  Macclesfield.  England.  22  Oct..  1817;  d.  in
Macclesfield.  England.  6  Nov.,  1887. He  worketl
in the  silk-mills  of Macclesfield  when but five
years  of  age.  and.  having  iK'come  an  exjH'rt  weaver
and  throwster,  emigrated  to  the  United  Slates  in
18;W,  and  was  engaged  to  establish  a  silk-factory  at
1  Paterson.  N.  J.,  of  which  he  iKH-ame  owner  in  1846.
'  He  was  the  first  to  carry  on  this  business  withsuc-
I  cess  in  the  United  .Sates. At  first  the  prtnluction
was  limited  to twists  and floss  silks. He  tried
weaving  in  1846,  and  again  in  1859- '60,  but  was
.  not  able  to  make  the  manufacture  of  broad  silks
I  remunerative  until  after  the  civil  war.


362


SA


SAAVEDRA


SA,  Estacio  de  (sah],  Portuguese  soldier,  b.  in
Alentojo  about  1530;  u.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  20  Feb.,
1507.  He  was  a  nephew  of  Men  de  Saa  (q.  v.).
During  the  struggle  between  the  French  and  Por-
tuguese in  Brazil  the  Portuguese  governnient  sent
Estat-io  de  Sa,  with  two  galleons  but  few  soldiers,
to  expel  the  invaders.  He  arrived  at  I^hia  in
15G4,  and,  after  waiting  several  months  to  organ-
ize a  sufficient  force,  left  in  1565  for  Rio  Janeiro,
but,  on  examining  the  fortifications,  became  con-
vinced of  his  inferiority.  He  then  sailed  for  Santos,
where  he  remained  one  year  organizing  militia  and
awaiting  re-enforcements,  and  in  January,  1506,
sailed  again  for  the  Bay  of  Rio  Janeiro.  On  1
March  he  came  to  anchor  at  the  bar  and  landed
his  force,  fortifying  himself  between  the  PjT<j  d'As-
sucar  and  the  Morro  HSo  JoSo,  where  he  laid  the
foundations  of  the  future  city  of  Rio  Janeiro.  The
governor-general,  being  informed  by  Jesuits  of  the
critical  condition  of  his  nephew,  sent  an  expedition
to  his  aid.  Estacio  de  Sa  began  operations  imme-
diately by  attacking  the  fortifications,  which  were
taken  after  an  obstinate  battle,  in  which  Sa  was
wounded.  The  French  were  completely  routed
and  obliged  to  retire  in  their  ships  to  Europe,  but
Sa  died  a  few  days  afterward  of  his  wound,  and
was  buried  in  the  church  of  Sfio  Sebastiilo,  on  the
hill  afterward  called  Morro  do  Castello.

SA,  Salvador  Correa  de,  Brazilian  governor,
b.  in  Rio  Janeiro  in  1594;  d.  in  Lisbon,  1  Jan.,
1688.  He  was  a  grandson  of  the  fii-st  governor  of
Rio  Janeiro  after  its  separation  from  Bahia  in  1573,
and  his  father,  Martin  de  Sa,  also  held  that  office
after  it  became  again  a  dependency  of  the  general
government  of  Bahia  till  1608.  Young  Salvador
entered  the  public  service  in  1612,  protecting  a  con-
voy of  thirty  vessels  from  Pernambuco  to  Europe
against  Dutch  privateers.  He  was  afterward  sent
to  Brazil  to  prepare  an  auxiliary  force  of  500  men
and  three  armed  ships  to  assist  the  fleet  that  had
been  sent  under  Fadrique  de  Toledo  against  the
Dutch  inviidei"s,  and.  after  saving  the  province  of
Espirito  Santo  from  an  attack  by  Dutch  corsairs,
he  aided  in  the  recmiture  of  Bahia  in  1625.  He  re-
turned in  1632  to  Lisbon,  but  was  sent  in  1634  as
admiral  of  the  south  to  suppress  a  rebellion  of  the
Calequi  Indians  in  Paraguay,  whom  he  defeated  in
1035.  He  was  appointed  captain-general  of  Rio
Janeiro  in  16:37.  and  as  such  recognized  in  1640  the
Prince  of  Braganza  as  King  John  IV.,  and,  when
the  Jesuits  of  the  south  refused  to  acknowledge  the
new  sovereign,  Sa  left  his  uncle,  Duarte  Correa,  in
charge  of  the  government,  and  sailed  on  29  March
for  Sao  Paulo,  where  he  soon  restoi'cd  order.  In
March,  1644,  he  was  appointed  general  of  the  fleet,
to  protect  the  Brazilian  coast  against  the  Dutch,
and  co-operated  with  JojIo  Fernandes  Vieira  in  the
attack  on  Recife.  He  was  appointed  in  1645  to
establish  a  government  in  Angola,  and  sailed  on
12  May  for  Africa,  finishing  the  conquest  of  the
Congo  kingdom  by  the  capitulation  of  Fort  Sfio
Miguel,  15  Aug.,  1048.  In  1058  he  was  again  ap-
pointed governor  of  southern  Brazil,  and  took
charge  in  September,  1059,  but,  after  quelling  an  in-
surrection in  Nictheroy  in  October,  1060,  he  handed
the  government  over  to  his  successor  in  June  of
that  year,  and  sailed  for  Lislxin.  When  Alphonso
VI,  was  de{X)sed,  23  Sept.,  1667,  Sa,  whose  son  had
been  the  favorite  of  that  monarch,  was  banished  to
Africa  for  ten  years;  but,  resolving  to  finish  his
days  in  a  Jesuit  convent,  he  obtained,  by  the  in-


fluence of  the  general  of  the  order,  permission  to
live  in  retirement  in  his  palace  of  Lisbon,  where
he  died  nearly  a  centenarian.

SA,  Siin&o  Pereira  de,  Brazilian  author,  b.  in
Rio  Janeiro  in  1701;  d.  there  alxmt  1769.  He
studied  in  the  Jesuit  college,  and  was  afterward
admittetl  into  the  order,  lie  was  graduated  in
theology  and  canonical  law  at  Coimbra  university,
and  by  his  learning  became  one  of  the  mo.st  cele-
brated members  of  his  order.  He  wrote  much,  and
among  the  few  of  his  productions  that  have  been
preserved  are  "  Essaio  topograph  ico  e  militar  sobre
a  Colonia  do  Sacramento"  (Rio  Janeiro,  1760),
and  "  Descrip^ao  chronologica  da  diocese  de  Rio
Janeiro"  (1705).

SAAVEDRA,  Cornelio  (sah-vay'-drah),  Argen-
tine soldier,  b.  in  Potosi,  Bolivia,  in  1700;  d.  in
Buenos  Ayres  in  1829.  In  1707  his  family  removed
to  Buenos  Ayres,  where  he  obtained  his  education.
He  filled  different  posts  under  the  Spanish  govern-
ment, and  on  0  Sept.,  1800,  was  appointed  chief  of
a  battalion.  When  Montevideo  was  taken  by  the
English  troops,  2  Feb.,  1807,  Liniers  marched  with
a  division  of  2,500  volunteers  to  protect  the  city,
and  Saavedra  took  part  in  the  expedition  at  tlie
head  of  GOO  patricians.  He  took  possession  of  all
the  arms  anu  ammunition  of  Colonia,  and  carried
them  to  Buenos  Ayres.  On  5  July,  1807,  he  took
an  active  part  in  the  reconquest  oi  the  latter  city,
at  the  head  of  his  battalion.  On  25  May,  1810,
after  the  revolution,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the
chiefs,  he  was  appointed  president  of  the  govern-
ing junta.  Against  the  advice  of  Mariano  Moreno
{q.  V.)  he  admitted  the  deputies  of  the  interior  prov-
inces into  the  junta  in  December,  1810,  and  by  this
and  other  measures  caused  discontent,  and  when
the  patriotic  army  under  Belgrano  was  defeated,
20  June,  1811,  at  lluaqui,  Saavedra  left  for  upper
Peru  to  take  command  of  the  army.  On  23  Sept.
the  revolution  that  overthrew  the  junta  took  place,
and  Saavedra  was  ordered  to  deliver  the  forces
under  his  command  to  Gen.  Puevrredon.  In  1814
he  was  accused  of  being  the  leaAer  of  the  mutiny
of  5  April,  1811,  took  refuge  in  Chili,  and  was  ex-
cluded from  the  amnesty  that  was  granted  after-
ward. When,  in  1810,  the  congress  of  Tucuman
was  established,  he  presented  himself  for  trial,
and  was  acquitted  and  occupied  his  former  place.
When  Balcarce  passed  to  the  array  of  San  Martin
in  1817,  Saavedra  was  appointed  his  successor  as
chief  of  staff,  which  place  he  occupied  till  1818.
He  served  in  the  Argentine  army  till  1821,  when
he  retired  with  his  family  to  a  country-seat.

SAAVEDRA,  Hernando  Arias  de,  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Asuncion,  Paraguay,  in  1550;  d.  there
about  1025.  He  was  a  son  of  one  of  the  officers
that  accompanied  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  and  at  an  early
age  entered  a  military  career,  taking  part  in  many
engagements  against  the  Indians.  For  his  services
he  was  made  governor  of  Asuncion,  which  post  he
held  three  different  times,  being  the  first  native  to
obtain  such  an  office.  Jn  one  of  his  expeditions
he  advanced  200  leagues  to  the  south  oi  Buenos
Ayres,  and  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Indians,  but
escaped  and  returned  to  Asuncion.  Afterward  he
invaded  the  Chaco,  and  explored  the  borders  of
Parana  and  Uruguay  rivers.  He  gained  most  re-
nown by  the  two  reforms  that  he  promoted,  of
which  the  first  was  the  suppression  of  the  encomi-
endas  or  system  of  personal  slavery,  which  would
have  resulted  in  the  destruction  of  the  native  race.


SAAVEDRA


SABIN


363


This  refonn  was  approvwl  by  King  Philip  III.,  and
in  cons«><|Ucnct\  in  16(M>.  the  Jesuits  Mazetta  and
Cataldini  WL>n>  sent  to  found  tlio  niissioiLs  of  Fara-
way. Tile  seeoml  refonn  was  tlie  division  of  tiie
Kio  de  la  Plata  into  two  different  >^>verninents,
Buenos  Avres  and  Pam>;uuv,  wliicli  was  «lecreed  in
1617,  and't(K.k  effect  in  1020.

SAAVIIDKA,  Juau  de,  Simnish  soldier,  b.  in
Seville,  Sfmin,  about  the  end  of  the  1.1th  century;
d.  in  Chuiiuinga,  Peni,  21  May,  1554.  lie  went  to
Peru  in  1534  as  chief  judjre  of  the  expedition  of
Pedro  de  Alvarado,  but  after  his  arrival  entered
the  service  of  Diego  de  Alniajfni.  whom  he  acconi-

Knitnl  in  the  discovery  and  conquest  of  Chili  in
35-'(J.  In  the  latter  year  he  founded  the  city  of
Valparaiso,  and,  on  his  return  to  Peru,  he  took
part  in  the  battle  of  Aliancay,  12  July,  1537.  lie
actwl  on  Ix'half  of  Alinagro  as  commissioner  in  the
nej'otiations  of  Mala  about  the  iKXindaries  of  New
Toledo,  but  was  not  present  at  the  battle  of  Salinas,
6  April,  15ii8,  on  account  of  illness.  Although  he
always  refuse<l  the  offers  of  the  brothers  Pizarro
during  Almagro's  life,  after  the  latter's  death  Saave-
dra,  on  account  of  rivalry  with  Juan  de  Kada  (q.  v.),
retired  to  Lima,  and  took  no  part  in  the  battle  of
Chunas.  In  1544,  when  Gonzalo  Pizarro  rose  in
rebellion,  he  apjKiinted  Saavedra  his  substitute  at
Huanuco.  President  Gasca  in  1547  induced  Saave-
dra to  re-enter  the  Loyalist  party,  appointing  him
captain  of  cavalry,  which  corps  he  commanded  in
the  battle  of  Jaquijaguana.  In  1549  Gasca  ap-
pointed him  governor  of  Cuzco,  but  in  1551  he  was
sujierseded  by  the  audiencia  of  Lima.  In  1554  the
city  of  Cuzco  sent  him  with  the  rank  of  captain  to
join  the  army  of  Alonso  de  Alvarado,  ojierating
against  the  rel)ellious  Francisco  Giron  (q.  v.),  and
he  met  his  death  at  the  battle  of  Chuquinga.

SAAVEDRA  GUZMAN,  Antonio,  Mexican
poet,  b.  in  Mexico  about  1550;  d.  in  Spain  about
1620.  lie  was  a  son  of  one  of  the  conquerors  of
Mexico,  and  married  a  granddaughter  of  Jorge  de
Alvarado,  brother  of  the  founder  of  the  Spanish
dominion  in  Central  America.  His  favorite  stud-
ies were  poetry  and  history,  especially  that  of  his
native  country,  in  which  he  was  aided  by  his  thor-
ough knowledge  of  the  Aztec  language.  The  his-
torical data  that  he  accumulated  during  seven
years'  lalwr  were  molded  by  him  during  a  seventy
days'  passage  to  Spain  in  1598  into  his  historical
poem  "  Kl  Peregrino  Indiano"  (Madrid,  1599).
This  work,  which  is  now  extremely  rare,  describing
in  twenty  cantos  the  glories  of  the  Aztec  court  ana
the  conquest  of  Mexico,  is  rather  a  chronicle  than
a  poem,  and  on  more  than  one  occasion  has  solved
difficulties  regartling  the  early  history  of  New
Spain.  The  Spanish  poets,  Vicente  Espinel  and
Loi)e  de  Vega,  praise  Saavedra's  work  highly,  and
William  II.  Prescott  calls  him  the  poet-chronicler.

SABIN,  Dwight  May,  senator,  b.  in  Marseilles.
La  Snlle  co..  111..  25  April,  1844.  His  early  years
were  spent  on  a  farm,  and  in  1857  the  family  re-
moved to  Connecticut,  He  was  educated  at  Phil-
lips Andover  academy,  which  he  left  in  186:3  to
enter  the  National  army:  but  he  resigned  after
three  months,  owinp  to  impaired  health,  and  pro-
cured a  clerkship  in  Washington,  I).  C.  In  1864
he  enteretl  on  farming  and  the  lumber  business  in
Connecticut,  and  in  1868  he  removed  to  Stillwater,
Minn.,  where  he  engaged  in  lumliering  and  manu-
facturing. Mr.  Sabin  now  (1888)  owns  a  large  num-
ber of  mills,  and  is  the  largest  stockholder  in  the
Northwestern  car  company,  having  ac<iuire<l  a  for-
tune. He  s«Tve«l  in  the  state  si-rmte  in  lH7t)-'l,  was
a  member  of  the  National  Republican  conventions
of  1872,  1876,  1880,  and  1884,  serving  as  chairman


!  of  the  la.<«t,  and  watt  elected  to  the  U.  S.  MiMite  as  a
Republican,  to  succewl  William  Windom,  for  the
term  that  will  end  on  4  March,  1889.

SABIN,  Klijah  RobinHon,  clergyman,  b,  in
Tollan<I,  Conn..  10  .Sept.,  1776;  d,  in  Augusta,  Ga.,
4  May,  1818.  His  ancestor,  William,  whr)sc  name
is  written  Sabin.  .Sabine,  and  Sal)en,  came  U>  this
i  country  in  1*145,  and  held  local  offices  in  Itehoboth,
1  Mass.,  and  his  father,  Nehemiah,  servwl  in  the  Revo-
lutionary war,  and  was  fatally  wounded  at  Trenton.
I  In  1784  his  family  removed  to  Vermont,  and  the
s<^)n  was  employed  in  clearing  land,  educating  him-
I  self  in  leisure  hours.  In  1798  he  iN-gan  to  preach,
and  in  1799  ho  entered  the  Methodist  Episcopal
ministry.  He  was  appointed  presiding  ehler  of  the
I  Vermont  district  in  1805,  ana  subseiiuently  of  the
New  London  district,  embracing  Rhode  Island,
Connecticut,  Massachusetts,  and  a  part  of  New
Hampshire,  He  was  apftointed  chaplain  of  the
Massachusetts  house  of  representatives,  lieing  the
first  of  his  denomination  to  hold  this  office,  and
afterward  became  pa.stor  of  a  Methmlist  church  in
Ham|Mlen,  Me.  He  assisted  in  the  military  hospi-
tal there,  and.  after  the  enemy  took  jjossession  of
the  town,  was  taken  prisoner  and  confined  in  a
transport.  His  wife  mounted  a  horse,  rode  nine
miles  to  the  British  commander,  and  obtained  his
release  on  the  plea  that  he  was  a  non-combatant.
In  1815  he  resumetl  his  charge  in  IIanii>den,  He
dietl  while  travelling  in  the  southern  states  to
regain  his  health.  Mr.  Sabin  was  the  author  of
the  "  Road  to  Happiness,"  and  "  Charles  Observa-
tor." — His  son,  Lorenzo  (Sabine),  historian,  b.  in
New  Lisbon,  N,  H„  28  Feb,,  1803 ;  d,  in  Boston,
Mass.,  14  April,  1877,  adopted  Sabine  as  the  spell-
ing of  his  surname.  He  was  self-educated,  and  was
employed  in  various  capacities.  He  was  elected  to
the  legislature  from  P^astjwrt  for  three  successive
terms,  and  held  the  office  of  deputy  collector  of  the
customs,  but  returned  to  Massachusetts  in  1849,
and  was  appointed  in  1852  a  secret  and  confidential
agent  of  the  U,  S.  treasury  department,  with  refer-
ence to  the  operation  of  the  Ashburton  treaty  as
connected  with  our  commerce  with  British  colonies.
He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig  in  place  of
Benjamin  Thompson,  serving  from  28  Dec.,  1852.
till  3  March,  1853,  and  was  afterward  appointe<l
secretary  of  the  Boston  Ixtard  of  trade.  The  degree
of  A.  M,  was  conferred  on  him  by  Bowdoin  in  1846,
and  by  Harvard  in  1848.  He  contributed  to  the
"  North  American  Review"  and  "Christian  Exam-
iner," and  was  the  author  of  the  life  of  Com.  Ed-
ward Preble  (1847)  in  Sparks's  "American  Biogra-
phy"; "The  American  Loyalists,  or  Biographical
Sketches  of  Adherents  to  the  British  Crown  in  the
War  of  the  Revolution"  (Boston.  1847:  2d  etl.,  2
vols,,  1864) ;  "  Report  on  the  Principal  Fisheries  of
the  American  Seas,"  prepared  for  the  \J.  S.  treasury
department  (Washington.  1853);  "Notes  on  Duels
and  Duelling,  with  a  Preliminan'  Historical  Es.say"
(Boston,  1855;  2d  ed.,  1856);  and  an  address  before
the  New  England  historic-genealogical  society,  13
Sept.,  1859,  on  the  "  Hundredth  Anniversary  of  the
Death  of  Major-General  James  Wolfe."

SABIN,  Joseph,  bibliophile,  Ij,  in  Braunston,
Northamptonshire,  England.  9  Dec.,  1821 :  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  5  June,  1881.  His  father,  a  me-
chanic, pave  him  a  common-school  education,  and
apprenticed  him  to  Charles  Richards,  a  l)ookseller
and  publisher  of  Oxford,  Sul)sequently  young
Sabin  opened  a  similar  store  in  Oxford  and  pub-
lished "The  XXXIX  Articles  of  the  Church  of
p]ngland,  with  Scriptural  Proofs  and  Refei-ences"
(1844).  In  1848  he  came  to  this  country,  and
bought  farms  in  Texas  and  near  Philadelphia. In


364


SABINE


SACKETT


1H50  ho  settled  in  New  York  city,  ami  in  1850  he
went  to  Pliilmlelphia  and  sold  old  and  rare  Uioks,
but  at  the  Ix'jjinning  of  the  civil  war  he  returned
to  New  York  and  opened  book-shops,  where  he
made  a  specialty  of  collecting  rare  books  and
prints.  His  knowledge  of  bibliography  was  ex-
tended, and  he  often  travelled  long  distances  to
secure  unioue  volumes,  crossing  the  ocean  as  many
as  twenty-nve  times  for  this  pur|)ose.  Two  of  his
sons  became  associated  with  liim  in  business,  and
two  others  were  proprietors  of  a  similar  enterprise
in  London.  He  prepared  catalogues  of  many
valuable  libraries  that  were  sold  by  auction  in  New
York  after  1850,  among  which  were  those  of  Dr.
Samuel  F.  Jarvis  (1851),  William  E.  liurton  (1861),
Etlwin  Forrest  (186;3),  John  Allan  (1804),  and
Thomas  \V,  Fields  (1875).  He  also  sold  the  collec-
tion of  William  Menzies  (1877).  >Ir.  Sabin  re-
published in  limited  editions  on  large  paper  several
curious  old  works  of  American  history,  edited
and  published  for  several  years  from  1869  "The
American  Bibliopolist :  a  Literary  Register  and
Monthlv  Catalogue  of  Old  and  New  Books,"  con-
tributed to  the  "  American  Publishers'  Circular,"
and  undertook  the  publication  in  parts  of  a  "  Dic-
tionary of  Books  relating  to  America,  from  its
Discovery  to  the  Present  Time,"  of  which  thirteen
volumes  were  issued,  and  upon  which  he  was  en-
gaged at  the  time  of  his  death.

SABINE,  Sir  Edward,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  14  Oct.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Richmond,
England.  26  June.  1883.  After  receiving  a  military
education,  he  entered  the  royal  artillery  as  2d  lieu-
tenant in  1803.  became  captain  in  1813,  and  served
in  the  war  with  the  United  States,  commanding
the  batteries  in  the  siege  of  Fort  Erie  in  1814.  He
was  appointed  astronomer  in  the  first  arctic  ex-
pedition under  Sir  John  Ross  in  1818.  and  accom-
panied Sir  William  Edward  Parry's  expedition  of
1819-'20  in  the  same  capacity,  making  important
researches  in  terrestrial  magnetism.  In  1821-'5  he
made  a  series  of  voyages  ranging  from  the  equa-
tor to  the  Arctic  circle  in  quest  of  data  concerning
the  variations  of  the  magnetic  needle,  and  con-
ducted pendulum  experiments,  thus  laving  the
basis  for  an  accurate  determination  of  the  figure
of  the  earth.  His  discoveries  led  to  the  establish-
ment of  magnetic  observatories  in  Great  Britain
and  the  colonies,  the  latter  l)eing  under  his  super-
intendence, and  from  1840  till  1860  he  published
reports  of  observations  at  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  Hobart  Town,  St.  Helena,  and  Toronto.  In
1818  he  became  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society,  of
which  he  was  vice-president  from  1850  till  1861,
and  president  from  1861  till  1871.  He  was  made
a  knight  of  the  Bath  in  1869  and  a  general  in  1870.
During  one  voyage  he  edited  tiie  "  North  Georgia
Gazette  and  Winter  Chronicle."  a  periodical  writ-
ten by  the  officers  on  the  "  Heda "  in  1819-'20,
which  was  republished  (London,  1822).  He  also
aided  in  the  preparation  of  a  "  Natural  History  "
(1824),  which  was  appended  to  Parry's  *'  First  Arc-
tic Voyage "  (1821),  and  was  the  author  of  "  An
Account  of  Experiments  to  determine  the  Figure
of  the  Earth"'  (1825);  "The  Variability  of  the
Intensity  of  Magnetism  upon  Many  Parts  of  the
Globe"  (1838);  and  numerous  memoirs  and  scien-
tific papers.  He  was  engaged  in  scientific  work
until  his  death,  and,  with  his  wife  as  assistant,  pre-
pared reduct  ion  tables  and  charts  of  all  the  observa-
tions that  have  been  made  in  terrestrial  magnetism.

SACKET,  Uelos  Bennet,  soldier,  b.  in  Cape
Vincent.  N.  Y..  14  April,  1822;  d.  in  Wa.shington.
D.  C,  8  March,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1845,  a.ssigned  to  the  2d


^/(TT^.^aoe^


dragoons,  and  8erve<l  in  the  Mexican  war,  l)eing
brevetted  1st  lieutenant,  9  May,  1846,  for  gallant
and  meritorious  conduct  at  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca
de  la  Palma,  Tex.  On  30  June,  1840,  he  J)ecamo
2d  lieutenant,  and  he  was  made  1st  lieutenant  on
27  Dec,  1848.  He
was  engaged  in
scouting  in  1850,
and  was  assistant
instructor  of  cav-
airy  tactics  in
the  U.S.  military
academy  from  10
Dec,  1850,  till
10  April.  18.55.
On  3  March,  1855,
he  became  cap-
tain of  1st  cav-
alry. He  was  a
member  of  the
board  to  revise
the  army  regula-
tions in  Wash-
ington in  1850-
'7.  served  on  fron-
tier duty  in  the
Kansas  disturbances  in  185(}-'7,  and  on  the  Utah
and  Cheyenne  expedition  in  1858.  He  was  ap-
pointed major  of  1st  cavalry  on  31  Jan.,  1801,  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  2d  cavalry  on  3  May,  1861,  and
inspector-general  on  1  Oct.,  1861.  Joining  the
Army  of  tne  Potomac,  he  served  on  the  staff  of  the
commanding  general  in  the  Virginia  peninsula  and
the  Maryland  and  RappahanncKrk  campaigns,  par-
ticipating in  the  chief  engagements.  He  was  in
charge  of  the  inspector-general's  office  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  from  10  Jan.  till  26  May,  1863,  and  after-
ward a  member  of  the  board  to  organize  invalid
corps  and  treat  for  retiring  disabled  officers.  From
1  April.  1864,  till  August,  1865,  he  wjis  on  inspec-
tion duty  in  the  departments  of  the  Tennessee.
Cumberland.  Arkansas,  and  New  ^lexico.  On  13
March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
and  major-general  for  gallant  and  meritorious  ser-
vices in  the  field  and  during  the  civil  war.  After
the  war  he  was  inspector-general  of  the  Department
of  the  Tennessee  and  of  the  divisions  of  the  At-
lantic and  the  Missouri.  On  the  retirement  of
Gen.  Randolph  B.  Marcy  on  2  Jan.,  1881.  he  l)ecanie
senior  inspector-general  of  the  army  with  the  rank
of  brigadier-general.

SACKETT,  William  Angnstns,  congressman,
b.  in  Aurelius,  Cayuga  co.,  N.  Y.,  18  Nov.,  1812.
His  ancestors  came  from  England  in  1632,  settled
in  Massachusetts,  and  continued  to  live  in  New
England  until  1804,  when  his  father  moved  to
Cayuga  county,  X.  Y.  He  received  an  academic
education,  studied  law  in  Seneca  Falls  and  Skane-
ateles,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1834.  and  soon
secured  a  lucrative  practice.  Elected  to  congress
as  a  Whig,  he  served  from  3  Dec,  1849.  till  3  March,
1853.  lie  took  part  in  the  controversy  in  relation
to  the  admission  of  California  as  a  free  state,  and
both  spoke  and  voted  for  admission.  He  earnestly
opposed  the  fugitive-slave  law,  and  was  uncom-
promisingly in  opposition  to  slaverv  and  the  ad-
mission of  any  more  slave  states,  from  the  com-
mittee on  claims  he  matle  a  report  on  the  power
of  consuls,  which  had  an  influence  in  the  final
modification  of  those  powers.  He  removed  to
Saratoga  Springs  in  18o7,  where  he  still  resides.
In  1876-'8  he  tmvelled  extensively  in  Eurooe.
Egypt,  and  the  Holy  Land,  and  wrote  letters  ac-
scribing  his  journeys  that  were  published.  He
has  been  a  llepublican  since  the  organization  of


SACO


SADTLER


365


the  party,  and  has  been  active  as  a  imblic  Hncakor.
— lti»  sun.  William,  wa«  colonel  of  the  Otn  New
York  cavalry,  nntl  was  killed  while  leading;  a  charge
under  (ten.  Slieri<lan  at  Trevililan  Station,  V'a.

SACO.  JoH^  Antonio  (siih'-ko).  Tulmn  publicist,
b.  in  ItayHtiio.  Culm,  in  May,  1707:  d.  in  Madrid.
S(>ain.  in  1H7U.  lie  flnishe«l  his  eilucation  in  Ha-
vana, whore,  in  IH21,  he  obtained  the  iirofess«»r>hii>
of  philosophv  in  the  S(>niinarv  of  .San  ("arlos.  Fn>in
1824  till  18*i«  he  travelled  "in  the  I'nitwl  States,
and  in  1H28  he  returned  to  New  York,  where  he
devotwl  himself  to  literary  laltors.  He  translated
into  Sjwnish,  fnun  the  Latin,  the  celebrate«l  work
of  Hcinecius  on  lioman  law,  and  his  translation

rwd  through  several  editions  in  .S{)ain.  In  18^2
went  to  Havana,  an<l  held  the  editf)rship  of
the  *'  Kevista  Himestre  Cubana"  until  IKW,  when
he  was  banishinl  from  the  island  on  account  of  his
lilx-ral  ideas  arul  anti-slavery  principles.  In  MiiW
he  was  elwtetl  to  represent  the  eastern  part  of
Cuba  in  the  Spanish  cortes,  but  he  did  not  take  his
seat,  as  the  Madrid  government  deprive<I  the  colo-
nies of  representation.  He  published  in  Ma<lrid
"Paralelo  entre  CuImi  y  algunas  colonias  inglesjis"
(1838).  He  nijule  afterward  an  extensive  tour  in
the  Euroi»ean  continent,  and  in  1840  fixed  his  resi-
dence in  Paris,  where  he  publishe«l  "  Supresion  del
trdfico  de  esclavoa  en  Cuba  "  (184»5),  which  brought
upon  him  the  wnith  of  the  slave-holders,  and  di-
niinishe<l  his  chances  of  l)eing  allowed  to  return  to
Cul)a.  In  1848  he  published  in  Paris  his  "Ideas
sobre  la  incorporaci<jn  de  Culm  &  los  E.  U.,"  favor-
ing the  annexation  of  Cuba  to  the  United  States,
which  was  immediately  translated  into  English
and  French,  and  assailed  by  the  American  press.
"  La  situac-ion  politica  de  Cuba  y  su  remedio  was
published  in  1851,  and  "  Ija  cuestion  Culwina"  in
1853.  He  was  elected  by  Santiago  de  Cul)a  in  1800
as  one  of  the  delegates  sent  to  Madrid  to  advocate
political  reforms  for  the  island,  and  in  1878  was
again  elected  by  the  same  city  to  the  Spanish  cor-
tes. Saco  was  a  volununous  writer.  During  the
last  years  of  his  life  he  l>egan  the  publication  of
his  great  work  "  Historia  de  la  esclavitud  desde  los
ticmpos  mas  remotos"  (Paris,  1870  el  seq.),  one  of
the  most  exhaustive  works  on  this  subject,  of
which  several  volumes  were  published  l)efore  his
death.  It  has  been  translated  into  various  Euro-
pean languages.  Other  works  of  Saco  are  "His-
toria de  la  esclavitud  entre  los  Indios."  and  nu-
merous articles  and  essays  on  a  diversity  of  sub-
jects, which  have  lx!en  collected  under  the  title  of
"Coleccion  de  painMes  varios"  (Havana,  1882).

SADLIER,  Marr  Anne  (Madden),  author,  b.  in
Cootehill,  County  Cavan,  Ireland,  31  Dec.,  1820.
After  receiving  a  private  school  education  she  con-
tributed to  London  magazines,  and  in  1844  emi-
grate*!  to  Montreal.  Canada,  where  she  publishe<l
by  subscription  "Tales  of  the  Olden  Tune."  In
1840  she  married  James  Sadlier,  then  of  the  pub-
lishing firm  of  D.  and  J.  Sadlier  and  Co..  of  New
York  and  Montreal,  and  Ix'came  connect etl  edi-
torially with  the  Homan  Catholic  press.  She  has
translated  several  religious  works,  tales,  and  dramas
from  the  Fn-nch,  and  is  the  author  of  stories  for
Roman  Cath«)lic  Sunday-schools,  and  several  novels.
Her  works  include  "  Alice  Riodan,  or  the  Blind
Man's  Daughter"  (Boston,  1851):  "  New  Lights,  or
Life  in  (tahvay"  (New  York.  185:}):  "The  Blakes
and  FlanaL'ans"  (IH.W):  "  The  Confederate  Chief-
tains, a  Tale  of  the  Irish  Reln'llion  of  1041  "  (IKV.)) ;
"  Bessv  C<mwav.  or  the  Irish  (Jirl  in  America"
(1802):  "The  Daughter  of  Tyrconnell"  (IWWi);
"  Maureen  Dhu,  the  Admirars  Daughter"  (1870):
and  '•  Purgatory,  Doctrinal,  Historical,  and  Politi-


cal" (1886).— Her  daughter.  Anna  Therefta,  au-
thor, b.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  lli  Jan.,  1854.  was
educated  fMirtially  in  New  York  city,  and  gradu-
atwl  at  the  conveiit  of  Villa  Maria,  near  Montnial,
in  1871.  She  has  contribute<l  largely  tf>  the  R4>man
Catholic  press,  has  translate<l  numerous  tales  and
|K>ems  from  the  French  and  Italian,  and  is  the
author  of  -  .St<ven  Years  and  Mair"  (New  York,
187H);  "Ethel  Hamilton,  and  other  Tales"  (1877):
"  The  King's  Page"  (1877):  "  Women  of  Catholici-
ty" (1885);  and  "The  .Silent  Woman  of  AIckkI"
(i887).  She  has  also  published  a  compilation  en-
title«l  "  Gems  of  Catholic  Th«»ught "  (1882).

SADTLER,  B<>njaniin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Balti-
mori",  Md..  25  De<'..  1H23.  He  was  gra<luated  at
Pennsylvania  college,  (iettysburg.  in  1842.  and  at
the  theological  seminary  there  in  1844,  and  was  suc-
eessivelv  jxistorof  Lutheran  churches  at  Pine  Grove,
Pa..  in'l845-'9;  ShipfHMisburg,  Pa.,  in  l84«-'53;
Middletown,  Pa,  in  IH.'iiJ-'O :  and  Easton,  Pa,  in
1850-'02.  In  the  last  year  he  became  principal  of
the  Ladies'  seminarv  at  Lutherville.  Md.,  and  in
1875  he  accepted  the  presidency  of  Muhlenberg
college,  Allentown,  Pa.  He  occupiinl  this  pKJst
until  1880,  when,  disabled  for  life  by  a  fall  on  the
ice.  he  was  comjx-lleil  to  abandon  the  work.  In
1807  he  received  the  degree  of  I).  D.  from  Penn-
sylvania college.  He  was  a  trustee  of  that  insti-
tution in  1862-'77,  and  has  held  many  ofBces  of
honor  and  trust  in  his  church.  He  is'a  frequent
contributor  to  the  perio<licals  of  his  denomination,
and  has  published  numerous  Imccalaureate  dis-
courses and  addresses,  including  "  A  Rel>ellious
Nation  Reproved"  (Ea.stxin.  Pa.,  1801).  and  "The
Causes  and  Remedies  of  the  liosses  of  her  Popula-

j  tion  bv  the  Lutheran  Church  in  Anierica"  (Phila-
delphia, 1878).— His  eldest  son,  Samuel  Philip,

I  chemist,  b.  in  Prine  Gnn-e,  Pa.,  18  July,  1847,  was
graduated  at  Pennsylvania  college  in  1867,  studied

j  at  Lehigh  university  in  1807-'8,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Ijawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard
in  1870  with  the  degree  of  .S.  B. He  then  studied

!  chemistry  at  the University  of  Gnttingen,  where

[  in  1871  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  for  original
researches  on  iridium  salts.  On  his  return  he  held
the  professorship  of  natural  science  in  Pennsyl-
vania college  until  1874,  when  he  accepted  the
chair  of  general  and  organic  chemistry  in  the
University  of  Pennsylvania.  This  place'  he  still
holds,  and  also  that  of  professor  of  chemistr)'  in  the
Philadelphia  college  of  pharmat^  to  which  he  was
appointed  in  1879.  Prof.  Sadtler  again  visited
Europe  in  1885  for  the  purjxise  of  inspecting  labo-
ratories of  applied  chemistry  in  Engl&nd  and  on
the  continent,  and  on  his  return  made  a  report  of
his  observations  to  the  trustees  of  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  for  their  guidance  in  organizing
a  laboratory  of  industrial  chemistry.  He  is  a  fel-
low of  the  Chemical  .societies  of  London  and  Ber-
lin, of  the  American  association  for  t  he  atl  vancement
of  science,  and  of  other  societies  in  the  United  States.
.Since  1M79  he  has  furnishe<l  each  month  notes  on
chemistry  to  the  "American  Journal  of  Pharmacy."
Dr.  Satltler  was  chemical  eiiitor  of  the  American
reprint  of  the  ninth  edition  of  the  "  Encyclo-
panlia  Britannica  "  (Philadelphia,  lS80-'4).  and,
with  Joseph  P.  Remington  and  Horatio  C.  Wootl,
edited  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  tnlitions  of  the
"  United  States  Distiensjitory  "  ( 1SS2-'S).  having  en-
tire  charge  of  the  clienucal  i>art  f>f  that  work,  lie-
sides  numerous  addresses  and  let-tures,  he  has  pul>-
lisheil  "  IIandl>ook  of  Chemical  Ex|H'rimentation
for  Lecturers"  (Ij<iuisville,  1M77).  and  e<litetl  the

I  eighth  edition  of  Attfleld's  "  Medical  and  Pharma-

;  ceutical  Chemistry  "  (Philadelphia,  1879).


366


SAFFOLD


SAGE


SAFFOLW,  Reuben,  jurist,  b.  in  Wilke« countv,
Ga.,  4  Sept.,  1788;  d.  in  Dallas  county,  Ala..  15
Feb.,  1847.  After  practising  law  in  Georgia  he  re-
nrjoved  to  Jackson,  Ala.,  in  1813.  During  the  In-
dian troubles  he  cominande<i  a  volunteer  company,
and  he  subsequently  served  several  terms  in  the
legislature  of  Missis-sijjpi  territory.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1819,
was  matle  a  circuit  judge,  and  was  one  of  the  three
judges  that  were  appointed  to  the  supreme  Ixsnch
m  lH:i2.  serving  Jis  chief  justice  m  1835-'6.

SAFFORl),  James  Merrill,  geologist,  b.  in
Putnam  (now  Zanesville),  Ohio,  13  Aug.,  1822.  He
was  graduated  at  Ohio  university  in  1844,  and
spent  a  year  at  Yale,  where  in  1866  the  honorary
degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  conferred  on  him.  From
1848  till  1872  he  was  professor  of  naturtil  sciences
in  Cumberland  university,  Lebanon.  Tenn.,  and  he
then  accepted  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Jiashville,  which
since  1874  has  also  been  the  medical  department
of  Vandcrbilt  university.  These  appointments,  to-
gether with  the  chair  of  natural  history  and  geolo-
fv  in  Vanderbilt  university,  which  he  accepted  in
875,  he  still  (1888)  holds.  In  1854  he  was  ap-
pointed state  geologist  of  Tennessee,  and  made  a
Ereliminary  survey  of  the  state.  This  place  he
eld  until  1860,  and  he  was  again  made  state  geolo-
fist  in  1871  and  has  since  continued  in  that  office,
le  has  also  been  a  memlier  of  the  Tennessee  state
board  of  health  since  its  organization  in  1866,
and  for  some  time  its  vice-president.  Prof.  Saf-
ford  was  one  of  the  judges  at  the  World's  fair  held
in  Philadelphia  in  1876,  and  his  reports  made  at
that  time  have  since  been  published.  The  de-
gree of  M.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Nash-
ville in  1872.  Prof.  Safiford  is  a  member  of  scien-
tific societies,  to  whose  transactions  he  has  con-
tributed various  papers  on  geology;  and  ho  has
published  "  A  Geological  Reconnoissance  of  the
State  of  Tennessee"  (Nashville,  1856);  "Second
Biennial  Report"  (1857):  and  "Geology  of  Ten-
nessee," with  a  geological  map  of  the  state  (1869).
He  assisted  in  the  preparation  of  "  Introduction  to
the  Resources  of  Tennessee"  (1874),  and  as  special
agent  of  the  census  of  1880  he  made  a  '•  Report  on
the  Cotton  Production  of  the  State  of  Tennessee  "
(Washington,  1884).

SAFFORD,  Truman  Henry,  mathematician,
b.  in  Royalton,  Vt..  6  Jan.,  1836.  At  an  early  age
he  attracted  public  attention  by  his  remarkable
powers  of  calculation.  When  six  years  of  age.  he
told  his  mother  if  she  knew  the  number  of  rods
it  was  around  a  certain  meadow  he  could  tell  its
circumference  in  barleycorns,  and  on  hearing  that
the  number  of  rods  was  1,040  he  gave  the  number
mentally  as  617,760  barleycorns,  which  is  correct.
He  could  mentally  extract  the  square  and  cube
roots  of  numbers  of  9  and  10  places  of  figures,
and  could  multiply  four  figures  by  four  figures
mentally  as  rapidly  as  it  could  be  done  upon
paper.  In  1845  he  prepared  an  almanac,  and  at
the  age  of  fourteen  calculated  the  elliptic  elements
of  the  first  comet  of  1849.  At  this  time  he  became
widely  known  as  the  Vermont  boy  calculator.  By
a  method  of  his  own  he  abridged  by  one  fourth
the  labor  of  calculating  the  rising  and  setting
of  the  moon.  After  long  and  difficult  problems
had  been  read  to  him  once,  he  could  give  their  re-
sults without  effort.  Prof.  Benjamin  Peirce  said
of  him  in  1846  that  his  knowledge  "  is  accompanied
with  p<jwers  of  abstraction  and  concentration  rare-
ly possessed  at  any  age  except  by  minds  of  the
hignest  order." He  was  gracluated  at  Harvard  in


1854,  after  which  he  spent  there  several  years  in
study  at  the  observatory.  Between  1850  and  1862
he  computed  the  orbits  of  many  planets  and
comets.  In  1863-'6  he  was  connected  with  the
Harvard  observatory,  in  the  last  year  acting  as  its
dirtfctor,  but  he  was  chiefly  employed  in  observa-
tions for  a  standard  catalogue  of  right  ascensions.
In  1865  he  was  appointed  professor  of  astronomy
in  the  University  of  Chicago,  and  director  of  the
Dearborn  observatory.  His  first  two  years  there
were  devoted  to  the  study  of  nebulae,  and  he  dis-
covered many  new  ones.  From  1869  till  1871  he
was  engaged  upon  the  great  catalogue  of  stars  that
is  in  course  of  preparation  by  the  co-operation
of  European  ana  American  astronomers.  His
work  was  interrupted  by  the  Chicago  fire  of  1871,
and  after  that  year  he  was  much  employed  in  lati-
tude and  longitude  work  in  the  territories  by  the
U.  S.  corps  of  engineers,  for  whom  he  also  prepared
a  star  catalogue,  which  was  published  by  the  war
department.  He  published  a  second  in  1879.  Since
1876  he  has  been  professor  of  astronomy  at  Will-
iams college,  which  gave  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
in  1878.  He  is  a  member  of  various  a.stronomical
societies,  and  has  edited  volumes  iv.  and  v.  of  the
"Annals  of  Harvard  College  Observatory,"  the
latter  one  containing  the  report  of  Prof.  George
P.  Bond's  discoveries  in  the  constellation  of  Orion,
which  Prof.  Safford  completed  after  Prof.  Bond's
death.  His  other  contributions  have  appeared  in
the  "  Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy,"
the  monthly  notices  of  the  Royal  astronomical
society,  and  other  astronomical  journals.  He  is
now  (1888)  preparing  a  catalogue  of  polar  stars  as
a  memorial  of  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  observa-
tory of  Williams  college.

SAFFORD,  William  Harrison,  lawyer,  b.  in
Parkersburg,  Va.,  19  Feb.,  1821.  He  was  educated
at  Asbury  academy,  Parkersburg,  Va.,  studietl  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1842,  and  in  1848  re-
moved to  Chillicothe,  Ohio,  where  he  has  since  prac-
tised his  profession.  From  1858  till  1860  he  served
in  the  state  senate,  and  from  1868  till  1874  he  was
judge  of  the  2d  subdivision  of  the  5th  judicial  cir-
cuit of  Ohio.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Life  of  Blenner-
hassett"  (Chillicothe,  1850),  and  "The  Blenner-
hassett  Papers  "  (Cincinnati,  1861).

SAGARDTHEODAT,  Gabriel,  French  mis-
sionary, lived  in  the  17th  century.  He  was  in  a
Recollet  Franciscan  convent  in  Paris  in  1615  when
HoQel,  the  secretary  of  Louis  XIII.,  asked  the
superior  of  that  order  to  send  missionaries  to  Can-
ada. Sagard  entreated  to  be  sent  on  the  mission,
but  he  was  not  allowed  to  leave  France  until  eight
years  afterward.  Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  Quebec
he  set  out  for  the  Huron  country  with  Father  Viel.
He  remained  there  over  two  years,  when  his  com-
panion was  drowned  in  Riviere  des  Prairies  (hence
called  Saut  du  Recollet),  and  Sagard  returned  to
France.  Hi"-,  writings  include  "  Grand  voyage  du
pays  des  Hurons,  situe  en  TAmerique,  vers  la  mer
Douce,  et  derniers  confins  de  la  Nouvelle-France,
dite  Canada,  ou  il  est  traicte  de  tout  ce  qui  est  du
pays,  des  mceurs  et  naturel  des  sauvages,  de  leur
gouvernement  et  fa9ons  de  faire,  tant  dans  leur
pays  qu'allant  en  voyage,  de  leur  foi  et  croyance,
avec  un  dictionnaire  de  la  langue  huronne"  (Paris,
16532),  and  "  Histoire  du  Can^a  et  voyage  que  les
frcres  mineurs  recollets  y  ont  faicts  pour  la  conver-
sion des  infidelles"  (1636).  The  works  of  Sagard
were  very  little  known  until  recently.  They  were
republished  and  edited  by  Henry  E,  Chevalier
(4  vols..  Paris,  1866).

8AGE,  Gardner  Arery,  donor,  b.  in  New
York  city,  8  May,  1813  ;  d.  in  White Sulphur


SAGE


SAQRA


887


springs,  Va..  22  Aug.,  1882.  He  studiinl  nun'py-
ing,  pructistHl  his  pn)fe88inii  in  Now  York  city,
ami  Hcquinnl  h  fortuiu'.  He  was  an  atiivo  int-ni-
\M.'r  of  the  HofornuHl  Dutch  cliurch.  iti  which  hi'
held  inuny  oflhvM  of  tru!<t,  and  liuilt  and  endowinl
the  libniry  of  the  theological  s«.>niinary  at  New
Rrunswick.  N.  J.,  which  lM*ars  his  name,  and  which
he  pn*sented  to  the  general  synod.  TIjis  was  dedi-
cate<l  on  4  June.  1875,  and  now  (1HM8)  contains
70,0(X)  volumes.  He  also  founded  a  chair  of  Old
Testament  exegesLs  in  the  si>mniarv,  gave  a  resi-
dence for  one  of  the  professors,  afso  larg«>  sums
fur  the  maintenance  of  Hertzog  Hall,  and  made
other  iHHpiesjits  to  aid  the  institutions  of -the  Ke-
formiHl  churcih  in  New  Hninswick.  His  gifts
amount«Ml  to  nearlv  ♦250.000.

SA<tK.  Henry  WilliauiH,  donor,  b.  in  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  31  Jan..  1814.  He  is  a  dcst-endant  of
David  Sage,  who  settled  in  Middletown  in  1652.
Hih  father,  Charles,  was  shipwrecked  on  the  coa.st
of  Florida  in  18;J8,  ami  murdered  by  Indians.  The
boy's  pre(ttirati(m  for  Yale  at  Bristol,  Conn.,  was
interruntiHi  by  his  removal  to  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  and
in  188s  he  entertnl  men-antile  life.  In  1854  he
established  a  lumber-manufactory  on  I^ake  Simcoe,
Canada,  and  later,  with  John  >fc{^iraw,  another  at
Wenona  (now  West  Bay  City),  Mich.,  which  at  that
time  was  one  of  the  largest  in  the  world.  Mr.
Sage  was  one  of  the  most  extensive  landholders
of  Michigan.  From  1857  till  1880  he  resided  in
Brooklyn,  and  was  an  active  member  of  Plym-
outh church.  He  took  much  interest  in  founding
Cornell  university,  and  in  1873  erected  there  a
college  hall  for  women,  which  is  known  as  Sage
college.  After  the  death  of  Kzra  Cornell  he  was
made  president  of  the  l)oard  of  trustees  of  Cornell
university.  He  endowed  the  Lyman  Beecher  lec-
tureship on  preaching  at  Yale,  and  built  and  pre-
sented to  West  Bay  City,  Mich.,  a  public  library
at  a  cost  of  $30,000.  >fr.  Sage  has  also  endowed
and  built  several  chun-hes  and  sc-hools.  In  1847
he  served  in  the  New  York  legislature.

SA(tE,  RiiSHell,  financier,  b.  in  Oneida  county,
N.  Y..  4  Aug..  1816.  He  received  a  public-school  edu-
cation, and  then  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  in
Troy.  In  1841  he  was  elected  an  alderman,  and  he
was  re-elected  to  this  office  until  1848.  also  serving
for  seven  years  as  treasurer  of  Rensselaer  county.
He  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  and
served,  with  re-election,  from  5  Dea,  1853,  till  3
March,  1857.  Mr,  Sage  was  the  first  person  to  atl-
vocate,  on  the  floor  of  congress,  the  purchase  of
Mount  Vernon  by  the  government.  S\ibsequently
he  settled  in  New  York  city  and  engiiged  in  the
business  of  selling  "  privileges  "  in  Wall  street.  At
the  same  time  he  became  interested  in  railroads,
and  secured  st(K>ks  in  western  roads,  notably  the
Milwaukee  and  St.  Paul,  of  which  he  was  presi-
dent and  vice-president  for  twelve  years.  By  dis-
lK>sing  of  these  investments,  as  the  smaller  roads
were  absorl)ed  by  trunk-lines,  he  became  wealthy.
In  late  years  he  has  l)een  closely  associated  with
Jay  Gould  in  the  managetnent  of  the  Walmsh,  St.
Louis,  and  Pacific,  the  Missouri  Pacific,  the  Mis-
souri. Kansas,  and  Texas,  the  Delaware,  Lacka-
wanna and  Western  and  the  St.  Louis  and  San
PVancisco  railromis,  the  American  cable  company,
the  Western  Union  telegraph  company  and  tlie
Manhattan  consolidated  system  of  elevated  rail-
roa<ls  in  New  York  city,  in  all  of  whicli  corpora-
tions he  is  a  director.  Mr.  Sago  was  for  many
years  closely  connect e<l  with  the  affairs  of  the
Union  Pacific  road,  of  which  he  was  a  direc-tor.
Ho  has  been  a  director  and  vice-president  in  the
Importers  and  traders'  national  bank  for  the  past


I  twenty  years,  also  a  director  in  the  MerchantV
trust  company  and  m  the  Fifth  avenue  bank  of
New  York  city.
I  KA(i>EAN,  Mathien  (sah-zhav-ong).  Canadian
I  explorer,  b,  near  I^a  Chine  aUtut  1(W5 ;  d,  in  Biloxi.
liii.,  alN>ut  1710.  He  early  entere<l  the  service  of
UolM>rt  Cavalier  de  I^a  Salle  {q.  v.).  aKMstinl  in  the
builtling  of  Fort  Saint  I»uis  of  the  Illinois,  and
was  left  there  under  Henry  Tonty  (</.  v.)  in  HJ81.
Being  «lesinjus  to  make  new  dis<-overies,  he  obtained
leave  shortly  afterwanl  from  Tontv  and  sot  out  at
the  heatl  of  eleven  Canadians  and  two  Mohegan
I  Indian.H.  They  ascended  the  .Mississippi  alK)ut  500
j  miles,  and  then,  their  provisions  U'ing  exhausted,
stopped  a  month  to  hunt.  While  thus  engage<l
they  found  another  river  flowing  south  southwest,
carried  their  cano<>s  to  it.  sailed  about  4.'i0  miles,
and  found  themselves  in  the  midst  of  an  Indian
tribe  dwelling  in  well-built  villages  and  governed
by  a  chief  who  claime<l  descent  from  Monte-
zuma. On  his  retuni  to  Canada,  Sagean  was  cap-
ture<l  by  English  pirates  upon  the  shores  of  the
St.  Ijawrence  and  compelled  to  take  service  among
them.  He  followed  a  life  of  a<lventure  for  almut
twenty  years  in  the  Fast  and  West  Indies,  but
toward  1700  he  found  his  way  to  France  and  en-
listed in  a  company  of  marines  at  Brest.  There
he  reveale<l  the  secret  of  his  discoveries  in  America.
His  story  was  written  down  from  his  dictation  and
sent  to  the  secretary  of  the  navy.  Count  de  Pont-
chartrain,  who  caused  inquiries  to  Ix?  made,  and,  as
a  result,  Sagean  was  sent  to  Biloxi.  near  the  mouth
of  the  Mississippi,  with  orders  that  he  should  be
supplied  with  the  means  of  conducting  a  party  tc
the  country  he  had  discovered,  and  which  he  rep-
resented as  being  rich  in  gold.  But  the  officers  m
command  neglected  their  instnictions,  and  suffered
the  order  to  remain  unexecuted.  Sagean's  discov-
ery has  been  contested,  inasmuch  as  he  described
the  country  as  a  kind  of  Fl  Donulo,  but  other  au-
thors contend  that,  aside  from  these  exaggerations,
Sagean's  discovery  was  real,  and  that  he  saw  the
remains  of  an  ancient  Mexican  trilx'  that  had
emigrated  northwanl  after  the  Spanish  conquest
Sagean's  story,  written  from  his  dictation,  is  pre-
served among  the  manuscripts  in  the  National
library  at  Paris.  It  was  translatetl  into  English
and  publishcil  by  John  Gilmarj-  Shea  in  his  series
of  memoirs  and  narratives  concerning  the  French
colonies  in  America  (18(i2).

SAGER,  Abrani,  phvsician,  b.  in  Bethlehem,
N.  Y..  22  Dec.  1810;  d."  in  Ann  Arbor.  Mich.,  6
Aug.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Troy  poly-
technic school  in  18J31,  studied  medicinfe  in  Albany
and  at  Yale,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Medical
school  of  Castleton,  Vt.,  in  1835.  He  settletl  in
Detroit  and  afterward  in  Jacks<m.  Mich.  From
1837  till  1840  he  assisted  in  the  geological  survey
of  Michigan,  having  charge  of  the  departments  of
lH>tany  and  zoology,  of  which  branches  he  was  pro-
fessor'in  the  state'  university  from  1H42  till  1855.
In  18.50  he  was  made  professor  of  obstetric-s.  and
in  1854-'(H)  he  had  the  chair  of  diseases  of  women
and  children,  but  he  resigned  in  1875.  when  the
Imard  of  regents  introduced  honiu'opat  hy.  He  was
a  meml)er  of  various  medical  and  scit-iitific  scx'ie-
ties,  and  w«is  president  of  the  MichigHii  medical
society  in  l850-'2.  Dr.  .S^iger  contributed  pai>ers
to  medical  journaLs,  and  published  re|H)rts  on  uot-
any  and  zfxilogy  in  \8S\).  His  colliM-tion  laid  the
foundation  of  the  present  museum  of  the  univer-
sity, to  which  he  also  pn>sentwl  the  "  .Sager  iler-
luirium  "  of  1.200  sjMX'ies  and  12.000  .sjiecimens.

SAUR.\.  Ramon  de  la  (sah-grah),  Spanish
economist,  b.  in  Corufla  in  1798;  d.  in  Cartaillac,


368


SAHAGUN


ST.  CLAIR


Switzerland.  25  May,  1871.  After  finishing  his
studies  in  Matlrid  he  was  appointed  in  1822  direc-
tor of  the  Ixjtanical  garden  of  Havana,  whieh  post
he  retained  for  twelve  years,  forming  several  valu-
able collections.  He  also  oi)ened  a  class  in  agri-
cultural l)otany  and  founded  a  model  farm,  which
was  of  much  Iwneflt  to  the  country.  In  18^4  he
travelled  through  the  United  States.  After  a
sojourn  of  several  years  in  Paris  he  returned  to
Mmlrid,  where  he  founded  a  magazine,  and  devoted
himself  exclusively  to  the  study  of  political  econo-
my till  1848,  when  he  went  to  Paris  and  took  part
in  the  revolution  of  that  year.  From  1854  till  1850
he  was  a  deputy  to  the  cortes.  His  works  include
"  Historia  economica,  politica,  y  estadisticii  de  la
isla  de  Cuba"  (Havana,  1831);  '*  Principios  de
Botiinica  Agricola "  (1833) ;  "  Breve  idea  de  la
administraciun  del  coraercio  y  de  las  rentas,  v
gastos  de  Cuba  durante  los  afios  de  182C  a  1836''
(Paris,  1836) :  '*  Historia  fisica,  politica  y  natural  de
la  isla  de  Cuba"  (2  vols,  1837-42;  French  transla-
tion, 1844);  "  Cinco  meses  en  los  Estados  Unidos"
(1836;  French  translation.  1837);  "  Apuntes  des-
tinadosa  ilustrar  ladiscusion  del  articulo  adicional
al  provecto  de  constitucion  "  (Madrid,  1837);  "His-
toria fisica.  economica,  politica,  intelectual  y  moral
de  la  isla  de  Cuba"  (Paris,  1861);  "Cuba  en  1860"
(1862) ;  "  Icones  plantarum  in  flora  Cubana  descrip-
torum"  (1863);  and  "Los  caracoles  microscopicos
de  Cuba"  (1866).

SAHAGUN,  Bernardino  de  (sah-ah-goon'),
Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  Sahagun,  Leon,  late  in
the  15th  century ;  d.  in  Mexico,  23  Oct.,  1590.  He
studied  in  Salamanca,  entered  the  Franciscan  order
about  1520,  came  to  Mexico  in  1529,  where  he  was
a  professor  in  the  imperial  college  of  Santa  Cruz
de  Tlaltelolco,  and,  after  thoroughly  learning  the
Aztec  language,  was  for  more  than  fifty  years  a
missionary  to  the  natives.  His  leisure  hours  were
occupied  in  composing  a  civil,  religious,  and  natu-
ral history  of  Mexico  in  twelve  volumes,  which  were
illustrated  with  drawings  by  the  author  and  copies
of  the  hieroglyphic  writings  of  the  Aztecs ;  but  these
drawings  were  considered  by  the  provincial  of  his
order  contrary  to  religion,  as  perpetuating  the
idolatrous  customs  of  the  natives,  and  his  work
was  not  allowed  to  be  published,  but  it  was  sent
by  the  viceroy  to  the  chronicler  Herrera,  who  used
some  of  the  material  in  his  "  Decadas."  The  work
was  afterward  printed  under  the  title  of  "Dic-
cionario  historico  universal  de  Nueva  Espafia"
(Mexico,  1829).  He  also  wrote  in  the  Aztec  lan-
guage "Arte  de  la  Lengua  Mexicana"  (Mexico,
1576) ;  "  Diccionario  trilingiie,  Latino,  Espailol  y
Mexicjino"  (1578);  "Salmodia  cristiana  en  Lengua
Mexicana,  para  que  canten  los  Indios  en  las  Igle-
sias"  (1581^);  "  Catecismo  de  la  Doctrina  Cristiana
en  Lengua  Mexicana"  (158Ji);  and,  according  to
Betancourt,  "  Historia  de  la  venida  a  Mexico  de
los  primeros  Religiosos  Franciscanos,"  a  Spanish
manuscript  in  two  volumes,  containing  the  con-
ferences of  the  missionaries  with  the  native  priests
in  Aztec  language.

SAINT  CASTIN,  Jean  Vincent  de  I'Abadle
(san  -  cas  -  tang).  Baron  de,  French  colonist,  b.  in
Lescar,  Beam,  in  1650;  d.  in  Acadia  in  1712.  He
came  to  Canada  in  1665  as  an  ensign,  took  part  in
the  expedition  of  De  Courcelles,  and,  when  his  regi-
ment was  disbanded  in  1668,  was  among  the  few
officers  that  chose  to  remain  in  the  colony,  and
was  sent  to  Acadia  to  command  for  the  king  under
Chambly.  In  1675  Dutchmen  from  Santo  Do-
mingo riuwle  the  latter  prisoner,  but  Saint  Cast  in
escaped  and  afterward  roamed  the  woods  with  the
Indians,  and  gained  much  influence  over  them.


He  also  made  a  fortune  of  about  400,000  crowns  by
dealing  in  beaver-skins  with  his  neighbors  of  New
Ph)gland.  His  trading- house  was  at  Pentagoet
(now  Ca.stine),  in  the  old  fort,  which  he  occupied
or  abandoned  by  turns,  according  to  the  needs  of
the  time.  But  his  trade  involved  hini  in  difllcul-
ties  with  the  royal  governors,  and  in  1688  the  king
required  him  to  establish  a  permanent  settlement
and  cease  all  trade  with  the  English.  About  this
time  Saint  Castin  married  the  daughter  of  M»-
dockawando,  chief  of  the  Penobscots,  and  in  the
same  year  war  was  renewed,  mainly  through  Saint
Castin's  efiforts.  He  attacked  the  English  j)osts  at
Port  Royal,  at  the  head  of  250  Indians,  and  con-
tinued for  years  to  plunder  the  English  settlements.
The  authorities  of  Boston  set  a  price  upon  his  head,
as  they  regarded  him  as  their  most  insidious  ene-
my, and  employed  deserters  to  kidnap  him ;  but  the
plot  was  discovered,  and  the  deserters  were  shot  at
Mount  Desert.  With  his  Indians,  Saint  Castin
landed  in  1696  at  New  Harbor,  near  Fort  Pema-
quid,  and,  co-operating  with  the  troops  of  Iber-
ville, obliged  the  governor  to  surrender,  and  de-
stroyed the  fortress.  The  French  dominions  were
thus  extended  over  a  large  part  of  Maine.  The  re-
mainder of  his  history  is  intimately  coimectetl  with
the  struggles  for  the  possession  oi  Acadia.  He  de-
fended Port  Royal  in  1706,  and  again  in  1707,  when
he  was  woundetl,  he  saved  the  fort.  He  is  said  to
have  gone  to  France  in  1709,  but  he  was  in  Acadia
again  soon  afterward,  where  he  fought  to  the  last
for  the  French  cause,  and  was  killed  in  an  engage-
ment in  1712. — His  son,  Joseph,  a  half-breed,  was
a  leader  of  the  eastern  Indians  in  their  later  diffi-
culties with  the  English.  In  December.  1721,  he
was  surprised  at  Pentagoet  and  carried  a  prisoner
to  Boston.  After  five  months  he  was  released  on
account  of  the  hostile  feelings  that  his  detention
provoked  among  the  Abenakis.

ST.  CLAIR,  Arthur,  soldier,  b.  in  Thurso,
Caithness,  Scotland,  in  1734;  d.  in  Greensburg,
Pa.,  31  Aug.,  1818.  He  was  the  grandson  of  the
Earl  of  Roslyn,  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Edinburgh,  and  studied  medicine  under  Dr.  John
Hunter.  Inherit-
ing a  fortune  from
his  mother,  he
purchased  a  com-
mission as  ensign
in  the  60th  foot  on
13  May,  1757,  and
came  to  this  coun-
try with  Admi-
ral Edward  Bosca-
wen's  fleet.  He
served  under  Gen.
Jeffrey  Amherst
at  the  capture  of
Louisburg,  26  Ju-
ly, 1758,  and  un-
der Gen.  James
Wolfe  at  Quebec,
30  Sept.,  1758.  On
16  April,  1762,  he
resigned  the  com-
mission of  lieuten-
ant, which  he  had  received  on  17  April,  1759,  and  in
1764  he  settled  in  Ligonier  valley.  Pa.,  where  he  pur-
chased land,  and  erected  mills  and  a  residence.  In
1770  he  was  made  surveyor  of  the  district  of  Cum-
berland, and  he  subsequently  liecame  a  justice  of  the
court  of  quarter  sessions  and  of  common  pleas,  a
member  of  the  proprietary  council,  a  justice,  re-
corder, and  clerk  of  the  orphans'  court,  and  pro-
thonotary  of  Bedford  and  Westmoreland  counties.


ST.  CLAIR


SAINTE-CLAIRE DKVILLK


In  July,  1775,  he  wan  made  colonel  of  militiA.  and  I
in  tho  nutuinii  h<«  aroom|>Hi>i(Ml  ax  fwn>lary  the  |
comini'«si<infrs  that  wcn<  itpiM)inti><l  to  tri'ut  with  *
the  WfsttTii  triU'snt  Fort  Pitt.  Ou  :l  .Inn..  177«.
ho  Ixt-ainc  colonol  of  tho  2«l  IViiiisvlvHiiin  n'tfi-  i
mcnt,  and,  Ikmuk  onlort'd  to  CiiriHidi,  hf  Joint'd  ,
Qeii.  John  Sullivan  nftor  the  disHstmuM  nnair  at  i
Three  Kivor>«.  and  aided  that  nfflccr  liy  his  iniun-  j
sel.  savin>;  the  army  from  caitture.  llo  was  a|>-  ,
potnttHl  hripidior-iri-nerHl  on  0  An^r..  1T70.  hnving
resifjnt'd  his  civil  nflices  in  the  prrvious  .Inniiary.
Joining;  (Jen.  Wa-shinjfton  in  N'ovondn'r.  177(5.  he
was  a|)|M>inted  to  orpin ize  the  New  JerM-y  niilitia,
and  imrticiputed  in  the  Imttles  of  Trenton  and
Princeton.  On  the  latter  oeciusion  he  rendered
valuable  service  by  protecting  the  fords  «if  the
Assanjiink.  He  was  ap|H)inte<l  major-p>neral  on
19  ^Vo..  1777,  and,  after  serving  as  adjutant-gen-
eral of  the  army,  .«uccee<led  (»en.  Horatio  (intes  in
command  at  Ticonderoga.  The  works  there  and
at  Mount  Indepen«lence  «)n  the  op{>osite  shore  of
Lake  Chninplain  were  garrisoned  by  less  than  2.000
men.  [KKirly  armed,  and  nearly  destitute  of  stori's.
The  appnMieh  of  a  force  of  more  than  7,000  men
under  Uen.  .John  Burgoyne  warninl  Gen.  St.  Clair
to  prepare  for  an  attack.  Elis  force  was  too  small
to  cover  all  exposed  points,  and,  as  he  h»ul  not
discovere<l  Burgoyne's  designs,  he  neglected  to  for-
tify Sugar  Ij<jaf  mountain  over  which  the  British
approached.  St.  Clair  and  his  oflicers  held  a  coun-
cil of  war,  and  decide<l  to  evjtt-uate  the  fort.  The
blaze  of  a  house  that  had  Ix-en  set  on  fire  con-
trary Ut  orders  discovered  their  movements,  and
iminediately  the  British  started  in  pursuit.  St.
Clair  fle<l  through  the  wo<h1s,  leaving  a  part  of
his  fon-e  at  Ilublwrdton,  which  was  attacked  and
defeated  by  Gen.  Fraser  on  7  July,  1777,  after  a
well-conteste<l  battle.  On  12  July,  St.  Clair  reached
Fort  Edward  with  the  renmant  of  his  men.  "  The
evacuation,"  wrote  Washington,  when  the  news
reached  him,  "  is  an  event  of  chagrin  and  surprise
not  aj»i)rehended,  nor  within  the  compass  of  my
reasoning.  This  stroke  is  severe  indeed,  and  has
distressed  us  njuch."  Gen.  St.  Clair  remained  with
his  army,  and  was  with  Washington  at  Brandy-
wine,  11  Sept.,  1777,  acting  as  voluntary  aide.  A
court-martial  was  held  in  1778,  and  ho  was  ac-
quitted, "with  the  highest  honor,  of  the  charges
against  him,"  which  verdict  was  approved  by  con-
gress. He  assisted  Gen.  John  Sullivan  in  prejmr-
ing  his  expedition  against  the  Six  Nations,  was  a
commissioner  to  arrange  a  cartel  with  the  British
at  AmlK)V,  9  March,  17H0,  and  was  appointed  to
command  the  corps  of  light  infantry  in  the  absence
of  Lafayette,  but  did  not  serve,  owing  to  the  re-
turn of  (len.  George  Clinton,  He  wits  a  memlx^r
of  the  court-martial  that  condemned  Maj.  Andre,
commanded  at  West  Point  in  Octolx'r,  1780,  and
aidiil  in  suppressing  the  mutiny  in  the  Pennsyl-
vania line  in  January,  1781.  He'was  lu-tive  in  rais-
ing triK)ps  and  forwarding  them  to  the  south,  and
in  OctolHjr  joined  Washington  at  Yorktown  a  few
days  U'fore  the  surrender  of  Lord  Cornwallis.  In
Novemlwr  he  was  placed  in  command  of  a  lx)dy  of
tro»)ps  to  join  (Jen.  Nathanael  (Jreene.  and  renmined
in  the  south  until  Octolier,  17x2.  He  wjis  a  mem-
ber of  the  Pennsylvania  council  of  censors  in  1783,
a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  from  2  Nov.,
ITH."),  till  28  Nov.,  1787,  and  its  pri'sident  in  1787,
and  a  njemln^r  of  the  American  philosi>phical  soci-
ety. On  the  formation  of  the  Northwestern  terri-
tory in  17S9  (ten.  St.  Clair  was  ap|H>inted  its  gov-
enior,  holding  this  otllce  until  1802.  The  last
words  of  Washington  on  his  de]Mirtnre  were:  "  Be-
ware of  a  surprise."  He  made  a  treaty  with  the
VOL.  V. — 24


Indians  at  Fort  Harmar  in  1780.  and  in  1790  be
flxe«l  the  s«'at  of  iu?<tice  of  the  territory  at  Cincin-
nati. Ohio,  which  he  name<l  in  honor  of  the  .Society
of  the  Cincinnati,  of  which  he  wa.s  president  for
Pennsylvania  in  17K.'}-'9.  He  was  ap)K)inte<l  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  army  that  wa.<*  oi>erating
against  the  Indians  on  4  March,  1791.  and  moved
towanl  the  savagi>s  on  Miami  and  Waimsh  rivers,
su fieri ng  no  severely  from  gout  that  he  was  carried
on  a  litter.  He  was  HurprisiHl  near  the  Miami  vil-
lages on  4  Nov.,  and  his  force  was  defeat«><]  by  a
horde  of  Indians  led  by  Blue  Jacket,  I^iltle  Turtle,
and  Simon  (Jirty,  the  renegade.  Washington  re-
fuse<l  a  court  of  inquiry,  and  .St.  Clair  resigne<l  his
general's  commission  on  /}  .Marc-h,  171>2,  but  con-
gress appointed  a  committee  of  investigation,  which
exonerated  him.  On  22  Nov,.  1802,  he  was  removed
from  his  governorship  by  Thomas  Jefferson.  Re-
tiring t<i  a  small  log-house  on  the  summit  of  Chest-
nut ridge,  he  sjK'iit  the  rest  of  his  life  in  poverty,
vainly  endeavoring  to  effect  a  settlement  of  his
claims  against  the  government.  The  legislature
of  Pennsylvania  gratited  him  an  annuity  of  11400
in  1813,  and  shortly  before  his  death  he  received
from  congress  $2,()(X)  in  discharge  of  his  claims,
and  a  f)ension  of  f  (JO  a  month.  He  published  "  A
Narrative  of  the  Manner  in  which  the  Cam|>aign
against  the  Indians  in  the  Year  1791  was  con-
ducted under  the  Command  of  Maj.-Gen.  St.  Clair,
with  his  Oljservations  on  the  Statements  of  the
Secretary  of  War"  (Philatlelphia,  1812).  See  " The
Life  and  Public  .Services  of  Arthur  St.  Clair,"  with
his  corresjwndence  and  other  papers,  arrangeil  by
William  H.  Smith  (Cinciniuiti,  1882).

ST.  COME,  John  Francin  BiiisHon  de,  Cana-
dian missionary,  b.  in  France  about  1(>.">8;  d.  near
Mobile  in  1707.  He  was  ordained  in  108:i.  Some
time  before  1700  he  was  sent  from  Canada,  and  Ijc-
gan  a  mission  among  the  Natchez  Indians.  He
soon  gaitunl  the  i-onfidence  of  the  chief,  who  was  a
woman,  and  the  affection  of  the  ix'0|)le,  although
he  was  not  very  successful  in  converting  them.
Being  oblige<l  to  visit  Mobile  in  1707,  he  emiiarked
with  three  Fri'iichmen.  and  while  sailing  down  the
river  the  whole  party  were  slain  by  the  .Sitimacha
Indians.  The  Natchez  avenge<l  his  death  by  the
almost  entire  destruction  of  that  triln'.  and  to'  pre-
serve his  memory  gave  his  name  to  the  "  Lesser
Sun,"  or  second  chief.

ST.  CYR,  John  Mary  IreniiH,  clergyman,  b.
near  Lyons,  F'rance,  2  Jan.,  1804;  d.  in  Carondelet,
Mo.,  21  Feb.,  188;i  He  studiwl  for  the  nriest  hood
and  receivinl  the  tonsure  in  Lyons,  5  Ju?je,  1830.
.Soon  afterward  he  embarked  as  a  missionarv  for
the  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  and  was  received  into
the  vicariate  of  St.  Louis.  He  was  onlained  in
the  cathedral  of  St.  Louis,  G  April,  WiS.  lie  re-
ceived his  first  ap|Mjintmenl  from  Bishop  Kosati,
17  April,  1833,  who  assigned  him  to  Chicago,  which
was  tnen  a  frontier  post.  After  a  journey  of  two
weeks  he  arrived  there,  and  in  September,  18;{3,  he
secured  the  erection  of  the  first  church,  and  Ijecame
the  first  resident  priest.  He  remained  in  Chicago
till  1837.  when  he  went  to  (^uincy.  111.,  and  thence
to  Kaskaskia.  Sjiinte  Genevieve,  and  Carondelet,
Mo.,  when*  he  die<l.

SAINTE- CLAIRE  DEVILLF.,  Charles,
French  giH)logist,  1>.  in  the  island  of  St.  Thomas,
West  Indies,  in  1814 ;  d.  in  Paris.  France,  10  Oct,
1870.  After  having  pursue<l  the  n«gular  course  of
studies  as  out-dtK)r  pupil  at  the  rk-ole  des  mines
in  Paris,  he  undert<M>k  a  jouniey  of  sc-ientific  in-
vestigation at  his  own  exiHMise,  and  in  lH39-'4ii
visite<l  the  Antilles  and  ttie  islands  of  Teneriffe
and Capo Verd. His  geological exploration  of


870


SAINTE-CROIX


SAINT HILAIRE


Guadeloupe  occupied  more  than  a  year,  and  he  was
engafje<l  in  it  when  the  island  was  visited  by  the
terrible  earthnuake  of  1834.  On  his  return  to
Prance  he  published  his  work  on  the  Antilles,  and
on  its  appearance  set  out  to  explore  southern  Italy.
For  several  years  he  acted  as  assistunt  to  £lie  de
Beaumont,  occupant  of  the  chair  of  the  history  of
inorganic  bodies  in  the  College  de  France,  and
flnallv  became  his  successor.  Prof.  Deville  was
also  deeply  interested  in  meteorology,  and  estab-
lished a  network  of  meteorological  stations  over
France  and  Algeria.  lie  was  elected  a  member  of
the  Paris  academy  of  sciences  in  1857  in  the  place
of  Dufrenoy,  and  promoted  officer  of  the  Legion  of
honor,  13  Aug..  1862.  He  published,  among  other
works,  "Vovage  geologique  aux  Antilles  et  aux
iles  Teneriffe  et  de  Fogo''  (7  vols.,  Paris,  1856-'64)
and  "  Recherches  sur  les  principaux  phenomenes
de  moteorologie,  etc.,  aux  Antilles"  (1861). — His
brother,  Henri  £tienne.  West  Indian  chemist,
b.  in  St.  Thomas,  11  March,  1818;  d.  in  Paris,  9
July,  1883,  studied  in  Paris,  early  acquired  reputa-
tion for  his  chemical  researches,  and  in  1851  wa?
appointed  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  Normal
school  of  Paris,  which  post  he  held  till  1859.  when
he  was  made  professor  in  the  University  of  Paris.  He
discovered  the  anhydrous  nitric  acid  in  1849,  a  new
method  of  mineral  analysis  in  1853.  and  from  1854
to  1865  devoted  his  labors  principally  to  researches
upon  the  new  metal  aluminium.  He  was  also  the
first  to  make  artificial  diamonds,  which  he  did  at
an  enormous  cost,  and  he  discovered  new  proper-
ties of  several  metals.  His  works  include  "Me-
moire  sur  les  carbonates  metalliques  et  leurs  com-
binaisons "  (Paris,  1852) ;  "  Memoire  sur  les  trois
etats  moleculaires  du  silicium  "  (1855) :  "  Memoire
sur  la  production  des  temperatures  elevees  "  (1856) ;
"  Metallurgiedu  platine  et  des  metaux  que  I'accom-
pagnent"  (1857);  and  "  De  I'aluminium,  ses  pro-
prietes,  sa  fabrication  "  (1859).

SAINTE  •  CROIX,  (jaetan  Xarier  Gnilhem
de  Pascalls  (saynt-crwah),  Chevalier  de,  French
soldier,  b.  in  Mormoiron,ll  Dec,  1708;  d.  in  Cape
Fran^ais,  Santo  Domingo,  18  Aug.,  1762.  He  en-
tered the  French  army  as  a  lieutenant  in  1731,  and
served  for  fifteen  years  in  Santo  Domingo,  Mar-
tinique, and  Louisiana.  He  gained  credit  by  his
defence  of  the  fortress  of  Belle  Isle  in  June,  1761,
was  promoted  major-general,  20  July,  and  became
commander  of  the  French  forces  in  the  Leeward  and
Windward  islands.  In  February,  1762,  he  made
an  attack  upon  Martinique,  which  the  English  had
just  captured,  but  was  defeated.  After  organizing
the  defence  in  Santo  Domingo,  he  exerted  himself
to  send  re-enforcements  and  supplies  to  Havana,
and  prepared  an  expedition  against  Jamaica,  when
he  died  of  yellow  fever.

SAINTE-CROIX,  Lonis  Marie  Fliilibert
Edgard  de  Renonard  de.  West  Indian  agricul-
turist, b.  at  sea,  22  May,  1809.  He  studied  at  the
military  school  of  Saint  Cyr,  and  liecame  a  lieu-
tenant of  the  general  staff,  but  resigned  in  1838
and  returned  to  his  home  in  Martinique,  where  he
engaged  in  agricultural  experiments  upon  his  large
estate.  He  introduced  new  methods  for  the  cul-
ture of  the  sugar-cane  and  for  the  fabrication  of
raw  sugar,  and  was  also  the  first  to  experiment  on
the  culture  of  the  cotton-plant  in  the  French  West
Indies.  For  his  services  he  was  made  a  knight  of
the  Legion  of  honor,  and  in  1860  he  became  treas-
urer-general of  the  department  of  Mayenne,  His
works  include  "  Maniere  d'estimer  le  rendement
de  la  canne  &  sucre"  (Paris,  1841);  "  Ija  question
du  sucre"  (1842);  *' De  la  fabrication  du  sucre
aux  colonies"  (1843);  "Principes  fondamentaux


d'agriculture  coloniale"  (1845);  and  "  Le  sucre
aux  colonies"  (1847).

SAINT  GAUDENS,  Angustns,  sculptor,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland.  1  Mareh,  1848.  When  six  months
of  age  he  was  brought  to  New  York,  and  in  that
city  he  suV)sequentlv  followed  the  profession  of  a
cameo-cutter.  He  iaegan  to  draw  at  Cooper  insti-
tute in  1861,  and  in  1865-'6  was  a  student  at  the
National  academy,  modelling  also  in  his  leisure
hours.  In  1867  he  went  to  Paris,  where  he  studied
under  Frangois  Jouffroy  at  the  ftcole  des  beaux
arts  until  1870.  He  next  went  to  Rome,  and  there
produced,  in  1871,  his  first  figure,  "  Hiawatha."  In
the  next  year  he  returned  to  New  York,  where  he
has  since  resided.  Mr.  Saint-Gaudens  has  been
president  of  the  Society  of  American  artists.  His
more  important  works  are  the  bas-relief  "  Adora-
tion of  the  Cross  by  Angels,"  in  St.  Thomas's
church.  New  York ;  statues  of  Admiral  David  G.
Farragut  (1880).  in  New  York,  of  Robert  R.  Randall
(1884),  at  Sailor's  Snu^  Harbor,  Staten  island,  N.  Y.,
and  of  Abraham  Lincoln  (1887),  in  Chicago:  a
fountain  (1886-'7),  in  Chicago;  "The  Puritan,"  a
statue  of  Samuel  Chapin  (1887),  in  Springfield,
Mass. :  portrait  busts  of  William  M.  Evarts  (1872-'3),
Theodore  D.  Woolsey  (1876),  at  Yale,  and  Gen.
William  T.  Sherman  (1888) :  and  medallions  of
Bastien  Le  Page  (1879)  and  Robert  L.  Stevenson
(1887).  Mr.  Saint-Gaudens  assisted  John  La  Farge
in  the  decoration  of  Trinity  church,  Boston,  and
the  monument  to  Le  Roy  King,  at  Newport.  R.  I.,
is  also  the  joint  work  of  those  two  artists. — His
brother,  Louis,  sculptor,  b.  in  New  York,  8  Jan.,
1854,  studied  in  the  ficole  des  beaux  arts.  Paris,
in  1879-'80.  He  has  modelled  a  "  Faun,"  "  St
John,"  for  the  Church  of  the  Incarnation.  New
York,  and  other  statues,  and  has  assisted  his
brother  in  most  of  his  works.

ST.  GEORGE,  Sir  Thomas  Bligli,  British  sol-
dier, b.  in  England  about  1765 ;  d.  in  London,  6
Nov.,  1837.  He  entered  the  army  as  an  ensign  in
the  27th  foot,  became  a  lieutenant  in  1790,  captain
in  1794,  major  in  1804,  and  in  1805  lieutenant-
colonel  in  the  63d  foot.  During  the  period  of
these  promotions  he  served  in  trance,  Portugal,
Corsica,  and  the  Mediterranean,  and  took  part  in
many  battles.  In  March,  1809,  he  went  to  Upper
Canada,  having  been  appointed  inspecting  field-
officer  of  militia  there.  He  commanded  at  Am-
herstburg  when  it  was  attacked  by  Gen.  William
Hull,  led  the  militia  at  the  capture  of  Detroit  in
August,  1812,  and  at  the  river  Raisin,  in  Michigan,
23  Jan.,  1813,  when  Gen.  Winchester  was  defeated.
At  this  battle  Gen.  St.  George  received  severe
wounds.  He  became  colonel  in  1813,  major-general
in  1819,  was  nominated  a  companion  of  the  Bath
in  1815,  and  was  knighted  in  1835.

SAINT  HILAIRE,  Angnstin  Frant^ois  C^sar
Prouvenjjal  de,  French  botanist,  b.  in  Orleans,
France,  4  Oct.,  1799;  d.  there,  30  Sept.,  1853.  He
was  sent  when  a  young  man  to  Holland  to  super-
intend a  sugar-refinery  that  belonged  to  the  family,
and  he  thus  passed  several  years  in  an  uncongenial
employment.  On  his  return  to  France  he  devoted
himself  enthusiastically  to  the  study  of  natural
history,  his  favorite  science,  and,  refusing  the  ap-
pointment of  auditor  of  the  counsel  of  the  state,  he
embarked  for  Rio  Janeiro  on  1  April.  1816.  For
six  years  he  explored  the  Brazilian  empire,  jour-
neying about  5,(500  miles  from  13°  south  latitude
to  the  Rio  de  la  Plata.  He  returned  to  France  in
1822  with  24.(XX)  specimens  of  plants,  embracing
about  O.tKK)  species,  almost  all  of  them  new.  and
nearly  all  analyzed  on  the  spot,  grains,  2,0(X)  birds,
16,(X)0  insects,  and  135  quadrup«is,  besides  reptiles.


SAINTIN


ST.  LRORR


371


I


flsh(>M,  and  a  f(>w  mincralA.  On  irarliinfr  home  ho
(Ifvotcnl  hiniHcIf  at  ()n<n>  to  prcptirnlion  for  nuhli-
cation  of  his  <'InlM>rHte  work  on  th«'  flora  of  Hraxil;
but  hin  health,  seriously  inipainnl  by  the  fatig^ui-s
and  trials  hf  iiail  undi>r);oiH>,  j^v(>  way.  and  it  was
only  after  a  lonjf  iH«rio«l  of  n'st  that  ho  wan  enabled
to  complete  it.  Me  was  ap|Hiinte<i  corn'sjKtnilent
of  the  institute  in  \HIU  while  alwent  in  Brazil,  and
became  an  active  memU-r  after  the  (loath  of  Cheva-
lier Jean  Iwiniarck,  H  Feb..  IKJO.  lie  was  also  a
chevalier  of  the  Ijoifion  of  honor,  and  of  the  I'or-
tusruew  Order  of  rhrist.  Amonf;  his  works  aro
"  Aperyu  d'lm  voyap?  dan?  I'interieur  tin  Bn'^j^il,  la
province  Oisplatine  ct  les  missions  du  Pamjfuay  "
(Paris,  IHiii);  "  Flora  BrasiliH>  mcridionalis,  ou  his-
toire  et  description  de  toutes  les  plantes  qui  erois-
sent  dans  les  dilTerentes  provinces  du  Brfeil "  (U
vols.,  IS2!}) ;  ••  Memoin*  sur  lo  systeme  d'agriculture
a<lopte  jNir  les  Bresiliens  et  les  resultats  (|u'il  a  eus
dans  la  province  dc  Minas-OeraiVi"  (1827);  "Voy-
age dans  la  province  do  Rio  de  Janeiro  et  Minas-
Gerat'-s"  (2  vols.,  1830):  "Voyajfe  dans  le  district
des  diamants  et  sur  le  littoral  du  Brcsil "  (2  vols..
1833) :  and  "  VoyajCfe  aux  sources  du  San  Francisco
et  dans  la  province  de  Govaz  "  (2  vols.,  1847-'8).

SAINTIN,  Jules  tmWe,  French  artist,  b.  in
Leme.  Aisne,  14  Aug.,  1829.  He  studied  in  Paris
under  Michel  Martin  DKtlling,  Fran9ois  Kdouard
Picot,  and  Lelx)ucher.  For  several  years  (abr>ut
1857- '63)  he  practise<l  his  profession  in  New  York.
During  his  stay  there  he  exhibited  frequently  at
the  Academy  of  design,  and  was  elected  an  asso-
ciate in  1861.  lie  has  receiveil  several  medals  in
Eurofie,  and  became  chevalier  of  the  Legion  of
honor  in  1877.  Among  the  portraits  that  he
painted  while  he  was  in  this  country  are  those  of
Paul  Morphy  (I860);  Stephen  A.  Douglas  (1860),
in  the  Corcoran  gallerv,  Washington;  and  John  F.
Kensett  (18(W).

ST.  JOHN,  Isaac  Mnnroe.  engineer,  b.  in  Au-
gusta, Ga.,  19  Nov.,  1827 ;  d.  in  Greenbrier  White
Sulphur  Springs,  W.  Va.,  7  April,  1880.  After
graduation  at  Yale  in  184.").  he  studied  law  in  New
York  city,  and  removed  to  Baltimore  in  1847,  where
he  be<'ame  assistant  e<litor  of  the  "  Patriot,"  but
chose  civil  engineering  for  a  profession,  and  was
engaged  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad.  In
1855  he  removed  to  Gef)rgia,  and  was  employed  on
the  Blue  Ridge  railroad  until  the  beginnmg'of  the
civil  war.  when  he  entere<l  the  engineer  corps  of  the
Confe<lerate  army  at  Richmond,  Va.,  and  was  as-
signe<l  to  duty  under  Gen.  John  B.  Magruder.  He
rendered  valuable  service  in  constructing  fortifica-
tions during  (Jen.  George  B.  MeClellan's  first  cam-
paign. In  May,  1862.  he  was  made  major  and  chief
of  the  mining  and  nitre  bureau,  which  was  the  sole
reliance  of  the  Confederacy  for  gunpowder  material.
He  was  promoted  through  the  various  grades  to
the  rank  of  brigatlier-general,  and  in  1865  was
made  commissary-general,  and  established  a  system
by  which  supplies  for  the  army  were  colIecte<l
directly  from  the  people  and  placed  in  dejx)ts  for  j
immediate  transjjortation.  After  the  war  he  re-
sununl  his  profession  in  Kentucky,  iK'came  chief
engintH'r  of  the  Ijouisville,  Cincinnati,  and  Lexing-
ton railroad,  and  built  the  short-line  to  Cincinnati,
which  was  consideretl  a  great  feat  in  civil  en-
gineering. Me  wa-s  city  engineer  of  Ijouisville  in
1870-*1.  ma<le  the  first  to|)ogniphical  map  of  that
city,  and  established  its  system  of  sewerage.  From
1871  until  his  death  he  was  consulting  engineer  of
the  (JhesajM-ake  anil  Ohio  railroad,  and  chief  engi-
neer of  the  Lexington  and  Big  Sandy  railroad.

ST.  JOHN,  John  Pierce,  governor  of  Kansas,
b.  in  Franklin  county,  Ind.,  25  Feb.,  1883. In  early


years  he  wa-i  employed  on  hi«  father's  farm,  and
was  clerk  in  a  grrK-cr's  store.  In  18.^3  ho  went  to
Califtirnia,  worki>d  in  ▼arioos  capa(-iti(>s,  and  niwle
voyages  to  .S<iiith  America.  Mexico,  Central  Ameri-
ca, and  the  Sandwich  islands,  and  serve<l  in  wars
with  the  Indians  in  California  and  Oregon.  In
18<i0  he  remove<I  to  Charleston.  111.,  to  continue  the
study  of  law.  which  he  hwi  l>egun  in  his  miner's
cabin.  Karly  in  1862  he  enliste<l  as  a  private  in
the  Wth  Illinois  volunteers,  in  which  he  iN-came  a
cHptain.  At  Alexandria.  Va.,  he  wils  detachtnl  from
his  commantl,  and  assigniHl  as  acting  a.ssistant  ad-

i'utant -general  under  (ten.  John  P.  Slough,  in  1864
le  was  place<l  in  command  of  the  troops  at  Camp
Matt(K>n,  111.,  and  on  the  organization  of  the  143a
rt>giinent  he  was  ele<rte<l  its  lieutenant-colonel,  serr*
ing  chiefly  in  the  Mississippi  valley.  At  the  close
of  the  war  he  resumed  practice  in  Charleston,  but
removed  afterward  to  Inde|M'ndenc<>,  .Mo.,  where  he
practisetl  law  four  years  with  success,  and  won  a
reputation  as  a  political  orator.  He  n^inoved  to
Olathe,  Kan.,  in  1869,  served  in  the  state  senate  in
187;i-'4,  and  was  electetl  governor  of  Kansa.s,  as  a
liepublican,  in  1878,  serving  until  1882,  when  he
was  defeated  as  a  candidate  for  a  thinl  term.  He
was  the  candidate  of  the  Prohibition  party  for  presi-
dent of  the  United  States  in  1884,  and  rweived  a
vote  of  151,809.  During  the  canvass  he  delivered
addresses  in  various  [)arts  of  the  Unitecl  .States.

ST.  JUST,  LiiC  Ix^tellldre  de,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Riviere  Ouelle,  province  of  (^uelKK-,  12
May,  1820 :  d.  there,  1  Feb.,  1881.  He  studied  law,
and  after  practising  for  a  time  was  elected  to  the
old  (tai'liament  in  1850.  He  was  defeated  at  the
general  election  of  1852,  and  again  in  1857,  but  in
18(H)  was  elected  for  Granville  division  to  the  legis-
lative council,  where  he  sat  until  the  union  in  1867.
In  18(t;j  he  became  minister  of  agriculture  in  the
Sandfield  Macdonald  administration,  retaining  the
office  until  18(i4.  In  1867  he  was  calle<l  to  the  sen-
ate, and  in  1873,  when  the  Liberal  atlministration
came  into  |)ower,  he  became  mini.sterof  agriculture.
Toward  the  close  of  1874  he  resigned  his  portfolio,
and  was  appointeil  lieutenant-governor  of  (Quebec.
He  soon  found  himself  at  variance  with  different
meml)ers  of  the  IcK-al  government,  es|)ecially  with
the  premier,  M.  de  Ik)ucherville.  The  difference
between  them  gradually  l)ecame  wider,  and  finally
all  the  members  of  the  administration  were  parties
to  the  dispute.  On  24  March.  1878,  the  lieutenant-
governor  brought  matters  to  a  crisis  by  dismissing
his  cabinet,  a  proceeding  that  produced  the  most
violent  excitement  throughout  the  country.  The
matter  was  at  last  considere<l  in  iMirliament.  but.  as
the  Lil)erals  were  in  power,  ana  he  had  only  dis-
missed their  political  opponents,  he  escaped  even
censure.  In  1879  the  Conservatives  came  into  pow-
er; the  dismissal  case  was  reconsidere<l.  and  the
ministry  advLsed  the  dismissal  of  the  lieutenant-
governor.  The  governor-general.  Jjonl  Ix)me.  hesi-
tate<l.  and  referml  the  case  to  the  secretarj*  for  the
colonies  at  Ijondon.  who  requested  him  to  take  the
a<ivice  of  his  ministers.  Consequently,  M.  de  St.
Just  was  disiilaced  from  office.

ST.  LEOEK,  Barry,  British  soldier,  b.  in  1787;
d.  in  1789.  He  was  a  nephew  of  the  fourth  Vis-
count Doneraile  and  fellow  of  St-  Peter's  college,
Cambridge,  and  was  of  Fluguenot  descent.  He
entereil  the  army,  27  April,  1756.  as  ensign  of  the
28th  regiment  o^  foot.  and.  coming  to  this  country
in  the  following  year.  serve<l  in  the  French  war,
learning  the  habits  of  the  Indians  and  gaining
much  experience  in  border  warfare.  He  served
un«ler  Gen.  Abercrombie  in  1757,  and  partici{>ated
in  the  siege  of  Louisburg  in  1758. Accompanying


372


ST.  LUC


SAINT  MfiMIN


Wolfe  to  Quebec  in  1759,  he  was  in  the  battle  on
the  Plains  of  Abraham,  whore  he  checked  the  flight
of  the  French.  In  July,  1760,  he  was  appointed
brigmle-inajor,  preparatory  to"  marching:  to  Mon-
treal, and  he  became  niaior  of  the  OHth  foot,
16  Au;r..  1702.  Maj.  St.  Leger  was  chosen  by
George  III.,  at  (Jen.  Burpoyne's  recommendation,
to  Ih?  the  le«der  of  the  expedition  against  Fort
Stanwix,  and  justified  their  confidence  in  him,  in
his  ailvance  from  Oswego,  by  his  precautions
against  surprise  and  by  his  stratagem  at  Oriskany,
and  his  general  conduct  of  the  siege  of  that  fort  up
to  the  panic  that  was  prmluced  \v  the  rumor  of
the  aj>proach  of  Arnold,  which  forced  him  to  raise
it.  After  the  failure  of  this  expedition  he  was  pro-
moted, in  1780,  to  colonel  in  the  army,  the  hignest
rank  he  ever  attained,  and,  becoming  a  leader  of
rangers  under  the  immediate  command  of  Gen.
lialdimand,  he  carried  on  a  guerilla  warfare,  with
headquarters  at  Montreal.  In  the  summer  of  1781
he  proposed  a  plan  for  the  capture  of  Gen.  Philip
Schuyler,  which,  however,  failed  in  its  object.  In
the  autumn  of  the  sjime  year,  in  obedience  to  the
orders  of  lialdimand,  who  was  anxious  to  persuade
Vermont  to  return  to  her  allegiance,  he  ascended
Lake  Champlain  with  a  strong  force  to  Ticonder-
oga,  in  the  expectation  of  meeting  the  Vermont
commissioners,  Ira  Allen  and  Joseph  Fay;  but,
hearing  a  rumor  of  the  surrender  ot  Cornwallis,  he
retreated  to  St.  John,  without  accomplishing  his
mission.  lie  was  commandant  of  the  royal  forces
in  Canada  in  the  autumn  of  1784,  and  his  name
appears  in  the  army  lists  for  the  la-st  time  in  1785.
St.  Leger  possessed  some  literary  talent,  as  is  shown
both  by  his  letters  to  Burgoyne  and  the  British
ministry,  and  by  his  volume  entitled  "  St.  Lcger's
Journal  of  Occurrences  in  America  "  (London,  1780).
ST.  LUC,  La  Corne  de,  French  soldier,  b.  in
1712 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  1  Oct.,  1784.  He  be-
longed to  a  family  that  was  noted  in  Canadian  an-
nals for  the  number  of  its  military  members.  His
father  was  Jean  Louis  de  la  Corne,  who  held  the
office  of  town  mayor  of  Three  Rivers,  and  in  1719
was  major-general  of  troops  at  Quebec,  and  his
brother  wjvs  the  Chevalier  Pierre  la  Corne  {q.  i>.),
but  he  signed  his  name  La  Corne  St.  Luc.  During
French  supremacy  in  Canada  he  was  an  active  par-
tisan leader  against  the  English.  He  was  engaged  in
1746  in  scouting  in  the  vicinity  of  Lake  St.  Sacra-
ment and  Fort  St.  Frederick  in  June,  1747,  nearly
captured  Fort  Clinton  (now  Schuylerville,  N.  Y.),
and  during  the  remainder  of  the  old  French  war
was  busily  employed  in  ambuscades  against  con-
voys and  small  parties  of  the  enemy.  He  was  pres-
ent in  1757  as  a  captain  in  Montcalm's  expedition
against  Fort  William  Henry,  and  led  the  Indians
of  the  left  column.  He  served  with  great  credit
at  the  battle  of  Ticonderoga  in  1758,  where  he
carried  off  a  convoy  of  150  of  Gen.  Al)ercrombie's
wagons.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  on  the  Plains  of
Abraham  in  1760,  and  again  at  the  victory  of  St.
Foy,  near  Quebec,  where  ne  was  wounded.  When
hostilities  began  between  Great  Britain  and  her
American  colonies,  he  at  once  espoused  the  cause
of  the  crown,  and  successfully  incited  the  In-
dians of  the  north  and  northwest  to  take  up
arms  against  the  colonists.  He  was  with  the
party  that  captured  Ethan  Allen,  and  with  Gen.
Carleton  when  he  was  repulsed  bjr  Col.  Seth  War-
ner. St.  Luc  was  taken  prisoner  in  1775,  and  sent
to  New  York,  but,  returning  to  Canada  in  May,
1777,  he  became  the  leader  of  the  Indians  in  the
Burgoyne  campaign.  When  Jane  McCrea  (q.  v.)
was  killed,  and  Burgoyne  demanded  that  the
murderers  should  be  given  up,  St.  Luc  reminded


him  of  the  consequences,  and  thus  secured  im-
munity for  his  savage  followers.  He  was  accused
by  Burgoyne  of  deserting  with  his  Indians  at  the
critical  moment  at  Bennington,  and  denounced  by
him  in  parliament  an.  a  runaway.  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  legis-
lative council  in  Canada,  and  stoutly  defended  the
political  rights  of  the  Canadians  at  an  epoch  when
they  were  not  always  resi)ected.  He  was  a  man
of  e<Iucation,  talent,  and  courage.  His  modes  of
warfare  were  brutal  and  sanguinary,  and  his  un-
relenting hostility  to  the  colonists  manifests  the
most  bitter  vindictiveness.

ST.  LUSSON,  Simon  Fran(;ois  Daumont,
Sieur  de,  French  officer,  lived  in  the  17th  centurj*.
He  was  the  deputy  of  the  intendant  of  the  French
government  in  Canada,  Jean  Talon,  who  on  3  Sept..
1670,  commissioned  him  to  search  for  copper-mines
and  confer  with  the  tribes  alK)ut  Ijake  Suj>erior.
Nicolas  Perrot,  who  had  visited  the  lake  country
a  few  months  before,  accompanied  him  as  interpre-
ter. On  5  May,  1675.  St.  Lusson  concluded  ft  treaty,
with  imposing  ceremonies,  in  the  presence  of  tlie
Jesuit  missionaries  then  in  Upper  Canada,  at  Sault
Ste.  Marie,  with  the  principal  chiefs  of  the  Sauks.
Menomonees,  Pottawattamies,  Winnebagoes,  and
other  tribes,  seventeen  in  all,  and  fonnally  took
possession  of  the  region  surrounding  Lakes  Huron
and  Superior  in  the  name  of  the  king  of  France.
The  costly  presents  to  the  Indians  and  other  ex-
penses of  the  expedition  were  more  than  repaid  by
the  gifts  of  furs  that  he  received  in  return.

SAINT  M£x^IN,  Charles  Balthazar  Jnlien
F^vre  de,  artist,  b.  in  Dijon,  France,  12  March,
1770;  d,  there,  23  June,  1852.  He  was  entered  as
a  cadet  in  the  military  school  in  Paris,  1  April,
1784,  and  appointed  ensign,  27  April,  1788.  At
the  opening  of  the
French  revolution  he
was  loyal  to  the  crown,
and  joined  the  army
of  the  princes,  serving
until  it  was  disbanded,
when  he  retired  to
Switzerland,  and  came
thence  to  this  country.
He  landed  in  Canada
in  1793,  but  soon  af-
terward reached  New
York.  While  with  the
army  he  had  given  at-
tention to  drawing  and
painting,  and  in  Swit-
zerland he  had  learned
to  carve  and  gild  wood.
A  compatriot  named
Chretien  had  invented
a machine in 1786

which  he  called  a  physionotrace,  by  means  of  which
the  human  profile  could  be  copied  with  mathe-
matical accuracy.  It  had  great  success  in  France,
and  Saint  Merain  determined  to  introduce  it  into
this  country.  He  constructed  such  a  machine
with  his  own  hands,  acconling  to  his  understand-
ing of  it,  and  also  made  a  pantograph,  by  which
to  reduce  the  original  design.  I  lis  life-size  pro-
files on  pink  paper,  finished  in  black  crayon,  were
reduced  by  the  pantograph  to  a  size  small  enough
to  be  engraved  within  a  perfect  circle  two  inches
in  diameter.  The  machine,  of  course,  only  gave
the  outline,  the  finishing  Ijeing  done  in  one  case
with  crayon,  and  in  the  other  with  the  graver  and
roulette,  by  which  means  he  took  in  thi?  coun-
try more  than  800  portraits.  The  drawing  and
engraved  plate,  with  a  dozen  proofs,  became  the


C^, .e^i^yfUAyy^


ST.  OURS


ST.  PALAIS


878


property  of  the  sitter  for  the  j)rice  of  $88.  the  nrt  j»t  '
reservitiif  onlv  «  fi»w  puKifmii  ewh  iKirtrait,  With  ,
tht'se  pn><)fs  ^ii>  forniod  two  M'ts,  Hml  wn»tc  uikhi
ewh  imprexjtion  the  name  «)f  tl»e  8ultJ€H,'t.  ThesH*
two  complete  collectiorw  were  bn)U);ht  to  thisenuri-
try  in  18o9,  and  one  of  them  i«  now  in  the  Con-oran
giillery.  Washington.  I).  ('.  While  in  thi«  country
Saint  Meniin  re^ithnl  prinei|)ally  in  I*hila4iulphia
anil  New  York,  but  nia«le  visits  to  other  cities,  tak-
in>;  |><)rtrHits.  While  he  was  in  IMiiiiwleiphia  in
17UH  he  st-cure<l  a  profile  [Hirtrait  of  Washin^rton,
which  is  es|H'cially  interi'stinj;  a-s  Imng  the  last
portrait  of  him  that  was  taken  from  life.  In  IHIO
Saint  Memin  retume«l  Ut  France,  where  he  re-
maine<l  two  years,  at  the  end  of  which  time  he  st>t-
tled  again  in  this  country,  when  he  alxindoiuHl
en^^nving  ami  followed |>ortrait-  and landsfa|>e-

Fimting.  In  C)ct«lK?r,  1814,  he  finally  uuitted  the
nit«Hl  Stat i»s  for  France,  and  in  1817  he  was  ap-
poinltHl  dir»«ctor  of  the  museum  at  Dijon,  which
post  he  oi-cupied  at  the  time  of  his  death.  Mathe-
matics and  mechanics  were  the  pursuits  he  loved
most  to  follow,  the  arts  being  merely  a  money-mak-
ing ailjunct ;  but  we  owe  to  the  physionotrace  and
graver  of  S«iint  Memin  the  preservati<m  of  the
lineaments  of  many  distinguished  citizens.

ST.  OrRS,  Jean  Baptlste  de,  Sieur  n'Es-
CHAiLLf)Ns,  French -Caiuulian  soldier,  b.  in  Cana-
da in  1««8;  d.  in  Montreal  in  1747.  His  father,
Pierre  de  St.  Ours.  wa.s  the  first  of  the  family
to  come  to  Canada,  renderetl  great  services  to
the  colony,  and  obtained  extensive  grants  of  land.
The  son  entere«l  the  army  as  s(X)n  as  he  was  fit
to  bear  arms,  was  made  lieutenant  in  1702,  and
a  little  afterward  became  garde-marine.  In  170H
he  was  one  of  the  three  commanders  of  the  ex-
itedition  against  Fort  Orange  (now  Albany).  The
Christian  Iroquois  having  alwudoned  the  exj>e-
dition,  the  French  were  about  to  retreat,  but  St.
Ours  appealed  to  the  Indians  that  remained  with
him  not  to  return  without  doing  something.  About
200  swore  that  they  would  follow  him,  and  at
their  head  he  captured  the  village  and  fort  of
Haverhill,  with  its  garrison,  afterward  leading  his
men  Ixack  to  Canada,  having  adroitly  extricated
them  from  an  ambusi-ade.  He  ct>mmanded  a  com-
pany in  De  Ramezay's  expedition  against  the  Kng-
lish  in  1710.  In  1721  ne  was  intrustetl  with  a
special  mission  to  various  Indian  tribes  by  the
governor,  De  Vaudreuil.  He  went  by  way  of  De-
troit, visited  Lachine,  and  endeavonnl  to  put  a
stop  to  the  liquor  trafiic  with  the  Miamis.  St.  Ours
also  trictl  to  bring  about  peace  between  the  Sioux
and  their  enemies,  took  steps  to  form  the  Creeks
into  a  single  village,  and  essayed  to  attract  to  that
of  (Jamanistigonye  the  savages  that  were  scattered
along  Ijake  Superior.  On  his  return  he  was  made
major  of  Montreal,  and  he  subsequently  became
king's  lieutenant. — His  grandson,  Charles  LodIh
Roch,  b.  in  Cana^la  in  175,3;  d.  there  in  IHiU,  on
his  entrance  into  puV)lic  life  decidetl  to  supfwrt
the  Knglish  government  in  Canada,  and  Wfis  an-
pointe<l  a  memljer  of  the  legislative  council.  In
this  jM>st  he  endeavored  successfully  to  give  ex-
pression to  the  views  of  his  countr>'men.  He
op|M>sedan  attempt  to  have  the  English  language
adopte<l,  an<l  also  comlmted  a  plan  for  confiscat-
ing the  projH'rty  of  the  .Ii»suits.  In  1774  he  was
ap(>ointe4i  major  of  militia,  and  soon  afterwani  he
became  ct>lonel.  The  services  that  he  rendennl  the
English  at  the  hea<l  of  the  Canadian  volunteers
gained  him  the  friendship  of  Gen.  Carleton,  who
made  St.  Ours  his  aidc-de-cam|).  He  travelled
through  EurofH?  in  178.5,  and  was  received  with
honor  not  only  at  the  English  court,  but  by  Fred-


crick  the  Oreat  and  Ixiuis  XVI.  On  hi»  return
he  Ux}k  a  notable  (tart  in  the  public  life  of  Canada,
where  his  infliicnci'  in  afTnin«  waM  much  incrnaed
by  his  m<Mleration  in  dclmte  and  courtesy  to-
ward {toliticul  op|Hinents.— His  kinsman.  Francla
Xarier.  b.  in  Canaila  alM>ut  1714;  d.  in  (Quebec  in
1759,  entere<l  the  military  wn*ice  and  nm?  rapidly
in  rank.  He  was  one  n(  the  commanders  of  the
militia  in  the  attack  on  Fort  (>tH>rge.  and.  although
wounde<l,  he  dn>ve  l»ack  a  fore*-  of  English  at  the
head  of  a  few  Canadians.  After  the  t>attle  of
Carrillon  in  1758  he  was  one  of  the  three  oflicerB
that  were  specially  mentioned  for  heroism  by  .Mont-
calm. He  commandeil  the  right  of  the  French
army,  with  De  Honne.  at  yueVjec.  ami  was  killed
while  charging  at  the  hea«l  of  his  tr<K)ps.

ST.  PALAIS.  JameH  Maurice  de  IiOngrd'An»-
Hac  de,  K.  C.  liishop,  b.  in  Ija  Salvetat,  France,
15  Nov.,  1811;  d.  in  St.  Mar>'*s  of  the  Wck^kIs.
Vigo  CO.,  Ind.,  28  June,  1877.  He  was  descended
from  a  celebrated  m(*din*val  family.  He  studied
in  the  College  of  St.  Nicholas  du  Chardonet  in
Paris,  and  in  1830  entered  the  .Seminarj'  of  St.
Sulpice,  to  l)ecome  a  priest.  He  wa?  ordaine<l
in  lt<i(i,  went  to  Indiana  as  a  missionary,  and,  on
his  arrival  in  Vincennes.  was  sent  to  a  station
thirty-five  miles  east  of  that  town.  Here  he  or-
ganized' a  congregation,  and  built  St.  Mary's
church.  The  first  settlers  of  this  countrj*  were,'a8
a  rule,  very  poor,  but,  by  his  ingenuity,  which  was
displaye<l  in  some  modest  and  successful  s|)e<'ula-
tions,  he  found  means  to  build  several  churches.
In  1839  he  was  removed  to  Chicago,  where  he  de-
voted a  great  part  of  his  time  to  the  conversion  of
the  Indians,  until  they  were  removed  across  the
Mississippi.  There  had  In^en  priests  in  Chicago,
prior  to  the  a<lvent  of  Father  St.  Palais,  whose
conduct  had  l>een  Iwd ;  and,  in  consequence,  he
found  his  flock  ilemoralized,  and  met  with  opposi-
tion from  a  j)ortion  of  them.  Thev  burned  his  lit-
tle cabin,  and  for  two  years  refused  him  his  salary,
with  the  avowed  purpose  of  starving  him  out.  lie
remaineil  at  his  j)ost,  however,  and  with  private
means  liuilt  St.  Mary's  church,  which  shortly  after-
ward iH'came  the  first  cathwlral  of  the  diocese  of
Chicago.  In  1844  Chicago  was  createtl  an  episco-
pal see,  and  Father  St.  Palais  was  removed  to
Logans|)ort.  The  hnnlships  he  underwent  at  this
station  were  extraonlinarv.  He  rode  almost  daily,
sometimes  for  a  hundre({  miles,  without  seeing  a
human  dwelling.  In  1840  he  was  sent  to  Madison,
and  in  1847  was  appointe<l  vicar-gi»neral  and  su-
perior of  the  ecclesiastical  seminary  at  Vincennes.
In  1848  he  was  administrator  of  the  diocese  of
Vincennes  on  the  death  of  Bishop  Itazin.  and  in
the  same  year  was  nominated  bishop  by  Pius  IX.,
and  consecrated  in  1849,  He  erected  two  fine
orphan  asylums — one  for  l)oys,  at  Highland,  and  the
otner  for  girls,  at  Terre  Haute.  He  |>aid  his  epis-
copal visit  to  Home  in  1849,  and  persuaded  the
Ilene<lictines  to  send  out  a  colony  of  their  order  to
Indiana.  In  1857  his  difn-ese  was  dividt><l,  a  new
see  being  erected  at  Fort  Wayne.  Keturiiing  from
his  second  visit  to  Home  in  18.59.  he  travelle<i
through  France.  Switzerland,  and  (Jermany,  in
furtherance  of  the  interest  of  his  diocese.  He  vis-
ited Rome  again  in  18G9.  and  attende<l  the  Vatican
council,  when  he  Ixt-ame  bishop  he  had  thirty-
tlire*'  prit?sts  to  assist  him  in  attending  aUnit
30.000  people.  The  number  of  Catholic  churches
was  fifty,  although  the  di(K-es«' of  Vincennes  com-

Srise<l  tlien  the  whole  state  of  Intliana.  .\t  his
eath  the  diiK-ese  of  Vincennes,  although  niluced
from  its  original  extent,  containe<I  90,000  souls,
151  churches,  and  117  priests. He  established  the


874


SAINT  PIERRE


SAINT  VICTOR


Francist-an  Fathei"?  at  Oldenburg  and  at  Indian-
apolis, the  Fathers  O.  M.  C.  at  Terre  Haute,  and  the
lirothors  of  the  Sacred  Heart.  The  following  fe-
male orders  also  owe  their  advent  in  the  diocese  to
his  administration :  the  Sisters  of  St.  Francis,  the
Nuns  of  the  Order  of  St.  Benedict,  the  Daughters
of  Charity,  the  Sisters  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  the
Little  Sisters  of  the  Poor,  the  Ursuline  Sisters,  and
the  Sisters  of  St.  Josonh.
SAINT  PIERRE,  Lesardeur  Jacques  de(san-

5e-air),  French  soldier,!),  in  Normandy  in  1G98;
.  near  Lake  George,  Canada,  in  1755.  He  went  in
early  youth  to  Canada  as  ensign  in  a  regiment  of
marines,  served  against  the  Iro^iuois,  and  took  a
commendable  part  in  the  war  of  1740  against  the
English.  In  1752  he  was  sent  on  a  journey  of
discovery  toward  the  Rocky  mountains,  which  he
was  among  the  first  to  explore,  and,  on  his  return
in  October,  was  ordered  by  Gov.  Duouesne  to  Ohio,
where  the  French  had  just  built  Fort  de  Bceuf
upon  French  creek,  which  commanded  the  route
to  Alleghany  river.  On  11  Dec.  he  received  there
George  Washington,  then  adjutant-general  of  Vir-
ginia, who  brought  a  letter  from  Gov.  Dinwiddie
mviting  the  French  to  withdraw  from  English
territory.  According  to  the  journal  of  Washing-
ton, printed  at  Williamsburg  just  after  his  re-
turn, he  was  extremely  well  received  by  Saint
Pierre,  whom  he  depicts  as  an  able  and  courteous
commander.  In  the  spring  of  1753  Saint  Pierre
was  superseded  by  Contrecoeur  and  appointed
commander  of  the  Indian  auxiliaries,  and  in  that
capacity  he  rendered  great  services  in  Baron  Dies-
kau's  expedition.  He  was  subsequently  killed  in
the  action  where  Whiting's  regiment  was  routed.
Saint  Pierre's  account  of  his  journey  to  the  Rocky
mountains  is  preserved  in  the  National  library  of
Paris,  and  has  been  published  in  the  collection  of
John  Gilmary  Shea  (New  York,  1862).  It  is  en-
titled "  Memoire  ou  journal  sommaire  de  Jacques
Legardeur  de  Saint  Pierre."

ST.  REAL,  Joseph  Remi  Vallidres  de,  Ca-
nadian jurist,  b.  in  Markham,  Upper  Canada  (or,
according  to  some  accounts,  in  Quebec),  1  Oct.,
1787 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  17  Feb.,  1847.  He  went  to
reside  with  an  uncle  in  Quebec,  where  his  aptitude
for  learning  attracted  the  attention  of  Bishop
Plessis,  who  took  the  boy  to  reside  with  him,  and
personally  superintended  his  education.  He  after-
ward studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1812,
and  began  practice  in  Quebec.  In  1813  he  was
elected  to  the  assembly  for  the  county  of  Cham-
plain,  and  at  once  allied  himself  with  the  Canadian
party  in  the  house,  then  engaged  in  a  struggle  for
what  they  regarded  as  constitutional  liberty.  Dur-
ing the  absence  of  M.  Papineau  on  a  mission  in
England,  he  was  chosen  speaker  of  the  assembly,  and
during  the  administration  of  Sir  James  Kempt,  in
1828,  was  appointed  judge  of  the  district  of  Three
Rivers,  where  he  remained  for  several  years.  Sir
Charles  Bagot  appointed  him  chief  justice  of  Mon-
treal in  1842.  From  that  time  until  his  death  he
was  infirm  in  health.  In  1839  the  governor  of
Canada,  Sir  John  Colborne,  had  requested  Judge
De  St.  Real  to  grant  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus  in  the
case  of  Judges  Panet  and  Bedard,  suspended  by
Sir  John  some  time  before.  Judge  De  St.  Real  re-
fused, and  was  in  consequence  suspended  from
office,  and  suffered  much  loss.

SAINT  SIMON,  Claude  Henri,  Count  de,
French  philosopher,  b.  in  Paris,  France,  17  Oct.,
1760;  d.  there,  IS)  May,  1825.  His  education,  that
of  the  nobility  of  his  time,  was  in  the  direction
of  philosophy.  He  entered  the  army  in  1777,  and
was  sent  to  this  country  as  the  commander  of  a


company  under  the  Marquis  de  Bouillc  in  1779.
He  remained  with  the  French  forces,  acquitting
himself  withgalluntrv  until  the  surrender  at  York-
town.  Like  many  of  liis  brother  French  officers,  he
was  made  a  life-member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cin-
cinnati. On  the  voyage  home  tiie  French  squadron,
under  the  Comte  de  Grasse,  was  defeated  by  Admi-
ral Rodney  on  12  April,  1782,  and  the  vessel  on
which  Saint  Simon  had  embarked  surrendered
and  he  himself  was  made  a  prisoner  and  taken  to
Jamaica,  where  he  remained  until  the  declaration
of  peace  in  1783.  Before  returning  to  France  he
visited  Mexico,  and  proposed  to  the  viceroy  of  that
country  to  unite  the  waters  of  the  Atlantic  and
Pacific  oceans  by  means  of  a  canal ;  but  no  notice
was  taken  of  his  scheme.  On  arriving  in  France
he  was  made  chevalier  of  St.  Louis  and  colonel  of
the  Aquitaine  regiment.  During  the  Reign  of
Terror  he  was  arrested  for  being  a  member  of  the
aristocracy.  After  an  imprisonment  of  eleven
months  he  was  liberated  and  succeeded  in  recovering
150,000  francs  as  his  share  of  the  profits  of  his  pre-
vious financial  operations.  He  now  began  to  study
sciences  and  to  form  plans  for  a  fundamental  re-
construction of  society.  He  obtained  a  small
clerkship,  and  lived  in  obscurity  until  his  friend,
Diard,  gave  him  the  means  to  issue  his  "Intro-
duction aux  travaux  scientifiques  du  19me  siecle  "
(2  vols,  Paris,  1808).  In  1810  Diard  died  and  Saint
Simon  suffered  from  actual  want.  Nevertheless,
he  continued  to  pursue  his  studies,  and,  in  spite
of  feeble  health,  penury,  the  coldness  of  friends,
and  the  lack  of  powerful  protectors,  he  is.sued  his
"  Reorganisation  de  la  societc  Europeenne  "  ( Paris,
1814)  and  '"L'lndustrie,  ou  discussions  politiques,
morales  et  philosophiques  "  (4  vols.,  1817-'18).  In
1820  he  published  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Parabole,"
in  which  he  advanced  the  most  revolutionary  ideas,
and  for  which  he  was  tried  and  acquitted.  In  1820
he  attempted  suicide,  butonlv  succeeded  in  depriv-
ing himself  of  an  eye,  and  lived  long  enough  to
complete  his  two  greatest  works,  "  Catechisme  in-
dustriel "  (1824)  and  "Le  nouveau  Christianisme  "
(1825).  See  "  Saint  Simon,  sa  vie  et  ses  travaux,"
bv  Nicholas  G.  Hubbard  (Paris,  1857);  "ffiuvres,
choisies  de  Saint-Simon  "  (3  vols.,  Brussels,  1859 ;
new  ed.,  Paris,  1861) ;  and  the  joint  works  of  Saint
Simon  and  his  editor,  Enfantin  (20  vols.,  1865-'9).

ST.  YALLIER,  Jean  Baptist  De  Lacroix
ChevriSres  de,  Canadian  R.  C.  oishop.  b.  in  Greno-
ble, Dauphine,  France,  14  Nov.,  1653 ;  d.  in  Quebec,
26  Dec,  1727.  He  was  chaplain  to  Louis  XIV.,
and  in  1684,  when  Laval,  bishop  of  Quebec,  went
to  France  to  engage  a  successor,  his  recommenda-
tion by  the  royal  chaplain  secured  his  appoint-
ment to  that  office.  He  arrived  in  Canada  in
July,  1685,  in  his  capacity  of  vicar-general  to  Bish-
op Laval,  and  remained  until  November.  1687,
when  he  returned  to  France.  He  was  consecrated
bishop  of  Quebec,  at  St.  Sulpice  de  Paris,  bv  Nicho-
las Colbert,  archbishop  of  Carthage,  in  January,
1688,  and  returned  to  Canada  in  August  of  the
same  year.  He  founded  the  general  hospital  of
Quebec  in  1693,  and  the  Ursulines  of  Three  Rivers
in  1697.  While  he  was  bishop.  Louis  XIV.  con-
firmed by  letters  -  patent,  in  October,  1697.  the
erection  of  the  bishopric  of  Quebec,  and  the  union
of  the  rectory  to  the  seminary,  as  well  as  of  the
revenues  of  Labbave  de  Meubee  to  the  bishopric.

SAINT  VICTOR,  Jacques  Benianiin  Max!-
miHen,  Count  de.  West  Indian  author,  b.  in  Fort
Dauphin,  Santo  Domingo,  14  Jan.,  1770;  d.  in
Paris,  8  Aug.,  1858.  lie  studied  in  the  College
of  La  Fleche  and  became  a  journalist.  Under
Napoleon  he  was  on  the  staff  of  the  "  Journal  des


SAJOUS


8ALAS


87S


n«'l»ut8."  antl  after  1815  h«'  foun<l«l  Hovprnl  Ro-
iimn  ('Hthulif  uiiii  royttlbt  iiiapixiiieK.  In  \KU)  he
iwi>ittHl  bis  imtive  lan<l,  but  lii>  wpiit  aftcTwanl  to
the  I'liittHl  SlMfs,  fXpluriHl  the  ttnuUry  for  two
yfat>,aiiil  thi-n  vi>«it<><l  most  of  the  Wt«t  Iii(li«>ii.  His
Works  iiK-ludc  "Tableau  hiKtori((Uc>  et  pittoreMiue
<li-  I'uris  (Icpuiti  Ifs  (Jauloiii  juM|u'a  iioh  jours'  (8
v«.ls..  I'ariH.  1H0H-'12):  "tKuvre»po6titjue»"(1822):
"Ix'ttn-s  sur  l»>s  £tats-riiiH  iVrites  en  lH3a-'88,"
winch  attrartiil  tnui'h  attention  (2  vols.,  1835);  and
"Journal  de  vovajre"  (2  vols,,  18JiO).

SAJOrs,  Charlex  Kurharbte,  physician,  b.
in  Paris,  Krant-e,  13  Ikf..  18.'j2.  He  eanie  to  this
country  at  the  a^fe  of  nine  years,  was  iHlqi>atv(l  by
private  tutors,  and.  after  attending;  lectures  in  the
medical  deitartnient  of  the  Tniversity  of  Califor-
nia and  at  Jefferson  collejje,  Philadelphia,  ri'ceived
his  diploma  in  1K7H.  Kcmaining  in  Philadelphia,
he  so<m  obtained  a  lucrative  practice  among  the
French  resi»lentji  of  that  city.  He  was  nnule  pro-
fessor of  anatomy  and  physiology  in  the  Wagner
trve  institute  of  science,  and  lecturer  on  diseases
of  the  nose  and  throat  in  the  Philadelphia  school
of  anatomy.  Having  made  this  class  of  diseases
his  sjH'ciartv,  Dr.  Sajous  became  clinical  chief  in
the  tnroat  tlepartment  of  Jefferson  college  hospi-
tal, and  finally  lecturer  in  the  college  proper,
which  post  ho  now  (1888)  occupies.  He  became
widely  known  early  in  his  career  through  his  inven-
tive ability,  and  has  devised  numerous  instruments
that  are  extensively  used  in  his  specialty.  I)r,
Sajous  is  an  honorary  and  corres|)onding  mem-
ber of  a  large  number  of  American  and  foreign
metlical  societies,  and  has  received  several  deco-
rations from  foreign  governments.  His  contri-
butions to  professional  literature  include  numer-
ous articles  in  medical  journals,  and  two  works,
"Curative  Treatment  of  Hay  Fever"  (Philadel-
phia, 1885)  and  "  Diseases  of  the  Xose  and  Throat "
(18M()).  In  1888  he  edited  and  brought  to  a  suc-
cessful issue  one  of  the  largest  medical  works  of
the  time,  the  "Annual  of  the  Universal  Medical
Sciences,"  having  for  its  object  to  collate  the  pro-
gres.-ive  features  of  the  medical  literature  of  the
world,  and  collect  information  relating  to  metli-
cine  in  uncivilized  countries.  In  this  he  was  as-
sist4'd  bv  sixty-six  associate  editors.

SALA,  (rieorge  August uh  Henry,  English  jour-
nalist, b.  in  London.  Kngland.  in  1828.  His  father
was  an  Italian  and  his  mother  a  native  of  the  West
Indies.  The  son  was  educated  for  an  artist,  but
embraced  the  literary  profession,  becoming  a  con-
tributor to  Ix>ndon  magazines.  In  1868-'4  he  was
the  American  corresjKjndent  of  the  Ijondon  "Tele-
graph," He  has  published  many  books,  including
"Aujerica  in  the  Midst  of  War"  (London,  1865)
and  "America  Revisited"  (1882).

SALABKKKY,  Charles  Michel  d'Iruniberry
de.  Seigneur de Chambly  et de Beaulac,  Cana-
dian soldier,  b.  at"  the  manor-house  of BeauiK>rt.
liower  Canada,  19  Nov.,  1778;  d.  in  Chambly,  2«
Feb., 1829. His  father,  descended  from  a  tioble  I
family,  was  a  legislative  councillor  in  Canada,  and  j
placed  his  four  sons  in  the  army,  Charles  l>eing  the  '
only  one  that  attained  distinction. He  entenHl  the  '
British  service  when  young,  and  servetl  for  eleven
years  inider  Gen.  Prescott  in  the  West  Indies,  was  :
present  at  the  capture  of  Martini(]ue  in  1785,  and  '
Accomf)anii>«l  Gen.  de  Kottenburg  in  the  Walch-  I
eren  ex|>e<lition  as  aide-tle-c«mp. When  recalled  :
to  Cana«la. he  commandeil the Voltigeurs,  and  I
became  als4i  one  of  the  chiefs  of staff of the  I
militia. I>iite  in  1812  he  and  his  Voltig(>urs,  to-
gether with M.  D'Kscham>»ault's  advance-guanl.
were  attacked  at  Lacolle  by  1,4UU  men  of Gen.


DearbomV  anny.  who  were  foret«l  to  rt'treat.  SuJ>-
aequcntly  I)t>  .Salal>errv's  it}r\>n  |>artici|iatwl  in  the
battle  of  Chrysler's  Farm,  which  also  was  diM»>
tn>us  to  the  .Vmericans.  He  afterwanl  attacked
Gen.  Wa<le  Hampton's  foni-s  at  Four  Conien«.  on
the  Odeltown  mute,  when  Hampton  decide«l  to  join
Dearl>orn  by  taking  the  route  leading  to  Chateau-
guay.  De  SalaU'rry.  antici|iating  such  a  movement,
ascendiMl  the  left  liank  of  the  river  and  t4M>k  up
advantageous  positions  and  established  lines  of  de-
fence. On  25  Oct.,  Gen.  Hampton,  with  8,5<J»)  men,
advanced  against  the  Kritish  defences,  and  with
1,50U  men  attempted  to  tuni  the  |M>sition.  leaving
in  reserve  the  remainder  of  his  tn>«)ps.  Da  Sala-
Ix'rry,  waniwl  of  this  movement,  placed  himself  in
the  centre  of  the  first  line  of  defencr.  leaving  the
second  in  charge  of  JUieuL-Col.  MacDonell.  The
Americans  were  foile<l  in  all  their  efforts,  and  De
Salaberry's  men  i)oure<l  in  a  deadly  fire  upon  the
Americans,  when  (Jen.  Hampton  ordered  a  retreat.
This  action  was  regardi-il  as  so  important  in  Great
Hritain  that  a  gold  me<Ial  was  struck  commemo-
rating it.  and  De  SalaU-rry  received  the  order  of  the
Hath.  He  subs<'<^uently  entered  ixtlitical  life,  and
became  a  legislative  councillor  in  1818.

SALAS,  Mariano  (sah  -las),  Mexican  soldier,  b.
in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1797;  d.  in  Guadalupe,
24  Dec.,  1867.  He  entered  the  army  in  1818  as
catlet  of  the  Puebla  regiment,  serving  under  the
Spaniards  till
14  May.  1821,
when  ho  pro-
nounce«l  for  the
plan  de  Iguala,
and  was  promote
edcaptauibvMi-
ramon.  After-
ward he  fought
under  Santa-
Anna  against
the  Spanish  in-
vasion of  Bar-
radas  in  1829,  in
the  campaign  of
Texas  in  1836,
being  promoted
colonel,  and  in
1839  brigadier
for  his  services
agai  nst  the  Fed-
eral chief,Mejia.
In  1844  he  was  appointed  commander  of  the  district
of  Mexico,  and  remained  faithful  to  Santa-Anna  in
the  revolution  of  6  Dec,  1844,  losing  Jris  place  in
consequence.  After  the  fall  of  Herrera  in  Janu-
ary, 1846,  Salas  was  reap|)ointed  commander  and
deputy  to  the  congress,  out  on  4  Aug.  he  headinl
a  revolt  in  favor  of  Santa-Anna,  and  took  charge
of  the  executive  as  provisional  president.  When
Monterey  capitulateu  to  Gen,  iiachary  Taylor,  24
Sept,,  1846,  Salas  was  active  in  preparing  troops
and  supplies  for  the  army  that  was  to  manh  to  the
north  under  Santa-Anna,  and,  when  the  latter  was
elected  president,  Salas  del  ivereil  the  executive  on  24
Dec.  to  the  vice-president,  Gomez  P'arias.  In  May,
1847,  he  was  aj)pointe<i  second  in  command  of  the
Armv  of  the  North  in  San  Luis.  With  it  he  |>artici-
patetl  under  Valencia  in  the  actions  of  Contn-ras  and
Churubusco,  where  he  was  taken  prL«H)ner,  ami,  re-
fusing to  be  paroled,  he  was  released  only  after  the
peace  of  Guadalu|>e  Hidalgo.  He  was  app«tinted
commander  of  (^ueretaro  and  j)resident  of  the  su-
preme military  c«)urt,  and  in  185;{  was  one  of  the
principal  sup|H)rters  of  the  dictatorship  of  Santa-
Anna,  who  made  him  commander-in-chief  of  the


376


SALAVERRY


SALCEDO


Department  of  Mexico.  After  the  fall  of  the
dictator,  Salas  lived  in  retirement,  till  he  took
part  in  the  deposition  of  Zuloa^  in  December,

1858,  and  for  a  few  houi"s  was  in  charge  of  the
executive  before  the  arrival  of  Miramon,  21  Jan.,

1859.  He  served  under  the  latter  till  his  fall  in
December,  1800,  when  he  wa.s  banished ;  but  he  re-
turned in  March,  1862,  during  the  French  inter-
vention, and,  when  the  capital  was  abandoned  by
the  republican  government  in  18(i3,  was  invested
by  the  populace  with  the  provisional  command.
The  junta  de  notables  appointed  Salas,  on  25  June,
1863,  a  member  of  the  regency,  in  which  capacity
he  acted  till  the  arrival  of  5laximilian.  But  he
received  little  acknowledgment  by  the  imperial
government,  and  retired  from  public  life.

SALAVERRY,  Felipe  Santiago  de  (sah-lah-
ver'-ree),  Peruvian  soldier,  b.  in  Lima  in  1806;  d.
in  Arequipa,  IS)  Feb.,  1836.  He  studied  in  the
College  of  San  Carlos,  at  Lima,  but  when,  in  1820,
San  Martin  arrived  in  Peru,  he  left,  notwithstand-
ing the  opposition  of  his  father,  and,  baffling  the
vigilance  of  the  Spanish  forces,  arrived  in  Huaura,
presenting  himself  to  the  general  as  a  volunteer.
San  Martin,  pleased  with  his  courage,  enlisted  him
as  a  cadet  of  the  battalion  of  Numancia,  in  which
he  took  part  in  the  campaign  against  the  Spaniards.
After  the  establishment  of  the  republic  he  rose  in
the  armv,  until,  at  the  age  of  twenty-eight,  he  had
obtained  the  rank  of  general.  When  the  garrison
of  Callao  revolted  in  January,  1835,  against  Orbe-
gozo,  and  pronounced  in  favor  of  La  Fuente,
Salaverry  defeated  the  insurgents,  and  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  the  fortress.  But  on  23  Feo.
he  himself  rose  in  arms  against  the  government,
and  as  Orbegozo  abandoned  Lima,  Salaverry  occu-
pied the  capital  and  proclaimed  himself  supreme
chief  of  the  republic.  In  a  few  months  he  had
possession  of  the  south,  and  Orbegozo  was  reduced
with  a  small  force  to  the  northern  provinces,  when
he  sought  the  intervention  of  Santa  Cruz  (q.v.),
with  whom  he  concluded  a  treaty.  The  Bolivian
army  invaded  Peru,  Salaverry  retired  to  Arequipa,
and  on  7  Feb.,  1836,  was  totally  routed  at  Soca-
baya.  After  wandering  for  several  days,  Salaverry
surrendered  to  Gen.  Miller,  who  delivered  him  to
Santa  Cruz,  and  he  was  shot.  A  Chilian  author,
Manuel  Bilbao,  has  published  his  life  (Lima,  1853).

SALAZAR,  Diego  de  (sah-lah-thar),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  the  latter  half  of  the  15th  century ;  d.
in  Florida  in  1521.  He  went  to  Santo  Domingo
with  one  of  the  expeditions  of  Columbus,  and
served  there  until  1509,  when,  entering  the  service
of  Juan  Ponce  de  Leon,  he  accompanied  the  latter
in  the  conquest  of  the  island  of  Porto  Rico,  and
assisted  in  the  foundation  of  the  city  of  Caparra.
In  1511,  when  the  natives,  aided  by  the  Caribes,
revolted,  Salazar,  seeing  that  one  of  his  companions
who  had  been  taken  prisoner  was  to  be  executed,
entered  the  hostile  camp,  where  about  300  Indians,
under  the  cacique  Aimanon,  were  preparing  for
the  execution,  charged  upon  the  enemy  and  liber-
ated his  countryman.  This  action  inspired  the
Indians  with  terror,  and  the  Spaniards,  taking
advantage  of  it,  thenceforth  carried  him,  even
when  sick,  to  the  battle-field.  In  recompense  Sala-
zar was  appointed  captain,  and  on  the  night  of  25
July  of  the  same  year,  when  the  Indians  surprised
and  set  fire  to  the  town  of  Guanica,  he  stived  the
rest  of  the  Spaniards  in  that  island  and  defeated
the  cacique  Mabodamaca  near  Aymaco,  and  Aguey-
naba  near  Aflasco.  In  1512  he  accompanied  Ponce
de  Leon  in  his  exploration  of  Florida,  and  during
the  second  voyage  to  that  country  he  met  his  death
in  an  encounter  with  the  natives.


SALAZAR,  Jo84  Maria,  Colombian  poet,  b.
in  Antioquia  in  1785;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  in  Feb-
ruary, 1828.  He  was  graduated  as  LL.  1).  in  the
College  of  San  Bartolome,  soon  afterward  composed
two  theatrical  pieces,  which  were  performed  at  the
theatre  of  Bogota,  and  also  published  several  arti-
cles in  the  "Semanario."  When  the  revolution
of  1810  began  he  <x;cupied  theplace  of  vice-rector
of  the  College  of  Mompos,  which  he  abandoned
and  entered  public  life.  The  civil  war  that  fol-
lowed the  revolution  obliged  him  to  move  to  Cara-
cas, where  he  was  well  received  by  Gen.  Miranda,
who  appointed  him  minister  to  the  government  of
Cartagena.  In  that  city  he  conducted  the  paper
"  El  Mensajero,"  and  on  the  arrival  of  Moriflo  he
emigrated  to  Trinidad,  where  he  practised  as  a
lawyer.  •  In  1820  he  was  appointed  minister  of  the
supreme  tribunal  of  V'enezuela,  and  in  1827  he
was  sent  as  minister  plenipotentiary  to  the  United
States.  During  his  stay  in  New  York  he  published
a  political  pamphlet  in  English  and  Spanish  about
the  reforms  that  ought  to  be  introduced  in  the
constitution  of  Colombia.  He  also  wrote  a  poem,
'*  Colombiada,"  which  many  years  afterwaru  was
printed  in  Caracas  by  his  widow.  On  account  of
the  civil  disturbances  of  his  country,  he  went  to
Paris  to  educate  his  children,  but  after  his  death
his  family  returned  to  Caracas.  He  wrote  "  El
Soliloquio  de  Eneas  "  and  "  El  Sacriflcio  de  Ido-
meneo,"  two  dramas  (Bogota,  1802) ;  "  Placer  pub-
lico de  Bogot-a"  (1803);  "  Memoria  biogrdfica  de
Cundinamarca  "(Trinidad,  1817);  and  "La  campaila
de  Bogota,"  a  heroic  poem  (1818).

SALAZAR  DE  ESPINOSA,  Jnan  de,  Span-
ish soldier,  b.  in  Villa  Pomar  about  the  end  of  the
15th  century;  d.  in  Asuncion  about  1566.  He
sailed  with  the  expedition  of  Pedro  de  Mendoza
{q.  v.),  and  assisted  in  the  foundation  of  Buenos
Ayres.  In  1537  Salazar,  with  the  acting  governor,
Galan,  and  the  garrison,  removed  to  Asuncion,  and
in  1538  was  elected  the  first  mayor  of  that  city.  In
March,  1542,  Salazar  fought  against  the  Guaycurus
and  Agaces  Indians,  commanding  the  infantry,  and
in  1543  he  was  appointed  acting  governor  at  Asun-
cion. On  25  April,  1544,  when  Cabeza  de  Vaca
was  taken  prisoner  by  Irala,  the  former  proclaimed
Salazar  as  his  successor.  In  order  to  avoid  new
complications,  the  latter  was  sent  to  Spain,  but  he
was  absolved  by  the  royal  council  of  the  Indies.
In  1549  the  emperor  appointed  him  treasurer  of
the  provinces  of  La  Plata,  and,  when  the  new  gov-
ernor died,  his  son  appointed  Salazar  his  substi-
tute. The  expedition  sailed  from  San  Lucar  at  the
beginning  of 1550,  but  Hernando  de  Trejo  de-

f)rived  Salazar  of  the  command  on  the  voyage,  an^
anded  him  at  San  Vicente,  in  Brazil,  where  he
stayed  almost  two  years,  but  in  October,  1555,
he  arrived  at  Asimcion  and  took  possession  of
his  office  as  treasurer.  Salazar  was  a  candidate
for  governor  in  1558,  but  was  defeated.

SALCEDO,  Francisco  (sal-thay'-do),  Mexican
monk,  b.  in  Chiapa  about  1550.  He  entered  the
Franciscan  order,  taught  theology  in  the  city  of
Mexico,  and  on  account  of  his  profound  knowl-
edge of  the  aboriginal  languages,  including  Aztec,
Quiche,  Cakchiquel,  and,  Tzutuhil,  was  called  by
Bishop  Gomez  Fernandez  de  Cordova  to  the
University  of  Guatemala,  where  he  taught  these
tongues  for  many  years  to  the  clergy  and  mission-
aries. He  wrote  "  Arte  y  Diccionario  de  la  Lengua
Mexicana,"  "Sermones  TrilingQes  en  Quiche,  Cak-
chiquel y  Tzutuhil"  (2  vols.),  and  "Documentos
Cristianos  en  tres  Lenguas,"  which  are  still  pre-
served in  manuscript,  tmpublished,  in  the  Fran-
ciscan convent  of  Guatemala.


SALDANHA


SALISBURY


3T7


SALDANHA,  Joikp  Carlot)  01lTpira.Duke  de,

Portui^ueso  Muti'siimiT,  l>.  in  LiMlHtii,  17  Nov.,  1791 ;
il.  in  Lonilon,  KiiKiuiul,  21  Nov.,  lN7ti.  lie  was  a
gruiuLson  of  the  fmuoiut  ManiuiM  dc  I'oiniNil,  and
rpoiMvwl  his  edufution  at  tin*  C'olit'jfi*  of  the  no-
bility of  LisU)ii  und  the  rniwrsiitv  of  Coindmi.
When  the  royal  family  fle«l  to  HrHzil.  he  reniHiiied
to  serve  under  the  Kn-nch,  hut  wum  made  a  pris-
oner by  Wellington's  forces  and  transjK)rte<l  to
Kn|;land.  In  1H14  he  was  iH-nnitted  to  jjo  to  Hra-
zil,  where  he  was  ai)|M>into<l  eoinniander  of  the
Portujfuese  fonvs.  He  renderetl  j^reat  s«>rvice  in
forwarding;  triMuis  for  the  war  that  resultctl  in  the
possesKion  of  I  rujfuay.  From  1818  till  "1822  he
was  captain-eoneral  of  the  province  of  Rio  Grande
do  Sul,  and.  joining;  the  lilH>ral  movement,  promul-
gated the  new  constitution  in  1N21,  hut  in  1822  he
retununl  to  Kun>iH«,  as  he  wiis  unwilling;  to  serve
un«ier  the  re^jenev  of  I>om  IVdro.  U|K)n  his
arrival  in  the  capital  he  was  anpointeil  captain-
general  of  Hra7.il  and  eommanuer-in-ohief  of  all
the  fon>es  in  the  country,  but,  having  learnetl  of
the  election  of  I>om  Pe<lro  to  the  empire,  he  refused
to  return  to  Hrazil  to  foster  a  civil  war.  and  was
imprisonetl  for  aU^ut  a  year.  In  February,  1825,
Kinjr  .lojlo  VI.  ap|>ointtHl  him  secretary  of  foreign  j
rt'iations,  and  after  the  death  of  the  king  he  l)e-
came,  during  the  regency  of  the  Infanta  Is»al)el  |
Maria,  governor  of  Oporto,  where  ho  supnresse<l  ]
the  first  movements  of  the  partisans  or  Dom
Miguel.  For  a  short,  time  he  was  secretary  of  war,
but,  on  account  of  disagreements  with  the  regent,
he  resigned  and  went  to  London  in  1827.  After
several  unsuccessful  attempts  against  the  reaction-
ary jMirty.  he  t<H)k  an  a<'tive  part  in  the  struggle
between  Dom  Pedro  and  Don  Miguel,  on  the  side
of  the  former,  and  was  rewarded  with  the  rank  of
field-marshal  and  commander-in-chief,  and  hence-
forth his  career  was  a  series  of  political  intrigues
and  revolutions,  sometimes  at  the  head  of  the  gov-
ernment, and  then  again  exiled,  or  ambassador  in
France  and  Kngland.  The  last  revolution  in  which
he  tfH>k  part  was  in  1870,  when  he  presided  for  a
short  time  over  the  cabinet,  and  in  F'ebruarv,  1871,
he  w^as  sent  as  ami)assa4lor  to  Ixtndon,  where  he
died. He  left  memoirs  in  manuscript.

SALES,  Francis,  educator,  b.  in  Roussillon,
France,  in  1771 :  d.  in  Cambrid^,  Mass.,  10  Feb.,
1854  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  during
one  of  the  political  convulsions  of  France,  and  was
instructor  at  Harvanl  in  French  and  Spanish  from
1810  till  18;JS)  and  afterward  in  Spanisn  alone  till
the  year  of  his  death.  He  edite<l  and  enlarged
Augiistin  K.  .losse's  "Grammar  of  the  Spanish
Ijanguage"  (Boston,  1822),  and  published  critical
and  annotated  editions  of  the  Spanish  dramatists,
"  Don  Quixote"  (1880),  and  other  Spanish  classics,
the  *'  Fables  "  of  Fontaine,  with  notes,  and  treatises
on  the  French  and  Spanish  languages.

SALES  LATERKIEKE,  Peter  de,  b.  in  Cana-
da in  1789;  d.  there,  lo  Dec,  IWM.  He  studied
mwlicine  in  London  under  Sir  Astley  ('(wiK'r,  and
on  his  retuni  to  (^uel)ec  soon  iHH-ame  distinguished
a.s  a  surgtHHi.  He  took  part  in  the  war  of  1812  as
surgeon-in-<'hief  of  the  Canadian  voltigeurs.  In
1M14  he  visitwl  France  and  Kngland.  where  he
married  the  daughter  of  Sir  Fenwick  Bulmer,  in
the  following  year  returned  to'CaniuIa,  an<l  resided
in  t^uelH'*'  up  to  1828.  Here  he  took  a  prominent
part  in  Cana<lian  politics,  giving  expression  to  his
views  in  the  public  journals,  and  denouncing  the
oligan^hical  regime  that  then  prevailwl.  In  1828
he  went  to  Kngland,  where  he  publishefl  "  A  Po-
litical an<l  Historical  Account  of  Lower  Cana<la,
with  licinarks  on the Present  Situation  of  the


People  "  (Ijondon,  18.'W),  which  create*!  a  sensation
in  Canaila,  and  delayi**!  the  union  of  the  iirovinccs.
— llisbn>ther,  Mark  Fancal,  b.  in  Baie-«lu-Febvre
in  17U2,  Btudie<l  intHlicine  at  the  Cniversity  of
Pennsylvania,  when?  he  was  a  pupil  of  Dr.  Benja-
min Hush.  He  obtained  his  di*gre«>  in  1812,  and
establishe<I  himself  in  (juelK-c.  During  the  war  of
1812  he  servitl  as  surgeon -genend  (»f  tlie  militia  of
Ijowcr  Caniula,  and  in  1N14  retinil  from  his  pro-
fession and  took  un  his  residence  in  his  s«'igneurie
of  f^lHiulemeiits.  He  was  elected  a  mendter  of  the
provincial  legislature  in  1824,  and  htks  cH>ntinued
to  take  a  leading  part  in  Canadian  (lolitics.  The
iinmens(>  and  dilTicult  highway  thn>ugh  the  Ijau-
rentides,  which  has  brought  that  coast  into  commu-
nication with  Oucbcc,  is  <lue  to  his  entcrpris«'.

SALINAS  Y  COKDOBA.  Buenaventura  de
(sah-lee-nas).  Peruvian  clergyman,  l>.  in  Lima  in
the  latter  |>art  of  the  10th  centurv:  d.  in  Cuenia-
vaca,  Mexico,  15  Nov.,  1058.  He  fn-longed  to  the
Franciscan  order,  was  sent  as  a  commissioner  to
Spain  and  Home  in  10:{7,  and  returned  in  1040  to
Mexico  as  vicar  -  general.  His  works,  which  are
mainly  devotwl  to  the  assertion  of  the  equality
of  Americans  of  Spanish  race  with  native -iKim
Sj)anianls,  are  "Memorial  de  las  Historias  del
Nuevo  Mundo  del  Pirii,  v  memorias  v  excelencias
de  la  ciudad  de  Lima"  (KWO;  Ma<lrid,  KWO),  and
"  Memorial  al  Hey  Nuestro  Seflor  "  (Ma«lrid.  1045).
The  latter  work  is  not  only  an  ajKilogy  for  himself
and  those  born  of  Spanish  race  in  the  Indies,  but
also  a  strong  plea  for  the  liU'rtv  of  the  Indians.

SALISBrkY,  Edvrard  Elbridge,  philologist,
b.  in  lioston,  Mass.,  0  April.  1814.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1832.  studie<l  theologv  there  for
three  years,  and  in  183(>-'9  pn>secute<l  the  study  of
oriental  languages  under  .Silvestre  de  Sacy,  a  part
of  whose  library  he  brought  with  him  to  the  United
States,  and  also  with  Garcin  de  Tassy  in  Paris  and
Franz  Bopp  in  Berlin.  A  professorship  of  Arabic
and  Sanskrit  was  created  for  him  at  Yale  in  1841.
and,  after  spending  another  year  in  the  study  of
Sanskrit  at  Bonn,  he  entere<l  on  the  duties  of  his

Brofessorship  with  the  delivery  of  an  "Inaugural
•iscourse  on  Arabic  and  Sanskrit  Literature "
(printed  privately.  1848).  In  1854  he  gave  up  the
cnair  of  Sanskrit  to  William  D.  Whitney,  pro-
viding the  endowment  and  subsequent  I  v  giving  to
the  university  his  oriental  library,  ife  acted  as
professor  of  Arabic  for  two  years  longer,  and  then
spent  another  year  in  Kurope.  He  had  meanwhile
been  elected  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Ameri-
can oriental  society,  and  for  severaf  ymrrs  he  con-
ducted the  "Journal"  and  labored  for  the  pros-
perity of  the  society,  of  which  he  became  presi-
dent in  1803.  Prof.  Salisbury  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  Asiatic  society  of  Paris  in  1838,  and  a
corresponding  member  of  the  ImiHTial  aca<lemy
of  sciences  and  belles-lettres  at  Constantinople  in
1855,  and  of  the  German  oriental  society  in  1859,
l)esides  being  a  member  of  other  learne<l  societies,
and  wjis  given  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  by  Yale  in
1««9  and  by  Harvard  in  1880.  Besides  oriental
papers  in  the  "Journal  of  the  American  Orien-
tal Society,"  he  has  published  articles  in  the
"  New  Knglander,"  and  has  jtrintetl  privately  an
account  of  the  I)io<lati  family  (New  Haven,  1^75);
a  lecture  on  the  "  Principles  of  Domestic  Taste,"
delivered  liefore  the  Vale  school  of  the  fine  arts
(1H77);  and  a  large  volume  of  "^Genealogical  and
Biographical  Monographs"  (1885).  Two  addi-
tional volumes  are  nt»w  (1888)  in  press.  —  His
wife.  Evelyn,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn..  3  Nov.,  1828,  a
daughter  of  Charles  J.  McCurdy,  began  and  haa
aided  him  in  the  completion  of  the  latter,  which


378


SALISBURY


SALNAVE


treat  (of  her  lines  of  descent,  as  the  former  work
did  of  the  lines  of  his  descent,  and  that  of  the
Phillips  family,  to  which  his  first  wife  belonged.

SALISBURY,  James  Henry,  phvsician,  b.  in
Scott,  Cortland  co.,  N.  Y.,  13  Oct.,  18*23.  He  was
educated  at  Homer  academy,  and  in  1846-'8  was
assistant,  and  in  1849-'52  principal,  chemist  of  the
New  York  state  geological  survey.  He  received
the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  Albany  medical  college
in  1850.  In  1851-'2  he  lectured  on  elementary
and  applied  chemistry  in  the  New  York  state  nor-
mal school  at  Albany.  He  conducted  experiments
and  microscopical  examinations,  the  results  of
which  were  published  in  the  "Transactions"  of
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science,  and  devoted  himself  later  to  the  study  of
the  causes  and  treatment  of  chronic  diseases,  pub-
lishing his  therapeutical  discoveries  in  the  New
York  "  Journal  of  Medicine."  In  1864  he  settled
in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  he  assisted  in  establish-
ing the  Charity  hospital  medical  college,  before
which  he  lectured  till  1866  on  physiology  and  his-
tology. He  has  been  president  of  the  Institute  of
mierology  since  1878.  Among  his  publications
are  a  prize  essay  on  the  "  Anatomy  and  History  of
Plants"  (Albany,  1848);  one  on  "the  "Chemical
and  Physioloo^ical  Examinations  of  the  Maize  Plant
during  the  Various  Stages  of  its  Growth,"  which
was  published  in  the  New  York  agricultural  re-
port for  1849,  and  reprinted  in  the  Ohio  state  re-
ports: and  "Microscopic  Examinations  of  Blood
and  Vegetations  found  in  Variola,  Vaccina,  and
Typhoid  Fever"  (New  York,  1865).

'SALISBURY,  Sylvester,  British  soldier,  b.  in
England ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  about  1680.  He
was  a  captain  in  the  force  that  captured  New  Am-
sterdam in  1664,  and  was  placed  in  command  of
Fort  Orange,  the  name  of  which  he  changed  to
Fort  Albany.  He  married  a  Dutch  lady  named
Marius,  and  held  the  ofBces  of  high  sheriff  and
justice  of  the  peace  at  Albany.  When  New  Am-
sterdam was  retaken  by  the  Dutch  in  1673,  he  was
carried  as  a  prisoner  of  war  to  Spain,  then  an  ally
of  the  Netherlands  in  the  war  against  France  and
England. On  his  release,  he  was  restored  to  his

E)st  at  Albany. Sir  Edmund  Andros  sent  him  to
ngland  in  1675  with  a  petition  to  King  James
for  the  annexation  of  Connecticut  to  New  York.

SALM  SALM,  Prince  Felix,  soldier,  b.  in  An-
holt,  Prussia,  25  Dec,  1828 ;  d.  near  Metz,  Alsace,
18  Aug.,  1870.  He  was  a  younger  son  of  the  reign-
ing Prince  zu  Salm  Salm,  was  educated  at  the
cmiet-school  in  Berlin,  became  an  officer  in  the
Prussian  cavalry,  and  saw  service  in  the  Schleswig-
Holstein  war,  receiving  a  decoration  for  bravery  at
Aarhuis.  He  then  jomed  the  Austrian  army,  but
was  compelled  to  resign,  extravagant  habits  having
brought  him  into  pecuniary  difficulties.  In  1861
he  came  to  the  United  States  and  offered  his  ser-
vices to  the  National  government.  He  was  given  a
colonel's  commission  and  attached  to  the  staff  of
Gen.  Louis  Blenker.  In  November,  1862,  he  took
command  of  the  8th  New  York  regiment,  which
was  mustered  out  in  the  following  spring.  He  was
appointed  colonel  of  the  68th  New  York  volunteers
on  8  June,  1864,  serving  under  Gen.  James  B.  Steed-
man  in  Tennessee  and  Georgia,  and  toward  the  end
of  the  war  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the
post  at  Atlanta,  receiving  the  brevet  of  brigadier-
general  on  15  April,  1865.  He  next  offered  his
services  to  the  Emperor  Maximilian,  embarked  for
Mexico  in  February,  1866,  and  on  1  July  was  ap-
pointed colonel  of  the  general  staff.  He  became
the  emjieror's  aide-de-camp  and  chief  of  his  house-
hold, and  was  captured  at  Queretaro. Soon  after


Maximilian's  execution  he  returned  to  Europe,  re-
entered the  Pnissian  army  as'  major  in  the  grena-
dier guards,  and  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Grave-
lott«.  He  published  "My  Diary  in  Mexico  in
1867,  includm^  the  Last  Days  of  the  Emperor
Maximilian,  with  Leaves  from  the  Diary  of  the
Princess  Salm  Salm"  (London,  1868). — His  wife,
A^nes,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1842;  d.  in
Coblentz.  Germany,  about  1881,  is  said  to  have
been  adopted  when  a  child  in  Europe  by  the  wife
of  a  raeml)er  of  the  cabinet  at  Washington,  but,
after  receiving  a  good  education  in  Philadelphia,
to  have  left  her  home  and  become  a  circus-rider
and  then  a  rope-dancer.  Afterward  she  acquired  a
reputation  as  an  actress  under  the  name  of  Agnes
Leclercq,  and  lived  several  years  in  Havana,  CuIm.
She  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1861,  and
married  Prince  Salm  Salm  on  30  Aug..  1862.  She
accompanied  her  husband  throughout  his  military
campaigns  in  the  south,  performing  useful  service
in  connection  with  the  field-hospitals,  and  was
with  him  also  in  Mexico.  After  the  fall  of  Quere-
taro she  rode  to  San  Luis  Potosi  and  implored
President  Juarez  to  procure  the  release  of  Maxi-
milian and  of  his  aiae,  who  underwent  imprison-
ment with  him.  She  also  sought  the  intervention
of  Porfirio  Diaz  and  of  Mariano  Escobedo,  and  ar-
ranged a  conference  between  the  latter  general  and
the  archduke.  After  the  death  of  her  husband  she
raised  a  hospital  brigade,  which  accomplished  much
good  during  the  Franco  -  Prussian  war.  Subse-
quently she  married  Charles  Heneage,  an  attache
of  the  British  embassy  at  Berlin,  but  soon  sepa-
rated from  him.  She  published  "Ten  Years  of
My  Life  "  (New  York,  1875).

SALNAVE,  SylTain  (sal-nahv),  president  of
Hayti,  b.  in  Cape  Haytien  in  1832 ;  a.  in  Port  au
Prince,  15  Jan.,  1870.  He  enlisted  in  1850.  and
was  captain  of  cavalry  when  Geffrard  overthrew
Soulouque  in  January,  1859,  being  rewarded  for
his  aid  with  the  rank  of  major.  In  1861  he  was
bitter  in  his  denunciation  of  Geflfrard  for  what  he
called  the  latter's  subserviency  in  the  matter  of  the
occupation  of  the  Dominican  territory  by  Spain,
and  Geflfrard,  whose  |:K)pularity  began  to  decline,
was  j)owerless  to  punish  Salnave.  The  latter  pro-
moted and  encouraged  frequent  insurrections  on
the  borders,  and  in  1864  he  abetted  an  insurrection
in  the  northern  part  of  Hayti,  but  the  movement
was  put  down  with  the  aid  of  the  Spanish.  In
July,  1866,  he  led  a  new  rising  at  Gonaives,  and,  al-
though he  was  again  defeated,  the  revolt  continued
to  increase,  and,  aided  by  a  pronunciamento  in  his
favor  at  Port  au  Prince,  22  Feb.,  1867,  he  entered
the  capital  on  13  March.  A  triumvimte  was  now
appointed,  composed  of  Nissage-Saget,  Chevalier,
and  Salnave,  and  the  last  was  elected  president  on
14  June.  His  first  act  was  to  promulgate  the  new
constitution  that  had  been  voted  by  the  senate,  but
his  despotic  rule  soon  occasioned  sullen  discontent.
In  1869  a  general  insurrection,  headed  by  Nis-
sage-Saget and  Domingue,  began  in  the  counties
of  the  north  and  the  south.  Salnave  collected  his
forces  and  fought  desjjerately,  even  after  his  chief
general,  Chevalier,  had  gone  over  to  the  enemy,  in-
trenching himself  in  Port  au  Prince,  where  he  was
soon  besieged  by  the  rebel  army  under  Gen.  Brice.
The  defence  was"  obstinate,  and  Salnave  refused  to
surrender  even  after  his  fleet  had  been  capture*!.
Port  au  Prince  had  been  bombarded,  and  the  grand
palace  had  been  completely  destroyed  by  an  ex-
plosion. At  the  instance  of  the  British  consul  he
endeavored  on  19  Dec.  to  escape  to  Dominican  ter-
ritory, but  was  captured  by  Gen.  Cabral  on  10  Jan.,
1870,  and  by  him  surrendered  to  Nissage-Saget,


SALOMON


8ALT0NSTALL


879


whn  hml  awniinml  comiimnd  nt  Port  tin  Prince.  On
hiM  arrivul  iit  the  cnpital,  Salnavf  wkm  tried  and
sentrnoiMl  to  death  l>y  a  court-martial  on  chartros
of  blcKMlsliiHl  and  tn-a-xon,  and  wim  ininuHliati'ly
expontf*!  on  the  st«'|»s  of  tin*  rtiinod  i»alaf«'.

SALOMON.  Fredcrirk,  ^<oldil•r,  ii.  m-ar  IlallxT-
stadt.  Prus-sia,  7  April.  1820.  After  luissin^  throuj^h
the  pyinnaMiiini,  he  iNH-amea  povernnient  Kurveyor,
later  a  lieutenant  of  artillery,  an<l  in  1N4N  a  pupil
in  the  Ii4'rlin  «chfH)|  of  arcnittHrture.  KmifrratinK
soon  afterwanl  to  the  l'nite<l  States,  he  settU-*!  in
Manitowoc-,  Wis*.,  aj*  a  surveyor.  He  wa.s  for  four
years  county  n'jfister  of  deeds,  and  in  IMT-'Q  chief
enjnnecr  on  the  ManitowiK^  and  Wisconsin  rail-
rtMMl.  He  entennl  the  volunteer  service  in  the
spring  of  1861  as  a  captain  in  the  5th  Missouri
volunteers,  and  served  under  Gen.  Franz  Sigel,  \to-
injt  present  at  Wilson's  (.'reek.  After  the  three-
months'  tenn  of  service  hat!  expire<l  ho  was  aj)-
|K>intiHl  colonel  of  the  9th  Wisconsin  infantry,
which  he  conunnndi-d  in  the  southwest  until  he
was  nm<le  a  brifjadier-general,  U\  .June.  1802,  and
assipne<l  to  the  command  of  a  brigade  in  Kansas.
On  'M)  S«'pt.  he  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to
capture  Newtonia,  Mo.  Heserve<l  throujjh  the  war,
receivinjr  the  brevet  of  major-general  in  March,
1H05,  and  was  mustered  out  on  25  Aug.,  1865.
Gen.  .Salomon  was  subsequently  for  several  years
sur\'eyor-jreneral  of  Utah  territory,  where  he  now
(1888)  resides.— His  brother,  Edward,  b.  near  Hal-
berstadt,  Prussia,  in  1828,  came  with  him  to  this
country,  liecame  a  lawyer,  was  governor  of  Wis-
consin in  lH62-'3,  and  "now  practises  in  New  V'ork
city.  He  has  gaine<i  a  high  reputation  as  a  i>oliti-
cal  sfieaker.  esjiecially  in  the  German  language.

SALOMON,  Hayni,  financier,  b.  in  Lissa,  Prus-
sian Poland,  about  1740;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  1785.  He  settled  in  Phila<lelphia  some  years
before  the  llevolution  as  a  merchant  and  banker,
and  succtHHled  in  accumulating  a  large  fortune,
which  he  subse<|uently  devoted  to  the  use  of  the
American  government  during  the  war  for  inde-
pendence. He  negotiated  all  the  war  subsidies  ob-
taine<l  during  that  struggle  from  France  and  Hol-
land, which  he  indorsea  and  sold  in  bills  to  Ameri-
can merchants  at  a  credit  of  two  and  three  months
on  his  i»ersonal  security,  receiving  for  his  commis-
sion one  quarter  of  one  per  cent.  He  also  acted  as
paymaster -general  of  the  French  forces  in  the
United  States,  and  for  some  time  lent  money  to
the  agents  or  ministers  of  several  foreign  states
when  their  own  sources  of  supply  were  cut  off.  It
is  asserted  that  over  $100,000  thus  advanced  have
never  l)een  repaid.  To  the  U.  S.  government  Mr.
Salomon  lent  about  $600,000  in  sj)ecie,  and  at  his
death  $400,000  of  this  amount' had  not  been  re-
turned. This  was  irres|)ective  of  what  he  had  lent
to  statesmen  and  others  while  in  the  discharge  of
public  trust*.  His  descendants  have  frequently
petitioned  for  remuneration,  and  their  claims  have
several  times  been  favorably  reported  upon  by  com-
mittees of  coii^ress.

SALPOINTE,  Jean  Baptist,  R.  C.  archbishop,
b.  in  St.  Maurice,  Puv-de-Dome,  France,  21  Feb.,
1825.  He  receiyetl  his  pre|Mirator>'  e<lucation  in
a  school  in  Ajain,  and  sul)se(|uently  studied  the
classics  in  the  College  of  Clermont  and  philoso-
phy and  the<»logy  in  the  Seminary  of  Clermont
Ferrantl.  He  was  raised  to  the  i>riestlioo«l  on  20
Dec.,  1851,  and,  after  snending  ai>out  eight  years
in par<K-hial  duties  anu  as professor  in  the  pre-

Piratory  seminary  of  Clermont,  he  came  to  the
nited  States  in  1859,  and  was  parish  priest  of
Mora,  N.  M.,  until  he  was  ap|M)inte<I  vicar-general
of  Arizona  in  1866. He  was  nominated  vicar  apo«»-


tolic  of  Arizona  three  yean*  afterwanl.  and  conae-
emted  by  the  title  of  bishop  of  I)oryla  i'm  parlHnu
on  20  .lune,  18(t9.  His  vicariate  in<-luded  Arizt^ma,
with  [>art  of  Texas  and  New  .Mexico.  He  imme«li-
ately  set  alMMit  building  chun-hes.  organizing  new
i-ongre^'Htions.  and  founding  schools  and  hitspitals.
The  numU'r  of  [)riests  htul  increase<l  to  eighteen
when  Dr.  Salpointe  was  transferre*!  to  .Santa  Fe  as
coadjutor  to  An?hbishop  l^amy,  and  the  churches
had  increastnl  from  aiM>ut  half  a  dozen  to  twentr-
thro<'.  besides  fifteen  cha[>els.  He  succeetlwl  Arch-
bishop I^iny  as  anhbishoo  of  Santa  Fe  in  18N5.

SALTER,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  lioston,
Ma.ss.,  in  172JJ;  «1.  in  Mansfield,  Conn.,  14  April,
1789.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1739,  stud-
ied nunlicine,  and  then  theology,  supiilied  a  pulpit
in  lioston  for  some  time,  and  on  27  June,  1744,  was
ordaine<l  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at
Mansfield,  where  he  remaitie<l  till  his  death.  He
gave  to  Yale  college  in  1781  a  farm,  which  was  sold
for  $2,000,  for  the  puriK)se  of  promoting  the  study
of  Hebrew  and  other  oriental  languag<>s.  He  was
proficient  in  Greek,  Hebrew,  and  other  branches  of
scholarship.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  cf>nferre<l  on
him  by  Yale  in  1782.  He  publishe«l  an  "Flection
Sermon  "  (1768),  and  began  a  "  Commentary  on  the
New  Testament,"  but  altandoned  his  design,  when
the  work  was  in  great  pwrt  written.

SALTER,  William  D.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1794;  d.  in  F]|izalx*lh,  N.  J.,  3  Jan..
1869.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  on  15
Nov.,  1809.  was  attached  to  the  frigate  "Constitu-
tion "  under  Com.  Isaac  Hull  during  the  action  with
the  British  frigate  "  Guerricre,"  on  19  Aug.,  1812,
and  was  the  last  survivor  of  those  who  participated
in  that  action.  He  became  lieutenant  «)n  9  Dec.,
1814,  was  made  master-commandant  on  8  March,
1831,  captain  on  3  March,  18JJ9.  and  commodore  on
the  retired  list  on  16  July,  18(52.  He  was  in  com-
mand of  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  in  1856-'9,  and
in  186;J  was  on  a  commission  to  examine  vessels,
from  which  duty  he  was  relieved  in  18(56.

SALTONSTALL,  Sir  Ricliard.  colonist,  b.  in
Halifax,  England,  in  1586;  d.  in  England  alxmt
1658.  He  was  a  nephew  of  Sir  Itichard,  who  was
lord  mayor  of  London  in  1597.  The  nephew  was
justice  of  the  peace  for  the  West  Riding  of  York-
shire and  lord  of  the  manor  of  lA'dsham.  near
Ijeeds.  He  was  one  of  the  grantees  of  the  Massa-
chusetts company  under  the  charter  that  was  ob-
tained from  Charles  I.  On  26  Aug.,  1629,  Salton-
stall,  Thomas  Dudley,  Isaac  Johnson,  John  Win-
throp.  and  eight  other  gentlemen  signinl  an  agree-
ment to  pass  the  seas  and  to  inhabit -and  continue
in  New  England,  provided  that  the  i»atent  and
whole  government  of  the  plantation  should  be
transferred  t<i  them  and  other  actual  colonLst-s.
The  pro[K)sition  was  accepted  by  the  general  court
of  the  company,  which  elected  Sir  Kichanl  the
first-named  assistant  of  the  new  governor.  He  ar-
rived with  (Jov.  Winthrop  in  the  "Arbella"  on  22
June,  1(J30,  and  began,  with  George  Phillips,  the
settlement  of  Watertown,  but,  owing  to  the  illness
of  his  two  young  daughters,  who.  with  his  five
sons,  had  accompanii><l  him,  he  returne<l  with  them
and  two  of  the  scms  to  England  in  1031,  where  he
c«mtinued  to  display  in  all  ways  the  greatest  inter-
est in  the  colony,  and  to  exert  himself  for  its  atl-
vancement.  He  was  one  of  the  |»tentees  of  Con-
necticut, and  sent  out  a  shallop  to  take  {ios.session
of  the  territory.  The  vessel,  on  the  return  voyage,
was  wrecked  on  Sable  island  in  l(Ci5.  In  1644  he
was  s«Mit  as  aml»a.v^dor  to  Holland.  A  portrait
that  wa.s  painted  by  l{^>mbrandt  while  he  was  there
is  reproduced  in  the  illustration. He  was  one  of


380


SALTONSTALL


SALTONSTALL


the  judges  of  the  hiph  court  that  sentenced  the
Duke  of  Hamilton,  Lord  Ca|X'l,  and  others  to  death
for  treason  in  1649.  In  1G51  he  wrote  to  John
Cotton  and  John  Wilson  a  letter  of  remonstrance
in  reganl  to  their  jxTsecution  of  the  Quakers. —
His  son,  Richard,  h.  in  WtxHlsome,  Yorkshire,
P^npland,  in  1010;  d.  in  Hulnie,  Lancashire,  2S>
April,  1(55)4,  was  matriculated  at  Emanuel  college,
Cambridjre,  in  1627.  and  emigrated  to  Massachu-
setts with  his  father  in  16;J0.  He  was  among  the
first  settlers  of  Ipswich,  and  was  chosen  one  of  the
governor's  assistants  in  1637.  In  1642  he  nub-
lished  a  polemic  against  the  council  apjKiintea  for
life.  In  July,  1(>43,  he  signed  a  letter  urging  the
colonial  authorities  to  take  warlike  measures  against
the  French  in  Acadia.  He  befriended  the  regicides
that  escaped  to  New  England  in  1660,  and  protested
against  the  importation  of  negro  slaves.  In  1672
he  returned  to  England. — The  second  Richard's
son,  Nathaniel,  councillor,  b.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  in
1631);  (1.  in  Haverhill,  Mass.,  21  May,  1707,  was
graduatc<l  at  Harvard  in  1659.  He  was  an  assist-
ant from  1679  till  1(J86,  and  was  offered  a  seat  in
the  council  by  Sir  Edmund  Andros,  but  declined.
After  the  deposition  of  that  governor  he  was  chosen
one  of  the  council  under  the  charter  of  William
and  Mary.  In  1692  he  was  appointed  one  of  the
judges  in  a  special  commission  of  oyer  and  terminer
to  try  the  persons  accused  of  practising  witchcraft
in  Salem.  Reprobating  the  spirit  of  persecution
that  prevailed,  and  foreseeing  the  outcome  of  the
trials,  he  refused  to  accept  the  commission. — Na-
thaniel's son,  (vurdun,  governor  of  Connecticut,
b.  in  Haverhill,  Mass.,  27  March,  1666;  d.  in  New
London,  Conn.,  20  Sept.,  1724,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1684,
studied  theology,  and
'  was  ordained  minis-
ter of  New  London,
Conn,,  on  19  Nov.,
1691.  He  was  dis-
tinguished not  only
for  learning  and  elo-
quence, but  for  knowl-
edge of  affairs  and
elegance  of  manners.
He  was  one  of  a  com-
mittee that  was  de-
puted by  the  Connec-
ticut assembly  to  wait
upon  the  Earl  of  Bel-
lomont  when  he  ar-
rived in  New  York  in
1698,  and  was  fre-
quently called  on  to
assist  in  public  busi-
ness. While  Gov.
Fitz  John  Winthrop
was  ill,  Saltonstall,  who  was  his  pjistor,  acted  as  his
chief  adviser  and  representative,  and  on  the  death  of
the  governor  was  cnosen  by  the  assembly  to  be  his
successor,  entering  on  his  functions  on  1  Jan.,  1708.
In  the  following  May  he  was  confirmed  in  the  office
at  the  regular  election.  His  first  official  act  was  to
propose  a  synod  for  the  adoption  of  a  system  of
ettclesiastical  discipline.  The  Saybrook  platform,
which  was  the  outcome  of  his  suggestion,  was  by
his  influence  made  to  conform  in  some  essentials
to  the  Presbyterian  polity.  Gov.  Saltonstall  was
appointed  agent  of  the  colony  in  1709  for  the  pur-
pose of  conveying  an  address  to  Queen  Anne  urg-
ing the  conquest  of  Canada,  and  raised  a  large  con-
tingent in  Connecticut  for  the  disastrous  expedi-
tion of  Sir  Hovenden  Walker.  He  set  up  in  his
house  the  first  printing-press  in  the  colony  in  1709,


and  was  active  in  the  arrangements  for  establish-
ing Yale  college,  influencing  the  decision  to  build
at  New  Haven  instea«I  of  at  Hartford,  making  the
plans  and  estimates,  ami  during  the  early  years  of
the  college  taking  the  chief  part  in  the  direction  of
its  affairs.  He  was  continued  in  the  office  of  gov-
ernor by  annual  election  till  his  death. — Gurdon's
nephew,  Richard,  jurist,  b.  in  Haverhill.  Mass.,
24  June,  1703;  d.  20  Oct.,  1756,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1722,  and  in  1728  was  chosen  to  repre-
sent Haverhill  in  the  general  court.  Subsequently
he  was  a  member  of  the  council.  From  1736  till
he  resigned  a  few  months  before  his  death  he  was
a  judge  of  the  sujierior  court.  He  was  chairman
of  a  commission  that  was  ap[K)inted  in  1637  to
trace  the  boundary-line  between  Massachusetts  and
New  Hampshire. — Gurdon's  son,  (jiirdon,  soldier,
b.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  22  Dec,  1708;  d.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  19  Sept.,  1785,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1725.  He  was  appointed  colonel  of  militia  in
1739,  served  at  the  siege  of  Louisburg  in  1745,  and
was  one  of  the  commissioners  for  fitting  out  expe-
ditions against  Canada.  He  was  a  member  of  the
general  assembly  in  1744-'8.  then  of  the  house  of
assistants  till  1754,  and  afterward  was  sent  to  the
assembly  again  at  intervals  till  1757.  From  1751  till
his  death  he  was  judge  of  probate  at  New  London.
In  September,  1776,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  of  militia,  and  reported  to  Gen.  Washing-
ton at  Westchester  with  nine  regiments. — The  sec-
ond Gurdon's  nephew,  Dudley,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  London,  Conn.,  8  Sept.,  1738;  d.  in  the  West
Indies  in  1796,  commanded  the  "Alfred"  in  Com.
Esek  Hopkins's  squadron  in  February,  1776,  and
on  10  Oct.,  1776,  was  appointed  fourth  in  the  list
of  captains  of  the  Continental  navy.  He  was  com-
modore of  the  fleet  that  left  Boston  in  July,  1779,
to  reduce  a  British  post  on  Penobscot  river.  Sal-
tonstall was  desirous  of  attacking  as  soon  as  they
arrived,  but  Gen.  Solomon  LovelT,  the  commander
of  militia,  was  unwilling.  When  Sir  George  Col-
lier appeared  off  the  coast  with  a  formidable  naval
force,  the  Americans  re-embarked.  Saltonstall
drew  up  his  vessels  in  order  of  battle  at  the  mouth
of  the  river,  but  was  greatly  overmatched,  and  his
men  were  demoralized.  As  soon  as  the  enemy
came  near,  his  ship,  the  "Warren,"  was  run  on
shore  and  burned.  Other  vessels  were  deserted  in
the  same  manner,  while  the  rest  were  captured  by
the  enemy.  The  crews  and  the  land-forces  fled  to
the  woods,  and  made  their  way  by  land  to  Boston.
A  court  of  inquiry,  wishing  to  shield  the  state
militia,  and,  perhaps,  establish  a  claim  on  the  Con-
tinental government  for  a  part  of  the  expenses  by
inculpating  a  Continental  officer,  blamed  Salton--
stall  for  the  disastrous  termination  of  the  expedi-
tion, which  had  involved  Massachusetts  in  a  debt
of  $7,000,000,  and  on  7  Oct.,  1779,  he  was  dismissed
the  service.  He  afterward  commanded  the  priva-
teer "  Minerva,"  and  among  the  prizes  taken  by
him  was  the  "  Hannah,"  a  merchant  ship  bound
for  New  York  with  a  valuable  cargo. — The  third
Richard's  son,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  Haverhill,
Mass.,  5  April,  1732;  d.  in  England,  6  Oct.,  1785,
was  gmduated  at  Harvard  in  1751.  He  com-
manded a  regiment  in  the  French  war,  and  soon
after  the  peace  of  1763  was  appointed  sheriff  of
Essex  county.  In  the  beginning  of  1776  he  emi-
grated to  England.  While  sympathizing  with  the
Tories,  he  refused  to  take  a  command  in  the  royal
army  to  fight  against  his  fellow-countrymen. — An-
other son.  Nathaniel,  phvsieian,  b.  in  Haverhill,
Ma.ss.,  10  Feb..  1746;  d.  there,  15  May,  1815,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1766.  He  was  a  skilful
physician,  possessed  high  scientific  attainments,


8ALTUS


SAI^MAXN


881


and  (lurinj:  the  U<«v«»lution  wiw  a  flrni  Whip. — An-
othvr  tM>n,  Lererett,  b.  in  IUvi<riiill,  Mhsk..  S*"}
Dec.,  1754;  d.  ill  New  York  tity.  W  lK«c..  17H2,  ao-
ooiu(tMnitMl  tlic  Hriti-sh  army  fnnn  Itiwtoii  tu  Hali-
fax. WHS  ^ivfit  u  ciiiiiiuiM'ittn,  and  M-rvt'd  as  a  <.-it|>-
tain  undiT  Lonl  Cornwallis. — The  «oc<)ii<l  Nathaii-
jfl's*  soil.  Loverett,  lawvor,  li.  in  HiiviTliill.  Muj«j».,
13  Jim.-.  ITKJ;  ti.  i:<  SHit-in.  .Mb-sm..  H  May.  IW.l,
was  j,'r»iluHte«l  at  Harvard  in  l^iH,  studii'tl  law,
and  i-ntcriMl  into  practicv  at  SaU>in  in  1H05.  Ho
was  .siH'akcr  of  the  state  house  «»f  r«'|)re«enlatives,
prvsident  of  the  state  senate,  the  Hrst  mayor  of
Salem  in  1H:(U-'8,  a  preeidential  elti-tor  on  the
Welwiter  tiekel  in  1837,  ami  was  elet-te*!  to  con-
Ifresw  to  fill  a  varancv.  servinj;  from  .'i  l)ef.,  lt<ii<.
till  8  Man-h,  184^1.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  1).  in  IKW.  He  was  an  atrtive  meinU'r  of
the  Mjussarhusetts  historical  society,  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  other  learned
Ixxlies. '  When  he  dietl,  he  left  a  large  part  of  his
library  to  l'hilli|>s  Exeter  academy,  whert^  lie  had
receivwl  his  early  education,  and  a  liequest  of
money  to  purchase  l)ooks  for  the  library  at  Har-
vartl."  He  was  the  author  of  an  "  Historical  Sketch
of  Haverhill,"  nriiittHl  in  the  "Collections"  of  the
MasNu;hus4'tts  lii«it<)rical  siK-iety. — A  descendant  of
Ourdon,  WiUiaiii  Wanton,  b.  in  New  Ijondon,
Conn.,  1»  .Jan..  17»3;  d.  in  Chicago,  HI.,  18  March.
1862.  was  on  his  mother's  side  a  great-grandson  of
Joseph  Wanton.  He  was  an  early  settler  in  Chi-
cago, and  tluring  the  last  twenty  years  of  his  life
held  the  iH»st  of  assignee  in  bankruptcy.— The  si'c-
ond  Levi'rett's  grands<in,  Levorett,  lawyer,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  Iti  March,  1825,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1844,  and  at  th6  law-school  in  1847,
and  practised  in  Boston  till  18«»4.  in  I)ecemi)er,
1885,  he  was  appointed  collector  of  customs  for
the  jKtrt  of  lioston  and  Charlestown.  He  is  an
active  member  of  the  Massiwhusetts  historical  so-
ciety and  of  other  learned  bodies,  and  is  compiling
a  genealogical  history  of  his  family.

SALTl'S.  Edgar,  author,  b.  in  New  York  city,
8  June,  18.58.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Paul's
schcKjl.  Concord,  N.  H.,  studied  later  at  the  Sor-
bonne,  Paris,  and  in  Heidelljerg  and  .Munich,  Ger-
many, and  after  his  return  at  Colund)ia  college  law-
8ch«x)l,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1880.  His  ear-
liest literary  efforts  were  in  poetry.  His  first  book
was  "  Halzac,"  a  biography  (Boston,  1884).  He  next
devoted  himself  to  the  presentation  of  the  jH'ssi-
inistic  philosophy,  a  history  of  which  he  publishinl
under  the  title  of  "  The  Philosophy  of  Disenchant-
ment" (1885),  which  was  followed  by  an  analytical
ex [»osit ion  entitled  "The  Anatomy  of  Negation"
(Ixjiidon,  1880;  New  York,  1887).  lie  is  the  author
also  of  "  Mr.  IncouPs  Misadventure"  (1887);  "The
Truth  al)out  Tristrem  Varick  "  (1888) ;  and  "  K«len  "
(18HH).— His  brother,  Francis  S.,  is  the  author  of
"  Honey  an<l  (tbII."  a  Ixiok  of  poems  (Philadelphia,
1873),  and  was  engagwl  on  a  "  Life  of  Donizetti,"

SALVATIEKKA,  Juan  Maria  de  (std-vah-te-
er-rah),  Italian  missionary,  b.  in  Milan,  15  Nov.,
1048;  d.  in  Gumlalajara,' Mexico,  18  July,  1717.
He  studietl  in  the  Jesuit  college  of  Parma,  entered
that  onler  in  Genoa,  and  went  to  Mexico,  where  he
studied  theology,  and  was  for  several  years  profes-
sor of  rhetoric  in  the  College  of  Pucbla.  Later  he
obtained  iR'rmission  to  convert  the  Tarahumaro
Indians  of  the  northwest,  among  whom  he  lived
for  ten  years,  founding  s«»veral  missions.  He  was
subsetpiently  ap|K>int«I  visitor  of  the  missions  in
Sinaloa  and  Stnora,  and  there  formetl  a  project  for
the  spiritual  conqui>st  of  California,  as  all  the  mill-
tar)'  exjM'ditions  to  that  country  hml  btHMi  without
result. After  obtaining  permission  from  his  su-


periors, ho  miled  on  10  Oct.,  1097,  for  I»wer  Cali-
fornia, wherr*,  on  lU  Oct.,  he  laiil  the  foundation  of
the  mission  of  Ijoreto.  He  s<M>n  learned  the  Ian-
gUBoe  of  the  natives,  wh«)m  he  propitiateil  by  hi**
kindness,  and  in  seven  years  e^tablish(*<l  six  other
missions  along  the  <-oast.  In  1 704  he  was  apiK>int«'d
provincial  of  his  ortler.  and  nv-ide<l  in  Mexuni,  but
when  his  term  was  condudisl  in  1707  he  retumi-d
to  his  missions  in  California.  In  1717  he  was
calletl  to  the  capital  by  the  vicenjy,  the  Mar({uis  de
Valero,  to  give  material  for  the  '"  History  of  Cali-
fornia," which  King  Philip  V.  hm\  ordeml  to  be
written.  Although  suffering  from  illnes.s.  Salva-
tierni  obeyed,  and,  crossing  the  (lulf  of  California,
continued  his  voyage  along  the  c<mst.  carrie*!  on
the  shoulders  of  the  Indians,  till  he  died  in  Giiaila-
lajara.  He  wrote  "  Cartas  sobre  la  Contpiista  espi-
ritual  de  Califoniias"  (Mexico,  lOlIN).  and  "  Nuevas
cartas  sobre  Calif«>rnias"  (101»9),  which  liave  been
use<l  by  Father  Miguel  Venegas  in  his"Historia
de  Californias."  Salvaticrra  is  still  known  as  the
ajHJslle  of  California.

SALVERT,  Perler  dn,  colonial  governor,  b.  in
France  about  lOJK).  He  whs  an  ofllcer  in  the
French  navy,  and  a  knight  of  .St.  Ixjuis.  On  the
recall  of  the  Sieur  de  Bienville  in  1?24.  he  was  sent
out  as  governor  of  I^ouisiana.  His  administration
was  lax  and  inefllcieiit,  and  the  Natchez  Indians,
exasj)erated  by  the  deeds  of  evil-disposed  [)ers<)ns,
rose  against  the  French,  and  on  29  Nov.,  1729,
slaughterinl  all  the  male  inhabitants  of  the  i)ost  in
their  country.  Their  example  was  followed  by  the
Yazix)s.  Perier  formed  an  alliance  with  the  Choc-
taws,  and,  after  the  latter  had  met  the  enemy  in
the  field  several  times,  niarche<l  into  the  Natchez
country,  and  laid  siege  to  the  fortified  village  of
the  Indians  until  they  withdrew  acn>ss  the  ^lissi8-
sijjpi.  In  order  to  restore  the  prestige  of  French
arms,  the  governor  sent  an  ex|)edition  of  1.000
men  against  the  Natchez  in  the  following  winter,
which  succeeded  in  capturing  their  fort  and  taking
several  hundred  prisoners,  who  were  s«'nt  to  Santo
Domingo  and  sold  as  slaves.  In  17Ji3  Bienville
was  reinstated,  and  Perier  returned  to  France,
where  he  was  made  lieutenant-general.  In  1765
he  was  sent  in  command  of  a  fleet  for  the  protec-
tion of  Santo  Domingo,  and  during  the  war  of
1756-'fti  he  commanded  a  scpiadron.

SALYINI,  Toniniaso,  Italian  trage<lian,  b.  in
Milan,  Italy.  1  Jan..  IKK).  His  father  and  mother
wer»>  actors  of  ability.  He  jK'rformed  children's
parts  at  the  age  of  thirteen,  later  joinetl  the  troupe
of  Adelaide  Ristori,  and  shared  her  triumphs.
After  fighting  in  the  Italian  war  for  hide|)endence
in  1849,  he  returned  to  the  stage,  and,  by  his  im-
fx'rsonation  of  the  title-Wiles  of  GiusemK'  5iicolini's
"  KdijK) "  and  Vittorio  Alfieri's  "  Saul, '  achieveil  an
Euroj>ean  reputation.  He  was  also  successful  a*
Orosinane  in  Voltaire's  "  Zaire,"  first  essayed
Othello  in  1857,  creatwl  the  part  of  Connul  in  "  I^
morte  civile,"  and  added  to  Ids  rein-rtoire  Romeo.
Hamlet,  In^omar.  Paolo  in  Silvio  Pellico's  "  Fran-
cesca  di  Runini."  which  he  nlayinl  at  the  Dante
celebration  in  18(W.  and  the  G!a<riator  in  Alexandre
.Soumet's  tragedy  of  that  name,  Sullivan  in  "  David
(larrick,"  Tonjuato  Tasso,  Samson.  Kssex  in  "  Kliza-
U'th,"  Maxiine  0<liot  in  the  "  Romance  of  a  Poor
Young  Man,"  and  other  characters.  In  1871  he
visited  S<iuth  America,  and  in  lM7:i-'4  he  made  a
tour  in  the  United  States,  giving  128  i)erformancc«,
U'sides  28  in  Havana.  In  New  York  city  Kdwin
IkxMh  playwl  the  ghost  to  his  Hamlet.  In  1881
he  again  visited  the  I'nittHl  States.

SAL/M.\NN.  Josoph,  elergyman,  b.  in  Munz-
bach, Austria, 17 Aug.,  1819;  d. in Milwaukee,


882


SAMOSET


SAMPSON


Wis.,  17  Jan.,  1874,  He  studied  at  the  University
of  Vienna,  where  he  won  his  doctor's  degree,  anil
was  ordained  a  priest  in  1842.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  1847,  and  was  appointed  pastor
of  St.  Mary's  church,  Milwaukee.  He  succeeded
Archbishop  Henni  as  president  of  the  Theological
seminary  of  St.  Francis,  the  success  of  which  is  in
a  great  measure  due  to  his  efforts.  He  was  one  of
the  founders  of  the  *'  Seebote,"  a  German  periodi-
cal published  at  Milwaukee,  to  which  he  was  a
frequent  contributor.

SAMOSET,  Indian  chief,  b.  in  New  England
alK)ut  1590.  He  was  a  chief  of  the  Pemaquids  on
the  Maine  coast,  and  learned  English  from  the  colo-
nists of  Monhcgan  island,  sent  out  by  Sir  Ferdi-
nando  Gorges.  Three  months  after  the  landing  of
the  Pilgrims,  Samoset  entered  their  settlement  at
Plymouth  with  the  salutation  "  Welcome,  English-
men ! "  He  informed  them  that  Patuxet,  where
they  had  planted  their  village,  was  ownerless  land,
because  its  former  inhabitants  had  been  carried  off
by  pestilence.  A  week  later  he  brought  Squanto,
who  had  been  taken  to  England,  to  act  as  their  in-
terpreter, and  showed  his  friendly  interest  in  en-
deavoring to  bring  about  a  treaty  of  jwace  with
Massassoit,  the  chief  sachem  of  the  Wampanoags.

SAMPLE,  Robert  Fleming,  clergvman,  b,  in
Corning,  N,  Y.,  19  Oct.,  1829.  lie  was'  graduated
at  Jefferson  colIege,Cannonsburg,  Pa.,  in  1849,  and
at  Western  theological  seminary,  Allegheny  City,  in
1853.  He  wius  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  at
Mercer,  Pa.,  in  1853-'6,  and  then  at  Bedford,  Pa.,
till  1806,  when  he  removed  to  Minneapolis,  Minn.,
and  after  supplying  a  pulpit  for  two  years  was
called  to  the  pastorate  of  another,  in  which  he  con-
tinued until,  in  1887,  he  exchanged  it  for  a  charge
in  New  York  city.  He  is  a  member  of  various
church  boards,  and  a  director  of  the  McCormiek
theological  seminary,  Chicago,  111.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Wooster  university,  Ohio,
in  1876.  In  1884  he  was  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the
Presbyterian  alliance  at  Belfast,  Ireland.  He  has
been  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  religious  press.
Besides  numerous  pamphlets  and  sermons,  he  has
published  several  books  for  the  young  on  Christian
experience,  and  also  a  "  Memoir  of  Rev.  John  C.
Thom"(1868).

SAMPSON,  or  SAMSON,  Deborah,  heroine,
b.  in  Plympton,  Mass,  17  Dec,  1760;  d.  in  Sharon,
Mass.,  29  April,  1827.  She  was  large  of  frame,
and  accustomed  to  severe  toil,  and  when  not  yet
eighteen  years  of  age,  moved  by  a  patriotic  im-
pulse, determined  to  disguise  her  sex  and  enlist  in
the  Continental  army.  By  teaching  for  two  terms,
she  earned  enough  to  buy  cloth  from  which  she
fashioned  a  suit  of  male  clothing.  She  was  ac-
cepted as  a  private  in  the  4th  Massachusetts  regi-
ment, under  the  name  of  Robert  Shurtleff,  and
served  in  the  ranks  three  years,  volunteering  in
several  hazardous  enterprises,  and  showing  unusual
coolness  in  action.  In  a  skirmish  near  Tarrvtown
she  received  a  sabre  cut  on  the  temple,  and  four
months  later  she  was  shot  through  the  shoulder.
During  the  Yorktown  campaign  she  was  seized
with  brain  fever,  and  sent  to  the  hospital  in  Phila-
delphia. The  surgeon  discovered  her  sex,  took  her
to  his  home,  and  on  her  recovery  disclosed  the  facts
to  the  commander  of  her  company,  who  sent  her
with  a  letter  to  Gen.  Washington.  The  com-
mander-in-chief gave  her  a  discharge,  with  a  note
of  good  advice  and  a  purse  of  money.  After  the
war  she  married  Benjamin  Gannett,  a  farmer
of  Sharon.  During  Washington's  administration
she  was  invited  to  the  capital,  and  congress,  which
was  then  in  session,  voted  her  a  pension  and  a


f:rant  of  lands.  She  published  a  narrative  of  her
ife  in  the  army,  under  the  title  of  "The  Female
Review"  (Dedham,  1797).  of  which  a  new  edition
was  issued  by  the  Rev.  John  A.  Vinton,  with  an
introduction  and  notes  (Boston,  1866).

SAMPSON,  Ezra,  clergyman,  b,  in  Middle-
borough,  Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1749 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
12  Dec.,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1773,
studied  theology,  and  was  settled  in  Plympton,
Mass.,  on  15  Feb.,  1775.  In  that  year  he  ofllciated
as  chaplain  in  the  camp  at  Roxbury,  and  by  his
vigorous  discourses  encouragetl  the  patriotic  de-
termination of  the  militia.  He  retained  his  charge
until,  at  the  end  of  twenty  years,  his  voice  failed,
when  he  resigned,  removetl  to  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  soon
afterward,  and,  in  company  with  Harry  Croswell,
began  the  publication  in  1801  of  the  "  Balance,"
from  which  he  withdrew  in  1803.  He  was  editor
of  the  "  Connecticut  Courant "  at  Hartford  in  1804,
and  continued  to  write  for  the  paper  till  1817.  In
1814  he  was  appointed  a  judge  of  Columbia  coun-
ty, N.  Y.,  but  he  soon  resigned.  He  published
"Sermon  before  Col.  Cotton's  Regiment"  (1775);
"Thanksgiving  Discourse"  (1795) ;  "The  Beauties
of  the  Bible '^  (1802) ;  "The  Sham  Patriot  Un-
masked "  (1803);  "Historical  Dictionary"  (1804);
and  "  The  Brief  Remarks  on  the  Wavs  of  Man,"
a  collection  of  moral  essays  originally  published
in  the  "Courant"  (1817;  new  ed.,  1855).

SAMPSON,  Francis  Smith,  Hebraist,  b.  in
Goochland  county,  Va.,  5  Nov.,  1814 ;  d.  at  Hamp-
den Sidney,  Va.,  9  April,  1854.  He  entered  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia  in  1831,  was  graduated  M.  A.  in
1836,  and  after  studying  two  years  at  Union  theo-
logical seminary  in  \  irginia,  was  appointed  teacher
of  Hebrew  there.  He  was  ordained  as  an  evange-
list in  1841.  He  performed  all  the  duties  of  pro-
fessor of  oriental  languages  and  literature,  but  was
not  given  the  title  of  professor  till  1849,  when  he
returned  from  a  year's  study  at  Halle  and  Berlin.
Hampden  Sidney  college  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1849.  He  prepared  a  "  Commentary  on
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews"  (New  York,  1856).

SAMPSON,  John  Patterson,  author,  b.  in
Wilmington,  N.  C,  13  Aug.,  1837.  He  is  of  mixed
Scottish  and  African  descent,  was  graduated  at
Comer's  college,  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1856,  was  for  some
time  a  teacher  in  New  York  city,  and  during  the
civil  war  conducted  a  journal  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
called  the  "Colored  Citizen,"  in  which  he  advo-
cated the  enlistment  of  negroes  in  the  National
army.  In  1865  he  was  appointed  assessor  at  Wil-
mington, N.  C,  and  was  superintendent  of  the
Freedmen's  school  in  1866.  In  1868-'9  he  attended
the  Western  theological  school  at  Alleghany,  Pa.*
He  took  an  active  part  in  reconstruction,  was  a
member  of  the  North  Carolina  constitutional  con-
vention, was  nominated  by  the  Republicans  for
both  the  legislature  and  congress,  and  for  fifteen
years  held  various  posts  under  the  state  and  U.  S.

fovernments.  After  completing  his  studies  at  the
rational  law  university,  Washington,  D.  C,  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  the  U.  S.  supreme
court  in  1873.  In  1882  he  relinquished  the  prac-
tice of  law,  and  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Afri-
can Methodist  Episcopal  church.  He  was  appoint-
ed to  a  church  near  Trenton,  N.  J.,  was  chosen
chaplain  of  the  state  senate,  and  afterward  took
charge  of  a  congregation  at  Trenton.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Wilberforce  uni-
versity, Ohio,  in  1888.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
general  conference  in  1888,  is  known  as  a  lecturer
on  social  and  scientific  subjects,  and  has  published
in  book-form  "  Common-sense  Phvsiologv  "  (Hamp-
ton, Va.,  1880);  "The  Disappointed  Bride"  (1883);


SAMPSON


SAMUELS


"  Temperampiit  aiul  Phif  noloffv  of  Mtxo<l  Raom"
(Tivnton.  I8K4):  "Jollv  People '•(HampUm,  1886);
Hii«i  '•  IllustrHlions  in  Thcoloffv"  (IHW),

SAMPSON,  William,  author,  b.  in  Ixindnn-
derrv,  In'laml,  17  .Ian.,  1764  ;  «1.  in  New  York  fity,
27  iW.,  IKitt.  He  was  the  »on  of  a  Pre!«byterian
minister,  and  hold  a  (Hinimiwion  in  the  Irish  vol-
unteers, hut  afterwanl  entere<l  Duhlin  university,
and  IxH-aine  a  liarrister.  He  aetetl  fre<|uently  a.*
counsel  for  meniU-rs  of  the  S<x'iety  of  Uniti-il  Irish-
men, thereby  exi-itin);  the  »usi)icions  of  the  jfovem-
ment.  and  after  the  failure  of  the  rebellion  of  1798
fled,  but  was  brought  back  as  a  prisoner  to  Dublin.
He  was  releaso<l  on  condition  that  he  should  go  to
Portugal.  While  then»  he  wa.s  again  imprisone«l
at  the  instance  of  the  Knglish  government,  which
was  anxious  to  obtain  pa|»ers  that  Inul  l)een  in  his
possession.  He  was  finally  set  free,  and  cAine  to
this  country.  He  established  himself  as  a  lawyer
in  New  York  city,  obtained  a  large  practic-e,  and
through  his  writings,  which  contain  severe  invec-
tives against  the  common  law,  was  influential  in
bringing  aliout  amendments  and  consolidations  of
the  laws  of  the  state.  He  nublished  "  Sami)son
against  the  Philistines,  or  the  Reformation  of  Ijaw-
Suits"  (Philatlelphia,  1805);  "  Memoirs  of  William
Sampson  "  (New  York,  1807 ;  London.  18JW) ;
"Catholic  Question  in  America"  (1818);  "Dis-
course Iwfore  the  New  York  Historical  Society  on
the  Common  Law  "  (1824) ;  "  Discourse  and  Cor-
respondence with  I joamed  Jurists  upon  the  History
of  the  Ijhw"  (Washington,  1826);  and  the  "His-
tory of  Ireland,"  in  part  a  reprint  of  Dr.  W.  Cooke
Taylor's  "  Civil  Wars  of  In>land"  (New  York,  1888) ;
als«o  n-pirts  of  various  trials.

SAMPSON,  William  Thomas,  naval  officer.
b.  in  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  9  Feb..  1840.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  naval  acatlemv  in  1861,  and  at-
tached to  the  frigate  "  Potomac  with  the  rank  of
master.  In  July,  1862,  he  was  commissioned  as  |
lieutenant,  and  in  1862-'3  he  served  in  the  pnictice-
sl<x)p  "John  Adams."  During  1864  he  was  sta-
tioned at  the  naval  academy,  and  he  then  served
in  the  "  Patapsco"  with  the  South  Atlantic  block-
ading s({uadron  in  1864-'5,  and  was  in  that  vessel
when  she  was  destroyed  in  Charleston  harbor  in
January,  1865.  He  served  in  the  flag-ship  "Colo-
rado," of  the  European  squadron,  in  186o-'7,  and
was  at  the  naval  academy  m  1868-'71.  Meanwhile
he  hat!  been  commissioned  lieutenant-commander
on  25  J  u  ly.  1 866.  1 1  is  next  service  was  in  t  he  "  Con-
gress "  on  special  duty  in  18?2,  and  o^i  the  P]uropean
station  in  1878,  after  which,  in  187.5,  he  had  the
"  Alert."  and  was  commissioned  commander  on  9
Aug.,  1874.  During  1876-'9  he  was  at  the  naval
academy,  and  in  1880  was  given  command  of  the
"  Swatara."  of  the  Asiatic  souadron.  He  was  assist-
ant superintendent  of  the  U.  S.  naval  ol)servatorv
in  Washington  in  1882-'3,  and  in  Septemlx'r,  1886,
was  ap|K)inted  superintendent  of  the  U.  S.  naval
academy.  Commander  Sam{)son  was  a  member  of
the  International  conference  at  Washingt<m  in  Oc-
tober, 1884,  for  the  pur|M>se  of  fixing  a  prime  merid-
ian and  a  universal  day.  and  in  1885  was  appointed
a  raemlierof  the  board  to  report  upon  the  necessary
fort ifiiat ions  and  other  defences  for  the  coast.

SAMSON,  Ueorge  Whitelleld,  clergyman,  b.
in  Harvard.  Mass.,  29  .Sept.,  1819.  He  was  gradu-
ate<l  at  Hrown  in  18:i9  and  at  Newton  thinilogical
seminary  in  1848.  In  the  same  year  he  was  calletl
to  the  charge  of  the  K  street  Baptist  church,
Washington,  I).  C,  of  which,  with  the  exception
of  tyro  years  in  Jamaica  Plains.  Mas.s.,  and  some
time  in  foreign  travel,  he  remained  pastor  until
1858. In  that  year  ho  was  called  to  the  presidency


of  Columbian  cf>llege.  which  ofllioe  he  held  until
1871.  So«^n  afterwanl  he  was  elected  presiilent  of
Rutgers  female  college.  New  York  citv,  and  con-
tinueil  in  this  relation  until  1875.  N^hile  presi>
dent  of  the  female  college  Dr.  Samiion  was  also,
for  [>art  «*f  the  time,  pastor  of  the  1st  liaptist
church  in  Harlem.  In  1886  he  resumwl  the  duties
of  pre«<ident  of  Rutgi>rs,  an«I  was  at  the  same  time
engagt><l  in  conducting  a  training-scluxil  designed
to  prefwire  young  men  for  evangelistic  work.  Be-
sides numerous  artich's  in  (x^ruMlicals,  he  is  the
author  of  "To  Daimoni6n,  or  the  Spiritual  Me-
dium" (Boston,  1852;  2d  ed.,  entitled  "Spiritual-
ism Tested."  1860);  a  "Memoir  of  Marv  J.  (Jra-
ham."  prefixe<l  to  her  "Test  of  Truth"  (1859);
"  Outlines  of  the  History  of  Ethics"  (1860);  "  Ele-
ments of  Art  Criticism  "  (Philadelfihia,  1867;
abridgetl  e<l..  1868) ;  "  Physical  Media  in  Spiritual
Manifestations "(1869);  "The  Atonement "(1878);
"Divine  I-iaw  as  to  Wines"  (New  York,  1880);
"  P^nglish  Itevisers'  Greek  Text  shown  to  be  Unau-
thorized "  (1882) ;"  Guide  to  Self-Pklucation  "  (1886) ;
"(luide  to  Bible  Interpretation  "  (1887);  and  "  Idols
of  Fashion  and  Culture"  (1888).

SAMTELS,  Edward  AuguHtns,  naturalist,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass..  4  July,  18JJ6.  He  received  a  com-
mon-school education.  Ijegan  early  to  write  for  the
press,  and  from  1860  till  1880  was  assistant  to  the
secretary  of  the  Mas.«achusetts  state  l»oard  of  agri-
culture. For  several  years  he  has  been  president
of  the  Massachusetts  fish  and  game  protective  as-
sociation, besides  following  the  business  of  a  pub-
lisher of  musical  works,  lie  has  given  attention
to  invention,  and  is  the  originator  of  a  pnK-ess  for
engraving  by  photography  directly  from  nature  or
from  a  i)hotographic  print.  Mr.  Samuels  has  con-
tributea  long  essays  to  the  U.  S.  and  the  Massachu-
setts agricultural  reports,  and  has  published,  among
other  works, "  Omit  tiology  and  ( >ology  of  New  Eng-
land "  (Boston,  1867);  "  Among  the  llirds"  (186'^;
"  Mammalogy  of  New  England"  (18(W);  and.  with
Augustus  C.  L.  Arnold,  "The  Living  World"
(2  vols.,  1868-'70).  He  is  now  (1888)  engageil  on
an  illustrated  work  on  "Game  Fish  and  Fishing."
— His  wife.  Susan  Bla^e  Caldwell,  author,  b.
in  Dedham,  Mass.,  21  Oct..  1848,  is  a  daughter  of
Com.  Charles  H.  B.  Caldwell.  She  was  a  teacher  in
Walt  ham  and  Ik)ston,  Mass.,  before  her  marriage,
and  in  1885  was  a  member  of  the  school  committee
of  Wallham.  Mrs.  Samuels  is  the  author  of  nu-
merous stories  that  have  appearetl  in  juvenile
magazines  and  religious  weekhes  and  of  a  series
of  books  calleil  ".Springdale  Stories"  (6  vols,,  Bos-
ton, 1871),  which  were  re-issuetl  as  "Golden  Rule
Stories"  (1886).— His  sister,  Adelaide  Florence,
author,  b.  in  lioston,  Mass..  24  .Sept.,  1845,  was  edu-
cated in  a  district  school  at  Milton.  Mass.,  and  be-
came a  teacher  and  ultimately  a  writer.  Her  juib-
licaticms  in  lKX)k-form  include  "  Adrift  in  the
World"  (Boston,  18?2);  "Little  Cricket"  (1873);
"  Daisy  Travers,  or  the  Girls  of  Hive  Hall "  (1876);
and  other  stories  for  vouth.

SAMUELS,  Saniiiel,  seaman,  b.  in  Philadel-

Ehia,  Pa.,  14  March,  1825.  He  shipfHHl  as  cabin-
oy  on  a  cojtsting- vessel  at  the  age  of  eleven,
studied  navigation  on  shiplK)ard,  and  after  many
voyages  became  at  twenty-one  captain  of  a  mer-
chantman. He  commandetl  for  several  years  the
"  Dreadnaught,"  the  fastest  of  the  sailing-|»ackets^
In  186.'J-'4  he  was  captain  of  the  V.  S.  steamship
"John  Rice."  In  1864  he  was  general  superin-
tendent of  the  quartennaster's  de|iartment  in  New
York  citv.  having  charge  of  the  repairing,  victual-
ling, and  desjHitching  of  vt^«5els.  In  1865  he  com-
manded the  "McClellan"  at  the  taking  of  Fort


384


SANBORN


SANBORN


Fisher.  He  was  captain  of  the  "  Fulton,"  the  last
of  the  American  packet  -  steamers  between  New
York  and  Havre  in  1866,  and  in  the  winter  com-
manded the  "Henrietta"  yacht  in  her  race  from
New  York  to  Southampton,  in  1870  the  yacht
"Dauntless"  in  her  race  with  the  "Camf^ria"
from  yucenstown  to  New  York,  making  the  voy-
age in  twenty-one  days,  and  again  in  1887  in  her
race  across  the  Atlantic  with  the  "Coronet."  In
1872  he  organized  the  Samana  bay  comi)any  of
Santo  Domingo  with  a  quasi-understanding  that
the  U.  S.  government  should  acquire  a  part  of  the
bay  as  a  naval  station.  He  was  granted  a  conces-
sion by  the  Dominican  executive,  which  was  con-
firmed by  a  plebiscite,  and  took  possession  in
March,  1873,  but  in  1874  was  expollea  by  the  new
government.  In  1876  he  organized  the  Rousseau
electric  signal  company,  and  introduced  th6  Eng-
lish system  of  interlocking  switches  and  signals.
He  was  general  superintendent  in  1878-'9  of  the
Pacific  mail  steamship  company  at  San  Francisco,
Cal..  and  in  1881  he  organized  the  United  States
steam  heating  and  power  company  in  New  York
city.  Cant.  Samuels  has  published  a  narrative  of
his  early  life  and  adventures  in  the  merchant  ser-
vice under  the  title  of  "  From  Forecastle  to  Cabin  "
(New  York.  1887).

SANBORN.  Charles  Henry,  physician,  b.  in
Hampton  Falls,  N.  H.,  9  Oct.,  1822.  He  was  edu-
cated in  the  common  schools  of  New  Hampshire,
taught  for  several  years,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
medical  school  in  1856,  and  has  since  practised
medicine  at  Hampton  Falls. He  was  active  in  the

Solitical  revolt  of  the  Independent  Democrats  of
lew  Hampshire  in  1845,  which  ended  in  detaching
the  state  from  its  pro-slavery  position.  In  1854-'5
he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature.  He  published
"The  North  and  the  South"  (Boston,  1856). — His
brother,  Franklin  Benjamin,  reformer,  b.  in
Hampton  Falls,  N.  H.,  15  Dec,  1831,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1855,  and  in  1856  became  secre-
tary of  the  Massachusetts  state  Kansixs  committee.
His  interest  in  similar  enterprises  led  to  his  active
connection  with  the  Massachusetts  state  board  of
charities,  of  which  he  was  secretary  in  1863-'8,  a
member  in  1870-'6,  and  chairman  in  1874-'6.  suc-
ceeding Dr.  Samuel  G.  Howe.  In  1875  he  made  a
searching  investigation  into  the  abuses  of  the
Tewksbury  almshouse,  and  in  consequence  the
institution  wjis  reformed.  Mr.  Sanborn  was  ac-
tive in  founding  the  Massjichusetts  infant  asylum
and  the  Clarke  institution  for  deaf-mutes,  and  has
devoted  much  attention  to  the  administration  of
the  Massachusetts  lunacy  system.  In  1879  he
helped  to  reorganize  the  system  of  Massachusetts
charities,  with  special  reference  to  the  care  of  chil-
dren and  insane  persons,  and  in  July,  1879,  he  be-
came inspector  of  charities  under  the  new  board.
He  called  together  the  first  National  conference  of
charities  in  1874,  and  was  treasurer  of  the  confer-
ence in  1886-'8.  In  1865  he  was  associated  in  the
organization  of  the  American  social  science  asso-
ciation, of  which  he  was  one  of  the  secretaries  until
1868,  and  he  has  been  since  1873  its  chief  secretary.
With  Bronson  Alcott  and  William  T.  Harris  he
aided  in  establishing  the  Concord  summer  school
of  philosophy  in  1879,  and  was  its  secretary  and
one  of  its  lecturers.  Since  1868  he  has  l)een  edito-
rially connected  with  the  Springfield  "  Republi-
can, and  has  also  been  a  contributor  to  newspapers
and  reviews.  The  various  reports  that  he  has  issued
as  secretary  of  the  organizations  of  which  he  is  a
member,  from  1865  till  1888,  comprise  alwut  forty
volumes.  He  hits  edited  William  E.  Channing's
"Wanderer"  (Boston,  1871)  and  A.  Bronson  Al-


cott's  "Sonnets  and  Canzonets"  (1882)  and  "New
Connecticut"  (1886);  and  is  the  author  of  "  Life  of
Thoreau  "  (1882)  and  "  Life  and  Letters  of  John
Brown  "  (1885).

SANBORN,  Edwin  Darid,  edticator,  b.  in  Gil-
manton.  N.  H.,  14  May,  1808;  d.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,
29  Dec,  1885.  He  was  graduatetl  at  Dartmouth  in
1832,  taught  for  a  year  at  Gilmanton,  studied  law.
and  afterward  divinity  at  Andover  seminary,  and
became  professor  of  Latin  at  Dartmouth  in  1835.
In  1859  he  became  president  of  Washington  uni-
versity, St.  Louis.  Mo.,  but  in  1863  he  returned  to
Dartmouth  as  professor  of  oratory  and  belles-lettres.
In  1880  he  assumed  the  new  chair  of  Anglo-Saxon
and  the  English  language  and  literature.  He  re-
ceived -the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University
of  Vermont  in  1859.  He  married,  on  11  Dec,  1837,
Mary  Ann,  a  niece  of  Daniel  Webster.  He  was  a
leatler  in  public  affairs  in  his  town  and  state,  and
was  several  times  elected  to  the  legislature.  Be-
sides contributions  to  newspapers  and  magazines,
he  published  lectures  on  education,  a  "  Eulogy  on
Daniel  Webster"  (Hanover,  1853),  and  a  "History
of  New  Hampshire"  (Manchester,  1875).  —  His
daughter,  Katliarine  Abbott,  author,  b.  in  Han-
over, N.  H..  in  1839,  taught  English  literature  in
various  seminaries,  and  held  that  chair  in  Smith
college  for  several  years,  resigning  in  1886,  in  order
to  follow  literary  pursuits  in  New  York  city.  She
has  lectured  in  public  on  literary  history  and  allied
subjects,  and  written  on  education,  and  for  several
years  was  a  newspaper  correspondent  in  New  York
city.  She  has  also  edited  calendars  and  holiday
books. Under  the  name  of  Kate  Sanborn  she  has

?ublished  "  Home  Pictures  of  English  Poets  "  (New
ork,  1869) ;  the  "  Round  Table  Series  of  Litera-
ture Lessons"  (1884);  "The  Vanity  and  Insanity
of  Genius  "  (1885) ;  "  Wit  of  Women  "  (1886) ;  and
"  A  Year  of  Sunshine  "  (1887). "

SANBORN,  John  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in
Epsom,  N.  H.,  5  Dec.  1826.  He  was  educated  at
Dartmouth,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  July,  1854.  In  December  of  that  year  he  re-
moved to  St.  Paul,
Minn.,  where  he
has  since  resided,
engaged  in  the
practice  of  the  law
when  not  in  the
public  service.  As
adjutant  -  general
and  quartermas-
ter-general of  Min-
nesota he  organ-
ized and  sent  to  the
field  five  regiments
of  infantry,  a  bat-
talion of  cavalry,
and  two  batteries
of  artillery  in  1861,
and  in  the  spring  ^^  yC  <^  V
of  1862  left  the  ^^2>^t-t^  /^- J'^Z^^v-i^^^**^
state  as  colonel  of

the  4th  Minnesota  volunteers,  remaining  in  ac-
tive service  in  the  field  to  the  close  of  the  war.
At  luka,  his  first  battle„he  commanded  the  lead-
ing brigade  and  was  commended  in  the  oflScial
report.  About  600  of  his  men,  out  of  2,2(K),  were
killed  and  wounded  in  little  more  than  an  hour.
For  this  he  was  appointed  brigadier  -  general  of
volunteers,  but  the  senate  allowed  this  apjwint-
ment  to  lapse,  and  after  the  Vieksburg  campaign,
on  the  recommendation  of  Gen.  Merherson  and
Gen.  Grant,  he  was  again  commissioned  to  date
from  4  Aug.,  1863. This  appointment  was  con-


SAXIJOKX


SANCHRZ  DK  AGUILAR


385


flrincU  by  the  HeiiHte.  lie  |inrli(*i|iHUHl  in  the  liat-
ties  of  ('(iriiith,  Port  Ciil>Miii,  KttyinoiKl,  JtR-ksoti,
and  Champion  IlilU.  and  in  tliv  a.v<uult  and  hii-f^t*
of  Viek.Hbiirj;.  Ilo  was  d(>><i^na(iMl  to  lead  the  ad-
vance into  tile  town  after  the  surrender,  and  suiter-
intended  the  parulintr  of  the  priminers  of  war  and
pMsin^  them  lx>yond  the  lines.  This  honor  was
oonferre<l  on  account  of  his  gallant  conduct  and
that  of  his  conunand.  es|>ecially  ut  the  Imttie  of
Jackson.  After  (KtolM-r  he  comnumded  the  dis-
trict of  southwest  .Missouri  and  a  bripule  and  di-
vision of  cavalry  in  the  field  in  Octolter  and  Novem-
lier,  18G4.  ami  fought  the  actions  of  JelTerHon  City,
liooneville,  I nde|K'ndencc,  Big  Blue,  Ijiltle  Blue,
Osaj^.  Marias  «les-Cygnes,  and  Newtonia.  He  was
never  defeatwl  l»y  the  enemy,  an«l  never  fniletl  of
comi)lete  success  except  in  the  assault  of  22  May
at  Vickshur);.  lie  conducted  a  campaign  against
the  Indians  of  the  southwest  in  the  summer  and
autumn  of  18(J5,  ojtenetl  all  the  lines  of  commu-
nication to  the  territories  of  ('olora«lo  and  New
Mexico,  and  terminated  all  hostilities  with  the
Comanche,  Kiowa,  Cheyenne,  Arapahoe,  and  Ai»a-
ches  of  the  upj>er  Arkansas,  by  the  treaties  tnat
he  ei)nclu(UHl  at  the  mouth  of  the  Little  Arkan-
sas in  OetoU'r,  1865.  After  this,  in  the  winter  of
1805-'({.  under  the  direction  of  President  Johnson,
he  ailjustcd  amicably  the  diniculties  growing  out
of  the  war  between  the  Cherokees,  Chcx-taws,
Chickasaw^s.  Creeks,  and  Seminoles  and  their  slaves,
and  declan'd  the  slaves  of  these  tribes  free.  In
1867  Gen.  Sanborn  was  designateil  by  congress  as
one  of  an  Indian  peace  commission,  and  with  the
other  commissioners  negotiate<l  several  treaties
•which  have  reuiaineil  in  force  and,  in  connection
with  the  report  of  that  commission,  have  had  a
great  influence  in  the  amelioration  of  theconditicm
of  the  Indians.  He  lias  been  a  meml)er  of  the
housi'  aiul  senate  of  Minnesota  on  various  occasions.

SANBORN,  John  Sewell,  Canadian  judge,  b.
in  Uilmanton,  N.  H.,  1  Jan.,  1819;  d.  in  Sher-
brooke,  Ontario,  18  July,  1877.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1842,  removed  to  Canada,  and  in
1847  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Montr&il.  He  was
elected  to  parliament  for  Sherbrooke  county  in
1850,  re-elected  in  1853  and  1854,  and  was  subse-
quently elected  for  Compton  countv,  remaining  a
memlx-r  till  1857.  In  1803  he  was  elected  for  Wel-
lington county  to  the  legislative  council,  and  he
^>rve«l  until  the  union  of  the  provinces  in  1807,
when  he  Ix'came  a  luember  of  the  Dominion  sen-
ate. He  resigned  this  place  in  1873,  when  he  was
appointed  judge  of  the  sujierior  cdurt  at  Sher-
brooke by  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald,  to  whom  he
was  politically  opposed.  In  1874  he  became  a
judge  of  the  court  of  oueen's  bench.

SAN  BUENAVENTURA,  Gabriel  de  (san-
bway-nah-vain-too'-rah),  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Seville.  Spain.  He  was  a  monk  of  the  Franciscan
onler,  and  sjient  many  years  in  Yucatan,  wherj*  he
was  still  living  in  1095.  He  wrote  "  Arte  de  la
lengua  Maya"  (Mexico,  1G84),  and  was  also  the
author  of  a  "  Vocabulario  Maya  y  Kspartol,"  con-
taining descriptions  of  the  medical  and  Ixjtanical
protluctsof  the  country,  which,  at  the  beginning
of  the  19tli  century,  was  in  the  Franciscan  convent
of  Vallrtdolid,  Yucatan,  but  is  now  lost.

SAN  CARLOS.  Jos^  Miguel,  Duke  de,  Spanish-
American  statesman,  b.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1771 :  d.
in  Pari*.  France,  17  Julv,  1828.  He  was  descemled
from  the  ancient  family  of  Carvwjal.  which  since
the  time  of  Charles  Y.  had  i»o«sesse<l  the  hereditary
title  of  chief  courier  for  tne  Indies.  After  com-
pleting his  studies  at  the  College  of  Lima,  he  w^ent
to  Spain  at  the  age  of  eixtcen,  and  entered  on  a
VOL.  V. — 2fi


military  career.  He  commanded  the  right  of  the
allitnl  armies  that  attacked  Toulon  in  1703,  was
tutor  of  the  king's  children  in  1797-lHOI,  was  ap-
pointed major-<lomo  of  Charles  lY.  in  1805,  and
in  1807  Ijecame  viceroy  of  Navarre.  When  Ferdi-
nand YII.  ascended  the  throne,  he  made  the  Duke
lie  San  Carlos  director  of  his  hous«>liold,  and  fol-
lowe<l  the  mlviceof  his  old  tutor,  and  of  Kscoiquix,
in  submitting  to  Na|M)leon.  During  the  king's  cap-
tivity the  duke  labon-<|  incessantly  for  his  rentorft-
tion,  and  when  he  had  accomplisheti  this  object,
in  Deceraljer,  1813,  he  exercised  the  functions  of
prime  minister  until  in  the  following  Novemljer
the  influence  of  his  enemies  comi>elIe<i  his  retire-
ment. He  was  afterward  amlnissiulor  at  different
courts,  and  died  while  representing  his  govern-
ment at  Paris.

SANC'HES,  AfTontiO  (san'-chess),  Portuguese
pilot,  b.  in  Ca.scaes,  Kstrcmadura,  alN)Ut  14<{0;  'd.
aljout  1480.  According  to  Francisco  (ioniara  in
his  "  Ilistoria  de  las  Inuias,"  Abreu  e  Lima  in  his
"  Synopsis  e  detluccdo  chronologica,"  Ayres  de
Cazal  in  his  '*  Corographia  Bra>ilica,"  LisUia  in  his
"  Annaes  do  Rio  de  Janeiro,"  and  other  historians,
Sanches  commanded  a  caravel,  and  was  trading  on
the  coast  of  Africa,  when  he  was  forced  by  winds
and  currents  toward  the  west  to  an  unknown  land,
where  he  discovered  the  mouth  of  a  mighty  river,
prol)ably  the  Amazon,  and  on  his  return  landed  at
some  large  islands,  j)erhans  Cuba  and  Santo  Do-
mingo. On  this  homewaru  journey  his  caravel  was
wrecked  near  Madeira,  or  at  Porto  Santo,  where  he
was  rescued  by  (,'olumbus,  with  whom  he  livetl  for
the  rest  of  his  life,  and  to  whom  he  left  his  pa|M.>rB
and  the  secret  of  his  great  discovery,  which  after-
ward enable<l  the  (Jenoese  navigator  to  fiml  Ameri-
ca. Although  no  direct  nnn^fs  exist  as  to  the  truth
of  these  facts,  nothing  has  yet  been  discovere<l  to
contradict  them,  and  thus  Sanches  stands  among
the  many  claimants  of  the  discovery  of  America.

S.4NCHEZ,  Labrador  Jo»6  (saii'-cheth),  Sjmn-
ish  missionary,  b.  in  (iuarda,  .Spain,  19  .Se|)t.,  1717;
il.  in  Ravenna,  Italy,  in  1799.  He  entert'd  the  Jesuit
order  in  1731,  went  some  time  afterward  to  Para-
guay, and  was  professor  of  philosophv  and  theology
in  the  acatlemy  of  New  Conlova.  lie  abandoned
his  professorship  to  preach  to  the  Indians,  among
whom  he  lived  till  the  exiiulsion  of  the  Jesuits  from
the  Spanish  colonies.  lie  wrote  a  dictionary  and
grammar  of  the  Ubja  dialect,  and  translated  the
catechism  into  it;  also  "Paraguay  natural  ilus-
trado.  Xoticias  de  la  naturaleza  del  Pavs,  con  la
explicacion  de  fenomenos  fisicos.  geiierafes  y  i>ar-
ticulares:  usos  utiles  que  de  sus  pnxlucciones  se
pueden  hncer."

SANCHEZ  DE  AGUILAR.  Pedro (san'-cheth),
Mexican  bishop,  b.  in  Yalladolid,  Yucatan.  10-\pril,
1555;  d.  in  Santa  Cruz,  Bolivia,  alxmt  1040.  He
was  a  descendant  of  the  first  conquerors  of  Yuca-
tan. Sanchez  was  sent  by  his  father  to  Mexico,
where  he  studied  in  the  College  of  Sjin  Ildefoiis*!,
was  ordained  and  graduated  as  d«»ctor  in  theology,
and  was  rector  of  several  parishes  in  Yu(*atan.
He  became  vicar-general  of  tne  bishopric  of  Yuca-
tan, and  in  1017  was  si>nt  to  Madrid  and  Rome  as
commissioner  of  his  province.  King  Philip  III.
appointed  him  to  a  canonry  in  the  cathe«lral  of
Ija  Plata  in  the  pn>vince  of  Charcas,  whither  he
sailetl  after  his  n't  urn  to  Mexico,  and  later  he
j  was  ap|K)intiHl  judge  of  the  Inquisition  in  Lima,
anil  finally  bishop  of  .Santa  Cruz.  He  wn>te  "  In-
forine  contra  Idoloriim  Cultures  del  Obis|»ado  de
Yucatan"  (Madrid.  1019  and  10JJ9):  "Cartilla6
Catecismo  de  Dix-trina  Cristiana  en  Idioma  Yuca-
teco " ;  and  '*  Memoria  de  los  priiueros  Conquis-


386


SANDEMAN


SANDERSON


tadores  de  Yucatan." The  two  last  were  not

published  and  have  liecn  lost.

SANUEMAN,  Robert,  founder  of  a  sect,  b.  in
Perth,  Scotland,  in  1718;  d.  in  Danbury,  Conn.,  2
April,  1771.  Ho  studied  in  the  University  of  Edin-
burgh, engaged  in  the  linen  trade,  and,  on  marry-
ing the  daughter  of  the  Rev.  John  Glass,  became
an  elder  in  his  church,  and  reduced  Glass's  opinions
to  a  system.  Under  Sandeman's  influence  churches
were  gathered  in  the  principal  cities  of  Scotland,
and  Newcastle,  London,  anci  other  English  towns.
His  views  excited  much  controversy.  They  were
similar  to  those  of  Calvin  with  the  distinguishing
tenet  that  faith  was  a  "  mere  intellectual  belief,  a
bare  belief  of  the  bare  truth."  He  rejected  all  mys-
tical and  double  sense  from  the  Scripture,  prohib-
ited games  of  chance,  "  things  strangled."  accord-
ing to  the  Jewish  precept,  and  college  training,  and
required  weekly  love  feasts,  and  a  plurality  of  elders.
The  sect  was  divided  into  two  parts,  the  Baptist
Sandemanians,  who  practised  the  sacrament  of
baptism,  and  theOsbornites,  who  rejected  it.  San-
deman  came  to  this  country  in  1764,  and  organized
societies  in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  Danbury,  Conn.
During the Revolution the Sandemanians  were

f generally  loyalists,  and  gave  the  Whigs  much  trou-
(le.  Tlie  sect  now  numbers  about  1,500  persons
(1888).  Sandeman  published  a  series  of  "Letters
addressed  to  James  Hervey  on  his  'Theron  and
Aspasio'"  (Edinburgh,  1757;  last  ed.,  1838).

SANDERS,  Daniel  Clarke,  educator,  b.  in
Sturbridge,  Mass.,  3  May,  1768;  d.  in  Medfield,
Mass.,  18  Oct.,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1788,  was  a  teacher  in  the  Cambridge  grammar-
school  while  studying  divinity,  and  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1790.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  in  Vergennes,  Vt.,  in  1794-1800,  and
in  October  of  the  latter  year  became  president  of
the  University  of  Vermont,  which  post  he  held  for
fourteen  years.  In  1815-'29  he  was  pastor  of  the
church  in  Medfield,  Mass.  He  afterward  accepted
no  settled  charge,  but  preached  occasionally,  and
interested  himself  in  educational  concerns,  being
chairman  of  the  Medfield  board  of  selectmen  and
of  the  school  committee.  He  served  in  the  IMassa-
chusetts  constitutional  convention  in  1820.  Har-
vard gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1809.  Dr.
Sanders  was  an  earnest  worker  in  the  cause  of  edu-
cation. While  president  of  the  University  of  Ver-
mont he  performed  his  duties  for  three  years  with-
out an  assistant,  the  class  of  1804  received  all  its
instruction  from  him,  and  he  regularly  taught  from
six  to  ten  hours  a  dav.  He  published  about  thirty
discourses,  and  a  "  History  of  the  Indian  Wars  with
the  First  Settlers  of  the  United  States"  (Mont-
pelier.  Vt..  1812).

SANDERS,  Elizabeth  Elkins.  author,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  in  1762;  d.  there,  10  Aug.,  1851.  She
was  educated  in  her  native  town,  married  Thomas
Sanders  in  1782,  and  was  greatly  esteemed  for  her
extensive  benevolence.  She  corresponded  with
many  eminent  persons,  and  published  ''  Conversa-
tions, principally  on  the  Aborigines  of  North
America  "  (Salem,  Mass.,  1828) ;  "  First  Settlers  of
New  England"  (Boston,  1829);  and  "Reviews  of
a  Part  of  Prescott's  '  History  of  Ferdinand  and
Isabella,'  and  of  Campljell's  '  Lectures  on  Poetry ' "
(1841).  She  also  contributed  to  the  press  on  moral
and  religious  subjects.

SANDERS,  John,  engineer,  b.  in  Lexington,
Ky..  in  1810;  d.  in  Fort  Delaware,  Del.,  29  July,
1858.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  18Ji4,  became  captain  in  the  engineer
corps  iri  1838,  and  for  many  years  was  engaged  in
improving  the  Ohio  river,  and  in  the  construction


and  repair  of  the  interior  defences  of  New  York
harbor.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  participated
in  the  battles  of  Monterey  and  Vera  Cruz,  and  re-
ceived the  brevet  of  major  for  gallantry  in  the  first-
named  action.  He  subsequently  was  "employed  in
the  improvements  on  Delaware  bay  and  river,  and
in  constructing  Fort  Delaware.  He  published
"  Memoirs  on  the  Resources  of  the  Valley  of  the
Ohio  "  (New  York,  1844),  and  a  translation  of  Fran-
9ois  F.  Poncelet's  "  Memoir  of  the  Stability  of  Re-
vetements  and  their  Foundation  "  (1850).

SANDERS,  William  Price,  soldier,  b.  in  Lex-
ington, Ky.,  12  Aug.,  1833;  d.  in  Knoxville,  Tenn.,
18  Nov.,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1856,  became  1st  lieutenant,
10  May,  1861,  and  on  the  14th  of  that  month  cap-
tain of  the  6th  U.  S.  cavalry.  He  engaged  in  the
battles  of  Yorktown,  Williamsburg,  Mechanics-
ville,  and  Hanover  Court-House  during  the  Vir-
ginia {wninsular  campaign,  became  colonel  of  the
5th  Kentucky  cavalry  in  March,  1863,  was  in  pur-
suit of  Morgan's  raiders  in  July  and  August,  was
chief  of  cavalry  in  the  Department  of  the  Ohio  in
October  and  November,  and  participated  in  the  ac-
tions at  Blue  Lick  Springs.  Lcnori,  and  Campbell's
Station,  where  he  was  mortally  wounded,  lie  be-
came brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  18  Oct.,  1863.

SANDERSON,  John,  author,  b.  near  Carlisle,
Pa.,  in  1783;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5  April,  1844
He  was  educated  by  a  private  tutor,  and  began  the
study  of  law  in  Philadelphia  in  1806,  but  became
a  teacher,  and  was  subsequently  associate  principal
of  Clermont  seminary.  He  went  abroad  in  1835,
and,  on  his  return  the  next  year,  became  professor
of  Latin  and  Greek  in  the  Philadelphia  hign-school,
which  post  he  held  until  his  death.  Rufus  W.  Gris-
wold  said  of  him:  "He  was  not  less  brilliant  in
his  eonvei"sation  than  in  his  writings,  but  he  never
summoned  a  shadow  to  any  face,  nor  permitted  a
weight  to  lie  on  any  heart."  With  his  brother,
Joseph  M.  Sanderson,  he  published  the  first  two
volumes  of  the  "  Biography  of  the  Signers  of  the
Declaration  of  Independence"  (Philatlelphia,  1820;
completed  in  7  volumes,  by  Robert  Wain,  Jr.,  and
others,  1820-'7 ;  illustrated  ed.,  by  William  Brother-
head,  1865).  He  was  also  author  of  a  pamphlet  in
which  he  successfully  opposed  the  plan  to  exclude
the  classical  langiiages  from  Girard  college  (1826) ;
"  Sketches  of  Paris '  (1838 ;  republished  in  London,
under  the  title  of  "  The  American  in  Paris,"  1838;
3d  ed.,  2  vols.,  1848);  and  portions  of  a  work  en-
titled •'  The  American  in  London,"  which  appeared
in  the  *'  Knickerl)ocker  Magazine."

SANDERSON,  John  Philip,  soldier,  b.  in
Lebanon  county.  Pa.,  13  Feb.,  1818 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  14  Oct.,  1864.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1839,  and  served  in  the  legislature  in  1845,  and  in
the  state  senate  in  1847.  He  edited  the  Philadel-
phia "  Daily  News  "  in  1848-'56,  and  became  chief
clerk  of  the  U.  S.  war  department  in  1861,  but  re-
signed to  become  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  15th
U.  S.  infantry.  He  was  ap|X)inted  its  colonel  in
July,  1863,  and  in  February,  1864,  became  provost-
marshal-general  of  the  Department  of  the  Missouri.
His  most  important  public  service  was  the  full  ex-
position that  he  made  during  the  civil  war  of  the
secret  political  organization  in  the  northern  and
western  states,  known  as  the  "  Knights  of  the  golden
circle  "  or  the  "  Order  of  American  knights. '  He
published  "Views  and  Opinions  of  American
Statesmen  on  Foreign  Immigration"  (Philadel-
phia, 1843).  and  "Republican  Landmarks"  (1856).

SANDERSON,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bally-
bay,  County  Monaghan, Ireland,  23  May,  1823.  He
was  graduated  at  the  Royal  college,  Belfast,  in


SANDFORD


SANDS


387


184S,  came  to  this  country  the  next  year,  and  wan
olaadoal  teacher  in  Washington  institute.  New  York
city,  in  1847-'i).  lie  tlien  Htudic*!  theology,  va»
licensed  to  preach  in  lK4i),  nnd  iM^'amo  pastor  of
the  Asiwx'ittto  Presbyterian  eijurt-h  in  I*rf)vidence,
R,  I.  In  185;}- '($9  he  occupied  the  pulnit  of  a  Pres-
byterian church  in  New  York  city,  lie  was*  acting
iNutor  of  the  Congregational  church  at  Saugntuck,
Conn.,  in  lH?J-'8,  assistant  editor  of  the  "  llonii-
letic  Monthly"  in  1881-'8.  and  has  e<liteil  the
"Pulpit  Treasury"  sinct»  \>W\.  lie  has  puhli»h«l
"Jesus  on  the  llolv  Mount"  (New  York,  1809),  and
"  Meinoriiil  Triliutes"  (IKS:}).

SANDFOKl).  l^wiH  HulHey,  jurist,  b.  in  Ovid.
N.  Y.,  8  .luiif,  1H<)T;  d.  in  Tolwlo.  (>hi«i,  27  Julv,
1852.  lie  studied  law  at  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  waa  ad-
mittetl  to  the  Iwr  in  1828,  removwl  to  New  York
city  in  1833,  and  in  1843  was  chosen  assistant  vice-
chancellor  of  the  first  circuit.  He  lx?cunio  vice-
chancellor  in  1846,  and  from  1847  till  his  death
was  ass<x'iate  iustice  of  the  su|>erior  court  of  New
York.  Me  published  "Catalogue  of  the  New  York
Law  Institute"  (New  York,  1843);  "New  York
Chancery  Re|)orts"(4  vols.,  1840-'50);  and  "New
York  Sur>crior  Court  Re|)orts"  (1849-*52).  —  His
brother,  Kdward,  lawyer,  b.  in  Ovid,  N.  Y.,  22
Sept.,  1809;  d.  at  sea,  27  .Sept.,  1854,  received  an
acA<U'inic  education,  and  at  fifteen  years  of  age  set-
tled iu  Allwiiy,  where  he  engaged  in  ti-aching  and
le*-'turiiig.  lie  sultsequently  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1833,  Ix'gan  practice  in  New
York  city,  and  in  1842  was  appointwl  judge  of  the
criminal  court  of  that  city.  He  subsetjuently  re-
turnetl  to  the  bar,  and  t(K)k  the  highest  rank  in  his
profession.  Mr.  Sand  ford  was  a  member  of  the
Kew  York  senate  in  1843.  He  was  lost  in  the
steamship  "  Arctic."

8ANI)IF0RD,  Ralph,  author,  b.  in  Liverpool,
England,  about  l(i!»3;  d.  in  Philadel|.hia.  Pa.  28
May,  1733.  He  was  the  son  of  John  .Sandiford,  of
Liverpool,  and  in  early  life  was  a  sailor.  He  emi-
grated to  Pennsylvania,  where  he  settled  on  a  farm
and  l)ecame  a  Quaker  preacher.  Sandiford  was
one  of  the  earliest  public  advocates  of  the  emanci-
pation of  negro  slaves,  and  in  support  of  his  views
published  "A  Brief  Examination  of  the  Practice
of  the  Times,  by  the  Foregoing  and  Present  Dis-

E'nsation.  etc."  (Philadelphil^  1729;  2d  ihI..  en-
rgetl.  1730).  These  were  printetl  by  Franklin
ana  Mercnlitb.  Franklin  says,  in  a  letter  dated  4
Nov.,  1789:  "I  printeil  a  book  for  Ralph  Sandiford
aninst  keeping  negroes  in  slavery,  two  editions  of
wliich  he  distributed  gratis."  Sjindiford's  doc-
trines njet  with  but  little  favor,  except  among  the
poor,  who  were  brought  into  competition  with
slave  lalK)r.  The  chief  magistrate  of  the  province
thn'atene<l  Sandiford  with  punishment  if  he  per-
mitted his  writings  to  be  circulated,  but,  notwith-
standing, he  distributed  the  work  wherever  he
thought  it  would  l)e  nmd.  Sandiford  was  buried
in  a  field,  on  his  own  farm,  near  the  house  where
he  <lied.  The  executors  of  his  will  had  the  grave
enclosed  with  a  l>alustmde  fence,  and  causetl  a
stone  to  l)e  plaecnl  at  the  head  of  it,  inscriljcd:  "In
Memory  of  lialph  Sandifonl.  Son  of  John  San<li-
ford,  of  LiverjxMjl.  He  Bore  a  Testimony  against
the  Negn  kj  Tnwle  and  Dye<l  ye  28t  h  of  ye  3rd  Mont  h.
1733.  Age<l  40  Years."  Sec  "  Memoir  of  Ikniamin
Ijay  and  Ralph  .Samliford."  bv  Robert  Vaux  (Phila-
derphia,  ISi:, : London,  18KJ).

SAMN)V.\Ii,  AlfonM)  de,  Penivian  philan-
thn>pist.  ii.  in  .Seville.  Spain;  d.  in  Carthagena.
S|)anish  America,  25  1)«h'.,  Uuii.  He  went  to  South
Ameriea  when  a  Ixiy,  was  eilucated  by  the  Jesuits
of  Lima,  joined  their  order,  and  devoted  himself


to  the  care  of  the  slaveM,  among  whom  he  spent
the  rest  of  his  life.  The  obj»>et  of  most  of  his
writings  was  toailvance  the  tem|H)ral  and  spiritual
welfare  of  the  negnn's.  His  princi|ial  works  are
"  Natundeut  sagrada  y  profana.  costundircM,  ritos,
diiU'iplina,  y  eateci.smi>  evanifelico  de  todoa  loo
KthioiK's"  (^M•ville.  1027);  "  Vida  de  S.  Franciaco
Xavier  y  lo  <iue  obranm  U)s  PP.  de  la  compaflia
de  Jesus  en  la  India  "  (1019);  and  "  I)e  Instauranda
Aethioi)uni  .Salute  "  (Madri«l.  1046).

SANDOVAIi,  (louzalo  de,  Spanish  soldier,  b.
in  Mtnlellin,  Spain.  alN)Ut  1490 ;  d.  in  Mogiier,
S|Mun,  near  the  close  of  1528.  He  was  the  young-
est of  the  lieutenants  of  Heman  Cortes,  who,  after
the  subjui;ation  of  Montezuma  plac4-<l  him  in  com-
mand at  Villa  Rica  de  Vera  Cruz.  He  seized  the
messengers  of  Narvaez,  who  demande<l  the  surren-
der of  the  town,  and  sent  them  as  i)rist>ners  to
Cortes,  to  whom  tie  rendered  effective  aid  in  over-
coming his  rival.  He  conducte<l  o|M'rations  against
the  Aztecs  from  a  [Kjstcalletl  Segura.  near  Te[K>aca,
until  the  ves-sels  were  built  for  the  attack  by  lake
on  the  capital,  when  he  went  to  Tlascala  to  direct
their  transiy)rtation.  In  the  investment  he  occu-
pied the  easteni  ajiproach,  and  in  the  first  assault
ne  8U[>ported  Alvarado  in  an  attempt  to  gain  the
market-place.  He  met  Cristoljal  ue  Ta[)ia  who
was  sent  to  relieve  Cortes,  in  Decemlier,  1521,  and
in  a  council  of  oflleers  obtained  a  delay.  He  was
the  ablest  and  most  conspicuous  officer  of  Cortes  in
his  southern  concpiests,  and  accomf)anied  him  on
his  return  to  Spain  to  confront  his  enemies,  but
died  immeiliately  after  landing.

SANDOVAL  SILVA  Y  MENDOZA,  GaRpar
de  (san-do^val ).  (,'ount  de  Galve.  viceroy  of  Mexi-
co, b.  in  Saragossa  alx)Ut  1040 ;  d.  in  .Spain  early
in  the  18th  centurv.  He  was  appointed  to  re-
lieve Melchor  de  t'orto-Carrero.  who  had  Iwen
promoted  viceroy  of  Peni.  and  arrival  in  Mexico.
17  Sept.,  1088.  Shortly  afterward,  hearing  that
the  French  had  founded  an  establishment  in  the
Bay  of  San  Bernardo,  he  ordered  the  eovemor  of
Coahuila,  Alonso  de  Leon  (o.  v.),  to  expel  them  with
an  expedition,  which  left  Monclova  in  1«>89.  He
sent  in  1690  an  exiMHlition  of  seven  ships  and  2,600
men  to  Santo  Domingo  to  assist  the  governor  of
the  Spanish  part  of  the  island  in  exi»elling  the
F'rencn  from  the  western  part,  and  on  21  Jan.,
1091,  the  latter  were  routed  near  Guarico  (now
Car)e  Haytien),  the  French  governor  was  killed,
anu  the  city  was  sacked  and  burnt  In  1691  he
established  several  military  j)osts  in  Texai<,  and
in  the  same  year  a  presidio  was  founded  in  the  Bay
of  Pensacola.  He  was  the  first  to  establish  schools
for  the  Indians,  taught  them  Spanish,  and  gave
minor  employments  to  those  that  were  foremost  in
learning.  In  1(592  the  crop  of  com  failed,  and  the
conseouent  famine  cause<l  a  mutiny  in  the  capital,
in  which  the  viceregal  palace  and  several  public
buildings  were  partially  burnt.  A  second  expe-
dition, in  co-ojH»rat itm  with  the  English  fleet,  was
sent  in  1095  against  the  Fn>nch  establishments  on
the  northwest  coast  of  Santo  Domingo,  and  their
forts  were  destroyed.  His  health  was  deilining,
and.  after  he  had'  repeatwUy  |)etitioiHsl  the  court
to  r»>lieve  him.  he  obtained  in  1095  |M'rniission  to
deliver  the  executive  to  Bishop  Juan  de  Ortega
Montafies.  who  took  charge  on  27  Feb.,  1096.  San-
doval then  retununl  to  Sftain.

SANDS,  Alexander  Hamilton,  lawyer,  b.  in
W'illiamsburg.  Va..  2  Mav.  1H28;  d.  in  Richmond,
Va..  22  D»H'.,  1887.  He  studietl  at  William  and  Mary
in  1H;{H-'42.  but  was  not  gra<luate<l.  ri'ad  law,  and
in  1843  became  deputy  clerk  of  the  state  superior
oourt In  1845-'9  he  held  the  same  office  m  the


388


SANDS


SANDS


U.  S.  circuit  court.  He  was  a  judge-advocate  in
the  Confederate  army  during  the  civil  war.  and  a
short  time  before  his  death  entered  the  Baptist
ministry,  serving  congregations  in  Asliland  and
Glen  Allan,  Va.  Besides  contributions  to  periodi-
cals, he  published  "  History  of  a  Suit  in  Kquitv  "
(Richmond,  1854);  a  new  edition  of  Alexander
Tate's  "American  Form-Book"  (1857);  "Recrea-
tions of  a  Southern  Barrister"  (Philadelphia,  1800) ;
"  Practical  Law  Forms  "  (1872) :  and  "  Sermons  by
a  Village  Pastor."  He  compiled  "  Hubbell's  Legal
Directory  of  Virginia  Laws,  and  was  the  editor  of
the  "  Quarterly  Law  Review "  and  the  "  Evening
Bulletin"  (1859),  both  in  Richmond.

SANDS,  Benjamin  FrankHn,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Baltimore,  Md.,  11  Feb.,  1811;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  30  June,  1883,  He  entered  the  navy  as
midshipman,  1  April,  1828,  and  was  commissioned
lieutenant,  16  March,  1840. During  the  latter  part

of  the  Mexican  war
he  was  in  the  Gulf
squadron,  and  took
part  in  the  expedi-
tion up  the  Tabasco
river  and  at  Tus-
pan.  He  cruised  in
the  sloop  "  York-
town  "  and  in  com-
mand of  the  brig
"  Porpoise  "  oflE  the
coast  of  Africa,  for
the  suppression  of
the  slave-trade,  in
1848-'51.  He  was
attached  to  the
coast-survey  service
in  1851-'9,  during
which  period  he  was
promoted  to  com-
mander, 14  Sept.,
1855.  He  was  next  attached  to  the  bureau  of
construction  in  the  navy  department  until  the
civil  war.  He  was  commissioned  captain,  16  July,
1862,  commanded  the  steamer  "  Dacotah  "  on  the
blockade,  participating  in  the  engagement  with
Fort  Caswell  at  the  mouth  of  Cape  Fear  river.  He
was  senior  officer  in  command  of  the  division  on
the  blockade  off  Wilmington,  N.  C,  in  1862-'5,  and
also  took  part  in  both  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher  in
command  of  the  steamer  "  Fort  Jackson."  He  had
charge  of  the  division  on  the  blockade  off  the  coast
of  Texas  from  February  to  June,  1865,  and  on
2  June,  1865,  he  hoisted  the  U.  S.  flag  at  Galves-
ton, the  last  place  that  was  surrendered  by  the  Con-
federates. He  was  commissioned  commodore,  25
July,  1866,  and  appointed  superintendent  of  the
naval  observatory  at  Washington  in  1867,  where
he  remained  until  the  latter  part  of  1873.  He  was
commissioned  rear-admiral,  27  April,  1871,  placed
on  the  retired  list,  11  Feb.,  1874.  and  was  then  a
resident  of  Washington  until  his  death.

SANDS,  David,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  on  Long
Island,  N.  Y.,  4  Oct.,  1745;  d.  in  Cornwall,  N.  Y.,
in  June,  1818.  He  became  a  merchant,  but  entered
the  Society  of  Friends,  married  a  member  of  that
denomination,  and  began  to  preach  in  1772.  He
labored  in  this  country  and  Canada  till  1794,  and
then  in  Europe  till  he  was  sixty  years  of  age.  See
"  David  Sands,  Journal  of  his  Life  and  Gospel  La-
bors "  (New  York,  1848).

SANDS,  Henry  Berton,  surgeon,  b.  in  New
York  city.  27  Sept.,  18:^0 ;  d.  there,  18  Nov.,  1888.
After  studying  at  a  high-school  in  New  York,  he
graduated  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons
m  that  city  in  1854. Since  that  time  he  has  prac-


/3.AJ^


^^z^a^


tised  in  New  York,  giving  special  attention  to  sur-
gery. From  1860  till  1870  ne  was  in  partnership
with  Dr.  Willard  Parker.  Dr.  Sands  was  demon-
strator of  anatomy  in  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  1856-^'66,  professor  of  that  branch  in
1869-'79,  and  since  the  last-named  year  has  held
the  chair  of  the  practice  of  surgery.  He  has  been
connected  with  various  hospitals  as  consulting  or
attending  surgeon,  is  a  member  of  many  medical
societies,  and  was  president  of  the  New  York  coun-
ty pathological  society  in  1866-'7,  of  the  County
medical  society  in  1874-'6,  and  of  the  New  York
surgical  society  in  1883.  In  the  latter  year  he  be-
came a  corresponding  member  of  the  Society  of
surgery  of  Pans.  Dr.  Sands  has  a  high  reputation
as  a  successful  operating  surgeon.  Among  the  de-
scriptions of  his  operations  that  he  has  contributed
to  surgical  literature  are  "Case  of  Cancer  of  the
Larynx,  successfully  removed  by  Larj-ngotomy "
(1865);  "Aneurism  of  the  Sub-Clavian,  treated  by
Galvano-Puncture"  (1869);  "Case  of  Traumatic
Brachial  Neuralgia,  treated  by  Excision  of  the
Cords  which  go  to  form  the  Brachial  Plexus"
(1873) ;  "  Case  of  Bony  Anchylosis  of  the  Hip-Joint,
successfully  treated  by  Subcutaneous  Division  of
the  Neck  of  the  Femur  "  (1873) ;  "  Esmarch's  Blood-
less Method  "  (1875) ;  "  Treatment  of  Intussuscep-
tion by  Abdominal  Section"  (1877);  "The  Ques-
tion of  Trephining  in  Injuries  of  the  Head  "  (1883) ;
and  "  Rupture  of  the  Ligamentum  Patellae,  and
its  Treatment  by  Operation  "  (1885).

SANDS,  Joshna  Ratoon,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  13  May,  1795;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  2  Oct.,  1883,  His  "father,  Joshua  Sands,  was
collector  of  the  port  of  New  York,  and  a  repre-
sentative in  congress  in  1803-'5  and  1825-'7.  The
son  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  18  June,
1812,  and  immediately  entered  upon  his  duties
in  Com.  Chauncey's  squadron  on  Lake  Ontario.
He  participated  in  the  action  with  the  "Royal
George,"  5  Nov.,  1812.  The  next  season  he  was  at-
tached to  the  "  Madison,"  and  in  the  action  that
resulted  in  the  capture  of  Toronto  he  carried  the
orders  of  the  commodore  by  pulling  in  a  small  boat
to  the  different  vessels  until  the  enemy  surren-
dered. In  May,  1813,  he  served  in  the  "  Pike,"
and  fought  several  engagements  with  the  British
squadron  under  Sir  James  Yeo.  In  1814  he  was
with  a  battery  on  shore  and  in  the  frigate  "  Supe-
rior "  until  peace  was  proclaimed  in  1815.  He  was
commissioned  lieutenant,  1  April,  1818,  and  com-
mander, 23  Feb.,  1841.  During  the  Mexican  war
he  had  charge  of  the  steamer  "  Vixen,"  in  which
he  assisted  at  the  capture  of  Alvarado,  Tabasco,
and  Laguna.  He  was  governor  of  the  last-named
place  until  the  investment  of  Vera  Cruz,  where  he
rendered  service  by  taking  the  "  Vixen  "  close  un-
der the  batteries  and  to  the  castle  of  San  Juan
d'Ulloa.  He  co-operated  in  the  capture  of  Tuspan,
and  in  1847  brought  home  the  flags,  trophies,  and
brass  cannon,  with  a  complimentary  letter  to  the
navy  department  for  his  creditable  services.  In
185i  he  commanded  the  frigate  "St.  Lawrence"
with  the  government  exhibits  for  the  World's  fair
at  London,  and  prior  to  his  departure  he  was  given
a  banquet  and  presented  by  the  citizens  of  Brook-
lyn with  a  sword  and  epaulets,  which  he  gave  to
the  Historical  society  of  Brooklyn,  together  with  a
gold  snuff-box  inlaicl  with  diamonds  uiat  had  been
presented  to  him  by  Queen  Victoria.  He  assisted
in  laying  the  submarine  cable  in  1857,  took  part  in
the  exjjedition  to  Central  America  against  tlie  fili-
busters, was  promoted  to  captain,  25  Feb.,  1854,
and  was  flag-officer  in  command  of  the  Brazil  sta-
tion in  1859-61. He  was  retired  on  21  Dec.,  1861,


SANDS


SANFORD


389


as  bo  woA  mon*  tlmn  xixtv-two  yenn  of  affe,  but
was  cuiiiiiiiMsioiitMl  cotnniudorc,  I'U  .Inly,  \iiS'i,  and
served  us  li^ht-huusu  itit<{M>ctor  on  the  Itiki-tt  until
ItmO.  He  w»w  |m»nii>t(Hl  to  n*Hr-miininil,  25  July,
1800.  Hud  was  |K)rt-tulininil  at  Norfolk  from  1809
till  1S72.  After  that  hi>  n-sidnl  at  Italtimorc  until
his  tl«>ath,  at  Mhich  tiuio  lie  was  the  »vnior  oflleor
of  the  navv  on  the  ret  inn!  list.

SANDS',  Robert  CharloH.  author,  h.  in  Flat-
bush.  I^>nK  Island.  N.  V..  U  Mav,  17W):  d.  in  Ho-
boken.  N.  .1..  17  Dec,.  IKW.  His  father.  tVmifort
Sands  (1748-18:i4),  a  New  York  merchant,  was  an
active  Revolutionary  patriot,  a  ilolepite  to  the
State  eonstitutional  convention  of  1777,  and  for
many  years  a  moml»er  of  the  lejfislature.  The  son
was  ^raduatinl  at  Columbia  in  isi.").  While  in  col-
lep^s  he  and  .lames  Wallis  Kastlmrn  had  planned
two  p«'rio«liails.  "The  Moralist," of  which  Imt  a  sin-
gle numlH-r  apiH>ared.  and  "  Acmlemic  Recreations."
which  histml  a  year.  To  lx)th  of  thest;  Stmds  con-
tribut^nl  prose  and  verse.  On  his  graduation  he
began  to  study  law  with  David  B.  Ogden,  but  at
the  same  time  wn)te  on  a  great  variety  of  subjects.
He  was  one  of  the  authors  of  a  scries  of  essays  in
the  '•  Dailv  Advertiser."  entitle<l  "The  Net>logist"
(1817),  and  another  entitled  "The  Amphilogist"
(1819),  which  were  marke«l  by  purity  of  taste.  He
also  i)egan  to  translate  the  l*salms  of  David  with
his  friend  Eastburn,  and  wrote  with  him  "  Yanioy-
den,"  a  p<>em  founded  on  the  history  of  the  Indian,
King  Pnilip,  which  was  publishe<l.  with  additions
by  Sands,  after  Piastburn  s  death  (New  York.  1820).
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1820,  declining  the
chair  of  Iwlles-lettres  in  Dickinson  college,  but
continued  to  devote  himself  to  literature,  and  in
1823-'4  issued,  with  others,  the  "St.  Tammany
Magazine."  of  which  seven  numbers  appeared.  In
1824  he  began  the  "Atlantic  Magazine, '  and  when
it  became  the  "  New  York  Review  "  he  conducte<l
it  with  William  Cullen  Br\'ant  in  182.V7.  From
the  latter  year  till  his  deatfi  he  was  an  editor  of  the
"Commercial  Advertiser."  During  the  latter  part
of  his  life  he  lived  in  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  then  a  rural
village,  the  V)eauties  of  whose  environs  he  celebrated
in  some  of  his  writings.  Besides  the  works  that
have  been  mentionetl  alx)ve.  he  wrote  "  The  Talis-
man." an  annual,
jointly  with  Will-
iam Cullen  Brvant
andGuliun  C.  "Ver-
planck  (3  vols.,
1828 -'30;  repub-
lished as  "  Miscel-
lanies"). In  this
apjH'ared  "  The
Dream  of  the  Prin-
cess Pajwmtzin,"
one  of  his  longest
|)oems.  He  con-
tribut«Ml  to  "  Tales
of  Glaul)er  S|)a,"
for  which  he  wrote
the  humorous  in-
tnxluction  (2  vols.,
18:)2),  and  was  also
the  author  of  "Life
and  Correspond-
enceof  Paul. J  ones"
(1831).  His  works  were  edited,  with  a  memoir,  by
Gulian  C.  Veqilanck  (2  vols..  New  York.  18.34).

SANDYS,  Sir  Edwin,  Knelish  statesman,  b.  in"
Worci'ster  in  VMl ;  d.  in  Xorthl)ome.  Kent,  in
1829.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was  bishop  of
Won-ester.  and  afterwanl  archbishop  of  York.  The
son  was  educated  at  Oxford,  supported  the  claims


/^i^.i'^if^^


^u^a*^?^


of  James  I.  to  the  English  thrrme.  and  was  knighted
in  160:3.  He  Ix-came  an  a<-tive  menilMT  of  the  first
London  company  for  Virginia.  le<l  in  n-formatory
measures,  and  intnxluced  the  vote  by  ballot.  Ho
was  electe<l  treasurer  (the  chief  ofllcer  of  the  com-
I>any)  in  1019,  and  establisheil  represcntati\'o  gov-
ernment in  the  colony,  whose  security  and  pn>»-
perityhe  did  much  U>  promote.  Througli  StNtnish
mfluence.  King  James,  in  violation  of  the  cnarter,
forbiule  his  re-<'lecti«>n  in  102O,  but  his  succewior,
the  Karl  of  S)uthampton,  continued  his  [lolicy.
He  publishe<l  "  Kuro|>a  .Speculum,  or  a  Survey  of
the  State  of  Relicion  in  tlie  Western  Part  of  the
World"  (l»est  e«l.,  1037).— His  brother.  <j<Mlltr««
imet.  b.  in  BishopsthoriK'  in  1577:  d.  in  iJoxley  ab-
tx>y.  Kent,  in  March.  1044.  was  e<Iiicated  at  Oxford,
and  in  1021  Ixn-ame  colonial  freasurer  of  Virginia,
where  he  built  the
first  water-mill,
promoted  the  es-
tablishment of
iron-works,  and  in
1022  introductni
ship-building.  His
translation  of  the
last  ten  books  of
Ovid's  "Metamor-
phoses," which  he
accomplished  dur-
ing his  stay  (Lon-
don, 1826),  is  the
first  English  lit-
erary prcxluction
of  any  value  that
was  written  in
this  country.  In
his  dedication  to
Charles  I.  he  says-
it  was  "limned  by

that  imperfect  light  which  was  snatched  from  the
hours  of  night  and  repose."  lie  retunied  to  Eng-
land in  1624.  .Sandys  is  well  known  as  a  traveller
from  his  "  Relation  of  a  Jouniey  "  in  the  countries
on  the  Mediterranean  sea  and  the  Holy  Ijand(Ix)n-
don,  1015),  and  he  also  jiublished  metrical  ver-
sions of  the  Psalms  (10J30),  the  .Song  of  Solomon
(1039),  and  other  parts  of  the  .Scriptures.  A  col-
lected edition  of  his  works  has  been  published  (2
vols.,  Ix)ndon,  1872).  See  his  life  by  Henry  J.
To<ld,  prefixed  to  selections  from  his  metrical
pa  nil  »h  rases  (1839).

SANFORD,  Charles  W.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Newark,
N.  J..  5  Mav,  1790;  d.  in  Avon  Springs;  Livingston
CO.,  N.  Y.,  25  Julv,  1878.  He  studietl  law  in  the
office  of  Ogden  IlofTman  in  New  York  city,  and
wjis  admittinl  to  the  l)ar  there,  where  he  remaine<l
in  continuous  practice  throughout  his  life.  He
was  counsel  for  the  Harlem  railroad  for  more  than
twenty  years,  and  became  well  known  from  his
connection  with  several  important  suits.  He  was
vice-president  of  the  liar  ass<x'iation  and  a  mem-
lx;r  of  the  liaw  institute.  He  enlisted  as  a  private
in  the  3d  New  York  militia  regiment,  and  was  pro-
moted until  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  1st
division.  In  1867  he  was  rctirwl  by  (lov.  Reuben
E.  Fenton.  after  beine  at  the  head  of  the  military
organization  in  New  York  city  for  more  than  thirty
years.  On  him  devolve<l  the  responsibility  of  di-
rec-ting  the  tr<x>ps  that  were  calhnl  out  to  suppress
the  Astor  place.  Flour,  Strcet-pn-achers',  and  Draft
riots.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  re-
s|x)n<le<I  to  the  first  call  for  three-months  volun-
teers, and  was  placed  at  the  head  of  a  division  un-
der Gen.  Rolx?rt  Patterson.  He  was  in  command
at  Harper's  Ferry  during  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.


390


SANFORD


SAN FORD


i;


In  his  early  life  Gen.  Sanford  had  some  exjwrience
as  a  manapor,  but  having  lost  both  of  his  theatres
by  firo,  ho  abandoned  that  field  of  speculation.

SANFORD,  David,  clergyman,  I),  in  New  Mil-
ford,  Conn.,  11  Dec,  1787:  d.  in  Medway,  Mass.,
7  April,  1810.  lie  was  graduated  at  Yale"  in  1755
and  studied  theology,  but,  instead  of  entering  the
ministry,  removed  to  Great  liarrington,  Mass.,
where  he  settled  on  a  farm.  Subsequently,  through
his  brother-in-law,  Samuel  Hopkins,  a  clergyman,
his  attention  being  again  turned  to  the  pulpit,  he
resiimed  his  studies,  and  on  14  April,  1773,  was
ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at
Medway,  Mass.,  where  he  passed  the  remainder  of
his  life,  with  the  exception  of  a  brief  period,  dur-
ing which  he  served  as  a  chaplain  in  the  Revolution-
ary army.  As  an  orator  Mr.  Sanford  possessed  un-
usual gifts.  As  a  preacher  he  especially  excelled  in
"tracing  the  windings  of  the  human  heart,  in
tearing  from  the  hypocrite  his  mask,  in  rousing
the  slumbering  conscience,  and  in  quickening  the
sluggish  affections."  lie  carlv  resisted  the  oppres-
sion of  Great  Britain,  and  relinquished  his  salary
for  a  time.  He  was  occasionally  nlunt  and  severe,
especially  when  he  met  with  those  that  came  short
of  his  own  high  standard  of  clerical  dignity  and
devotion.  Thus,  when  a  licentiate  with  clownish
manners  and  a  rustic  garb  asked  what  system  of
divinity  he  would  recommend,  he  replied :  "  Lord
Chesterfield's  divinity  to  you ! "  On  another  occa-
sion, on  hearing  that  a  young  preacher  had  refused
a  call  on  the  ground  that  there  was  an  extensive
pine-swamp  in  the  place,  he  exclaimed:  "Young
man,  it  is  none  of  your  business  where  God  has
ut  his  pine-swamps."  Mr.  Sanford  never  wrote
is  sermons,  and  the  only  publications  bearing  his
name  are  two  "  Dissertations  "  issued  in  1810,  one
"  On  the  Nature  and  Constitution  of  the  Law  given
to  Adam  in  Paradise,"  and  the  other  "On  the
Scene  of  Christ  in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane."

SANFORD,  Ezekiel,  author,  b.  in  Ridgefield,
Fairfield  co..  Conn.,  in  179G;  d.  in  Columbia,  S.  C,
in  1822.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1815,  and
in  1819  published  "  A  History  of  the  United  States
before  tne  Revolution,  with  Some  Account  of  the
Aborigines  "  (Philadelphia).  Of  this  work  Nathan
Hale  {g.  V.)  wrote  in  the  "North  American  Re-
view "  in  September  of  that  year :  "  We  have  pro-
ceeded far  enough,  we  trust,  to  support  our  charge
of  gross  inaccuracy  in  the  work  before  us."  The
same  year  Mr.  Sanford  projected  an  expurgated
edition  of the British poets  with biographical

Erefaces  in  fifty  volumes,  twenty-two  of  which  he
ad  published  when  his  health  failed  (Philadel-
Ehia),  and  the  remainder  of  the  series  was  edited
y  Robert  Walsh,  for  many  years  U.  S,  consul  in
Paris.  Sanford  left  in  manuscript  a  satirical  novel
entitled  "  The  Humors  of  p]utopia."

SANFORD,  Henry  Sheltoii,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Woodbury,  Conn.,  15  June,  1823.  He  entered
Washington  (now  Trinity)  college  in  1841,  but  was
not  graduated,  and  afterward  studied  at  Heidel-
berg, where  in  1854  he  received  the  degree  of
J.  U.  D.  He  was  secretary  of  the  U.  S.  legation
in  Paris  in  1849-'53,  and  then  charge  d'affaires
till  April,  1854.  He  resigned  on  the  question  of
citizen's  dress  for  diplomatic  uniform,  refusing  to
conform  to  Minister  Mason's  course,  which  led,
on  Senator  Charles  Sumner's  motion,  to  the  pres-
ent law,  enforcing  Sec.  Marcy's  circular  instruc-
tion recommending  citizen's  dress  as  a  diplomatic
uniform.  From  1861  till  1869  he  was  U.  S.  minis-
ter to  Belgium,  where  he  negotiated  and  signed
the  Scheldt  treaty,  a  treaty  of  commerce  and  navi-
gation, a  consular  convention  (the  first  ever  made


with  Belgium),  a  trade-mark,  and  naturalization
conventions.  In  1877  he  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  International  African  association  (now  the
Independent  state  of  the  Congo),  and  became  a
member  of  the  executive  committee,  representing
on  it  the  English-speaking  races.  As  its  plenipo-
tentiary at  Washington  he  secured  recognition  of
its  flag  in  April,  1884,  and  he  was  sent  as  a  dele-
gate of  the  L.  S.  government  to  the  Berlin  Congo
conference  of  1885-'6,  which  opened  to  free-traae
and  neutrality  a  territory  of  1,000.000  square  miles,
with  a  population  of  50,000,000.  In  1870  Mr.
Sanford  founded  the  city  of  Sanford,  Fla.,  and  en-
gaged in  orange-culture,  introducing  into  Florida
various  new  cultures,  notably  that  of  the  lemon.
Trinity  gave  him  the  degrree  of  LL.  D.  in  1849.
Various  oflicial  reports  of  his  have  been  published
bv'  congress,  including  one  on  "Penal  Codes  in
Europe  "  (Washington,  1864),  and  the  "  Averdslood
Correspondence,"  also  published  by  congress,  which
treated  very  fully  of  several  important  questions  of
international  law.

SANFORD,  Joseph,  clergvman,  b.  in  Vernon,
Vt.,  6  Feb.,  1797;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25  Dec.,
1831.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1820,  and  at
Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1823,  ordained
as  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  cfiurch  in  Brooklyn,
N.  v.,  in  October  of  that  year,  and  from  1829  till
his  death  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Philadelphia.
He  was  distinguished  for  his  power  to  move  the
sympathies  and  emotions  of  his  audiences.  See  his
"  Memoirs,"  by  Robert  Baird  (Philadelphia,  1836).

SANFORD,  Nathan,  senator,  b.  in  Briug©-
hampton,  Suffolk  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  Nov.,  1777;  d.  in
Flushing,  N.  Y.,  17  Oct.,  1838.  He  was  educated
at  Yale  college,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1799,  and
Ijcgan  practice  in
New  York  city.
He  was  appoint-
ed to  several  local
offices,  and  on  the
accession  of  Presi-
dent Jefferson  was
made  U.  S.  com-
missioner in  bank-
iiiptcv.  From  1803
till  1816  he  was
U.  S.  district  attor-
ney. This  was  the
period  of  the  com-
mercial difficulties
with  France,  of
the  "  embargo,"
and  of  the  war
of  1812,  involving
great  embarrass-
ment to  American
commerce.  To  the  discussion  of  the  difficult  legal
q^uestions  arising  out  of  the  occurrences  of  this
time,  Mr.  Sanford  brought  unusual  ability,  exten-
sive learning,  and  a  liberal  spirit.  While  holding
this  office,  he  was  twice  elected  to  the  New  York
assembly,  of  which  he  was  chosen  speaker  in  1811.
From  1812  till  1815  he  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate,  which  then,  in  addition  to  its  legislative
functions,  sat  as  a  court  for  the  correction  of  er-
rors. He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  New
York  as  a  Democrat,  and  served  from  4  Dec,  1815,
till  3  March,  1821.  when  he  was  sent  as  a  dele-

fate  to  the  State  constitutional  convention.  There
e  proposed  amendments,  which  were  adopted,
abolishing  the  property  qualification  for  the  elec-
tive franchise.  On  the  adoption  of  the  new  con-
stitution he  was  appointed  to  the  office  of  chan-


^s^^^*^^^


SANPORD


SANOSTER


391


cellar,  a«  KUCHi»sn«)r  «>f  Jaiiu*}*  Kont.  After  four
vpani'  iiorviit'  lie  ^>^icl)«*<l  <>ii  acniuiit  of  iin{NiinHl
health,  nml  whm  af^iii  el(>ctf<l  to  tliu  V.  S.  senate,
»er\in)f  from  SI  Jan..  1820,  till  3  Mnrth,  1H81.  Dur-
ing his  s4'C(>n«i  tenn  m*  si-nator  his  effortM  were  e»pe-
cially  iliriH-liHl  toward  s^furinK  »  ri'form  of  the
rurri'ncy,  hikI  a  chanp*  in  the  stamhtnl  of  the  gold
coinaut'  was  nH-oninifntl*"*!  Iiy  him  in  an  eiabomte
re|K)rt  that  forninl  tho  Uisis  of  siil>M'<|iK*nt  legisla-
tion. H«'  also  riH-omini'mlf*!  a  line  of  jM)licy  towanl
France  in  r«*taliation  for  tlie  dilatory  course  pur-
sue*! t)y  her  reganling  indemnity  for  depredations
on  our  commerce,  which,  though  rejei'ted  at  the
time,  wa.-*  afterwartl  approval  by  President  Jack-
son and  ado[it«Hl  by  congres.s.  At  the  expiration
of  his  semitoriiil  term  he  n'tin*<l  to  his  estate  on
liong  Isiaixl,  wher»'  he  ri'sid***!  until  his  death.  His
thinl  wife  wjus  Mary  nuchanan.  granddaughter  of
Thomjus  McKean.  signer  of  the  i>e<-laration  of  In-
de|H«ndence.  The  wiMlding  ceremony  was  held  in
the  White  Ilouse,  President  John  (^uincy  Adams,
Miss  Huchanan's  nearest  relative,  giving  awav  the
bride.— His  son,  Edward,  p<H't,  b.  in  AUwny,  Jf.  Y.,
8  July,  ISOfl;  d.  in  Gowanda,  Cattaraugus  co.,
N.  Y.',  28  Aug.,  1870,  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1824,  and  studied  law,  but  never  prac-
ti.se<l,  preferring  journalism,  politics,  and  literature.
His  first  engagement  was  ujH)n  the  etlitorial  staff
of  a  Br(H)klyn  newspajx'r.  He  was  suljsequently
c<mnecte<l  with  the  Jsew  York  "Standard"  and
"Times."  with  the  latter  in  1836-'7.  He  next  be-
came ass<x?iate  cnlitor  of  the  Wa.shington  "Olob>e,"
the  organ  of  the  Van  Hun-n  mlmini-stration.  Re-
turning to  New  York  city  in  ISW,  he  was  made
assistant  naval  oflicer  at  that  port,  and  also  held
the  office  of  secretary  to  the  connnission  to  restore
the  duties  on  gtxxls  that  had  been  destroyed  by  the
great  fire  of  18JW.  In  \H4S  he  was  elected  to  the
state  senate.  He  was  a  fretjuent  contributor  of
both  prose  and  verse  to  the  "  New  York  Mirror"
the  "  Spirit  of  the  Times,"  and  the  "  Knicker-
bocker magazine.  Among  his  best-known  com-
positions, only  a  few  of  wliich  ap[)eared  over  his
own  name,  are  a  p<ietical  mldress  to  "lilack  Hawk"
and  "The  I^oves  of  the  Shell-Fishes."  Other  speci-
mens of  his  graceful  and  humorous  verse  are  pub-
lished in  various  collections.

SANFORI),  Thaddens,  journalist,  b.  in  Con-
necticut in  17'Jl :  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  30  April,  18G7.
Ho  went  to  New  York  city  in  early  life,  and  en-
gaged in  commercial  imrsuits  until  1822,  when  he
pemovctl  to  Mobile,  Ala.,  and  in  1828  tx'came  the
editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Mobile  Register."
He  continued  to  conduct  that  journal,  with  the
exception  of  the  jierio*!  between  1837  and  1841,  for
twenty-six  years.  In  1833  he  was  elected  president
of  the  Bank  of  Mobile,  and  in  1853  he  wa.s  a{>-

1  pointed  collector  of  the  nort  bv  Prt>sident  Pierce,
lolding  the  office  throughout  Ruchanan's  admin-
istration. On  the  organization  of  the  Confederate
p)vernment  he  was  reapiK)inte«l,  and  sul)se<iuently,
in  addition,  discharged  the  duties  of  "  dejwsitary  "
for  the  Corjfederate  treasury.  Mr.  Sanford  was
intimatelv  connected  with  the  pmgress  and  pros-
perity of  liis  adoptc<l  city  for  nearly  half  a  century.
SANFrilNTES.  Salvador  (san-foo-ain'-tays),
Chilian  |>oet.  b,  in  .Sitntiago,  2  Feb.,  1817 ;  d.  there,
17  July.  18<i0.  He  followcii  preriaratory  studies  in
the  National  institute,  antl  early  showe<l  literary
tastes,  but.  aceonling  to  his  father's  wi.shes,  entered
commercial  life  in  tne  latter's  store.  There  he  at-
tracte<l  in  18:^:)  the  attention  of  Andres  Hello  (q.  v.),
who,  rwognizing  the  youth's  talent.  befriende<!
him,  and  the  next  year  publisbeil  in  his  |>a{>er  "  El
Araucano,"  a  translation  from  Racine  by  Sanfuen-


tea.  Tlie  latter  cntennl  public  life  as  sorretary  of
the  legation  that  was  sent  to  Peni  in  188H.  return(>d
to  Chili  in  1837.  was  a{i|M>inte4l  clerk  of  the  minis-
try of  justice  and  public  instruction,  and  in  1843
lK>came  general  s«'<'retary  of  the  newly  organized
university.  In  1845  he  was  made  intendant  of  the
pr*»vince  of  Valdivia,  and  in  February,  1847,  he  was
called  to  ck-cui»v  the  ministry  of  public  instruction,
which  place  he  held  till  June,  1841>.  In  1855  he
was  ap|K^intiHl  judge  of  the  court  of  ap|>eals  of
.Santiago,  in  1857  he  was  for  the  se<-ond  time  min-
ister of  public  instruction,  and  in  1858  he  was
elwtcil  judge  of  the  supn>me  court,  which  place  be
held  till  his  death.  He  wrote  "Cau|M»lican,"  a
dnima  in  verse  (.Santiago,  1885);  "  El  Camtmiiario**
(1838):  "  Leyendas  v  obras  dramdticas  "  (Santiago,
1849-'50);  "Chile  ilesiJe  la  luitalla  de  Chacabuco
hasta  la  <le  Mai|)6  "  (1850) ;  "  Ricardo  v  Lucia,  o  la
destruccion  de  la  Im|K>rial  "  (2  vols.,  18^7) ;  "Teudo,
6  memorias  de  un  solitario"  (1858);  and  "  Dramas
inwlitos"  (180;i).  In  1873  a  motiument  waserect<Hl
in  Santiago  to  t\}e  memory  of  Sanfuentes,  (Jarcia
Reyes,  aiul  T(M'onial.

sAN<jER,  (ieorgo  Partridge,  lawyer,  b.  in  Do-
ver. Mass..  27  Nov..  1811):  d.  in  Sw«inps«;ott.  Mass.,
3  July,  185K).  He  was gnwluateil  at  Harvard  in  1840,
and  for  a  time  was  tutor.  He  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitte<l  to  the  bar,  and  re(;eiv(Hl  the  degree  of  LIj.  B.
from  Harvard  in  1844-  He  was  for  many  years  the
e<litor  of  "The  American  Almanac"  (Boston). and
also  edited  the  Boston  "  Law  Reporter "  (vols,
xi.-xvi.)  in  conjunction  with  Stephen  II.  Phillips
and  George  S.  Hale,  and  after  May.  18(50.  alone.
He  etlited,  with  George  Minot.  the  "  Unite<l  States
Statutes  at  Large,  Treaties,  Pnx-lamations,  etc."
(Boston),  and  in  1802-'8,  with  John  G.  Ij<x'ke,  re-
vised and  consolidated  the  city  ordinances  of  Boa-
ton,  Mass..  and  collate<l  the  state  munici[ml  laws.

SAN(j8TER,  Charles,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Kingston,  Ontario,  10  July.  1822.  He  was  almost
entirely  self-educated.  \Vhen  fifteen  years  of  age
he  was  employed  in  the  lalM>ratory  at  t'ort  Henry,
Kingston,  antl  afterward  in  the  ordnance  office  as
a  messenger  and  clerk,  where  he  remaine<l  for  ten
years.  In  1849  he  became  editor  of  the  Amherst-
burg  "Courier,"  and  the  same  year  returned  to
Kingston  and  formc^l  a  connection  with  the  press
of  that  city.  Since  then  he  has  gainetl  a  reputa-
tion as  a  poet,  and  his  comi>ositions  have  been
favorably  reviewed  both  here  and  in  P'urope.  He
has  published  "St.  I^awrence  and  the  Saguenay,
and  other  P<xMns  "  (Kingston.  IK'iO).  and  "  Hesperus
and  other  Pch'ius  and  Lyrics"  (1800).

SANCiiSTER,  John  Herbert,  Canadian  author,
b.  in  London,  Ont..  20  March,  18;n.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Victoria  college  in  arts  in  1861  and  in  medi-
cine in  18(W,  has  Ix-en  princifNil  of  the  Toronto
normal  school,  professor  of  chemistry  and  botany
in  the  University  of  Victoria  college,  and  is  now
(1888)  engage<l  in  active  practice  as  a  physician.
He  has  publishe<i  "Natural  Philosophy"  (Mon-
treal, 18()l-'2):  "Elementary  Arithmetic"  (1862);
"Students'  Note-liook  on  Inorganic  Chemistry"
(1802):  "National  Arithmetic  Revised"  (1864);
and  "  Elements  of  Algebra"  (1864).

SANtiSTER,  Marararet  EUzabeth.  author,  b.
in  New  K.K-helle,  N.  \ ..  22  Feb..  \KiH.  Her  maiden
name  was  Munson.  She  waif  e<lucate<l  chiefly  at
home,  and  in  1858  marritnl  Gei)rge  Sangster.  .She
hiis  done  a  large  amount  of  worK  as  a  journalist,
hKving  been  ass<x-iate  editor  of  "Hearth  and
Home"  in  1871-'3,  of  the  "Christian  at  Work"  in
1873-'9,  of  the  "  Christian  Intelligencer"  from  1879
till  the  present  time  (1888),  and  of  "Harper's
Young  People"  since  1882. Uer  publications  in


392


SANKEY


SAN  MARTIN


book-form  include  "Manual  of  Missions  of  the
Reformed  Church  in  America  "  (New  York,  1878);
"  Poems  of  the  Household  "  (Boston,  1883) :  *'  Home
Fairies  and  Heart  Flowers"  (New  York,  1887);
and  several  Sunday-school  books.  Her  most  suc-
cessfiil  poems  are  "  Our  Own,"  "  The  Sin  of  Omis-
sion," and  "  Are  the  Children  at  Homef  "

SANKEY,  Ira  David,  evangelist,  b,  in  Etlin-
burjjh,  Lawrence  co.,  Pa.,  28  Aug.,  1840.  His  fa-
ther, David,  was  for  many  years  a  state  senator,
president  of  a  bank,  and  an  editor.  As  a  boy,  Ira
displayed  a  great  liking  for  music.  The  family
removed  to  New  Castle.  Pa.,  where,  at  the  age  of
fifteen,  he  united  with  the  Methodist  church,  of
which  his  parents  were  meml)ers.  He  became  leader
of  the  choir,  superintendent  of  the  Sunday-school,
and  president  of  the  Young  men's  Christian  asso-
ciation in  the  town.  In  1870  he  was  delegated
to  the  Indiana|H)lis  international  convention  of
the  last-named  body,  where  he  first  met  Dwight
L.  Moody.  Since  that  time  he  has  been  asso-
ciated with  him  in  his  evangelistic  work  as  a  singer,
and  has  attained  a  wide  reputation.  His  melo-
dies, whether  composed  by  Mr.  Sankey  or  selected,
are  simple,  pleasing,  and  effective,  readily  caught,
and  easily  remembered.  On  23  April,  1886,  he
presented  to  the  town  of  New  Castle,  Pa.,  as  a  free
gift,  a  Young  men's  Christian  association  building,
equipped  with  gymnasium,  reading-rooms,  halls,
school-rooms,  and  an  art  gallery,  and  since  then  he
has  also  given  a  valuable  building -site  to  the
church  with  which  he  was  fii*st  connected.  Mr.
Sankey,  however,  does  not  confine  himself  exclu-
sively to  singing:  he  has  always  taken  an  active
Sart  in  the  inquiry  -  room,  and  of  late  has  ad-
ressed  meetings  very  acceptably.  He  has  a  fine
baritone  voice,  and  accompanies  himself  on  the
harmonium,  singing  solos,  and  also  leading  the
audiences.  Mr.  Sankey's  compilation  of  "Sjvcred
Songs  and  Solos "  has  been  translated  into  many
languages,  and  has  had  a  larger  circulation  than
anv  other  book  of  hvmns.

San  MARTIN,  Jos^  de,  Argentine  soldier,  b.
in  Yapeyu,  25  Feb.,  1778;  d.  in  Boulogne,  France,
17  Aug.,  1850.  At  the  age  of  eight  years  he  was
sent  to  Spain,  where  he  was  educated  in  the  College
of  the  nobility,  and,  entering  the  army  in  1791,
served  with  credit  during  the  French  invasion.
Being  promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  he  left  the
army  to  offer  his  services  in  the  cause  of  South
American  independence,  and  arrived  in  March,
1812,  in  Buenos  Ayres.  The  government  commis-
sioned him,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  to  organize  a
regiment  of  mounted  grenadiers,  with  wnich  he
took  part  in  the  campaign  against  the  viceroy
Vigodet,  whom  he  defeated,  13  Jan.,  1813,  at  San
Lorenzo.  On  18  Jan.,  1814,  he  was  appointed
commander-in-chief  of  the  army  in  upper  Peru,  to
replace  Belgrano;  but,  seeing  that  the  Spanish
power  in  America  could  not  be  broken  until  it
should  be  attacked  from  the  Pacific  coast  and  de-
prived of  the  rich  resources  of  Peni,  he  matured  a
scheme  for  an  invasion  of  Chili,  and,  under  the
pretext  of  feeble  health,  retired  from  the  command
of  the  army  and  went  to  the  province  of  Cuyo  as
governor  in  September,  1814.  There,  with  the  co-
operation of  the  Chilian  emigrants,  he  organized
the  famous  army  of  the  Andes,  and,  obtaining  the
assent  and  tacit  aid  of  the  Argentine  director,
Pueyrredon,  he  set  out  with  his  army  on  21  Jan.,
1817,  from  Mendoza.  Misleading  the  Spanish
generals  by  false  rejwrts,  he  crossed  the  Andes  un-
der great  difficulties  by  the  pass  of  Uspallata,  and,
surprising  the  Spanish  at  Chacabuco,  totally  routed
them  on  12  Feb.,  entering  the  capital  triumphantly


on  the  15th.  He  was  elected  supreme  chief  of  the
republic,  but  declined  and  proposed  O'Higgins,
only  reserving  the  command  of  the  auxiliary  Ar-
gentine army.  The  sum  of  f  10,000,  offered  him
by  the  municipality  he  also  refused,  dedicating  it
to  the  foundation  of  a  library  in  Santiago.  After
the  surprise  of  the  united  army  by  the  Spaniards
at  Cancha  Rayada,  19  March.  1818,  he  reorganizetl
his  forces  and  totally  defeated  the  royalists  at
Maipo  on  5  April  of  that  year,  liberating  Chili
from  the  Spanish  yoke.  After  a  visit  to  Buenos
Ayres,  he  returned  in  October  to  Chili,  and  soon  be-
gan to  organize,
with  O'Higgins,
a  fleet  and  array
for  the  invasion
of  Peru.  In
May,  1820,  he
was  called  with
his  troops  to
Buenos  Ayre.*,
but  disobeving,
as  no  established
government  ex-
isted in  the  Ar-
gentine, he  was
proclaimed  by
his  army  an  in-
dependent chief,
and  on  20  Aug.
sailed  with  an
army  of  4,500  men  on  Admiral  Cochrane's  fleet  from
Valparaiso,  landing  on  7  Sept.  at  Pisco.  After  a
brilliant  campaign  he  entered  Lima,  which  had  been
abandoned  by  the  Spaniards  on  12  July,  1821,  and
on  27  July  proclaimed  the  independence  of  Peru,
being  elected  on  3  Aug.  by  the  municipality  chief
of  the  government,  under  the  title  of  protector.
During  his  short  administration  he  alx)lished
slavery  and  the  tribute  that  had  been  levied  on  the
Indians,  and  introtluced  many  other  reforms,
especially  in  the  system  of  education.  He  sent  the
famous  regiment  of  mounted  grenadiers  to  assist
Bolivar  in  his  struggle  for  independence  in  Ecua-
dor, and,  seeing  the  importance  of  united  action,
he  met  him  in  Guayacjuil  on  25  July,  1822.  What
passed  at  this  interview  is  unknown,  but  on  his
return  to  Lima,  San  Martin  resigned  on  22  Aug.,
and,  leaving  part  of  his  army  to  assist  Gen.  Sucre,
he  went  to  Europe,  where  he  established  himself
in  Bnissels.  In  1828  he  returned  to  Buenos  Avres
shortly  after  the  battle  of  Ituzaingo,  and,  finding
his  country  plunged  in  intestine  troubles,  returned
to  Brussels,  as  he  had  made  a  vow  never  to  un-
sheath  his  sword  in  civil  war,  and  in  1830  settled
in  Paris.  Chili,  Buenos  Ayres,  and  Peru  have
erected  statues  in  his  honor.  The  one  in  Buenos
Avres  is  shown  in  the  engraving.

SAN  MARTIN,  Tonics  de,  Spanish  -  Ameri-
can bishop,  b.  in  Cordova,  Spain,  in  1482 :  d.  in
Lima,  Peru,  in  1554.  He  entered  the  Dominican
order,  and  was  appointed  regent  of  studies  in  the
College  of  St.  Thomas,  Seville.  While  here  he  asked
to  1x5  sent  to  Santo  Domingo  as  missionary  to  the
Indians.  He  arrived  in  that  island  in  1525,  and  at
once  sided  with  Las  Casi^s  in  defending  the  rights
of  the  natives.  He  was  president  of  the  royal  audi-
ence of  Santo  Domingo  till  1529,  when  he  went  to
Spain  in  the  interests  of  the  colony.  Learning
that  a  bodv  of  Dominicans  were  about  to  follow
Pizarro  to  t'eni,  he  resigned  his  title  of  president,
and  went  with  them.  lie  remained  in  San  Miguel
de  Piura  when  Pizarro  marched  to  meet  Atahualpa
at  Caxamarca,  but  entered  Cuzco  after  its  ca|>-
ture,  and  then  went  to  the  province  of  Charcas,


SAN  ROMAN


SANTA-ANNA


of  which  ho  WB«  tho  first  ap«i«tlo.  In  1540  he
WM  niadc  vicar  pnivincinl  of  the  Doininicunrt  of
Peru,  and  lM'>;nn  the  const  met  inn  of  tlic  convent  of
San  Rosario  in  Lima,  and  wa.H  afterwani  a|)|Miintc<l
provincial  for  ei^ht  year*.  In  1541.  after  the  un-
MifQ«inntion  of  Piuirro  ami  the  ppM-laninlion  of  the
(•on  of  Alnmjrro  as  caiituin-ffenenil  of  IVru,  Va<'a
cle  CiLHtrt),  piviTiior  of  Peru,  who  wjls  then  at
Panama,  nuule  San  Martin  his  r«>pres«'ntafive.  lie
ii«»«>ntM(Ml  tile  leading;  inhabitants  of  Lima,  and
pn)jHise<l  the  eliH'tion  nf  a  lieutenant-pMieral  to  nile
the  ctmntr)'  until  the  povemor  should  arrive.  Mis
a(lvi<i>  was  followtNl,  and  the  choic(>  fell  on  Fran-
cisco de  Ilarrionucvo.  In  the  Iwttle  of  Chuiuis  in
1542,  iH'twtH'n  the  partisans  of  Almajjro  and  the
viceroy,  he  was  pres«'nt  at  the  solicitation  of  the
latter,  hut  attended  impartially  to  the  wonnde«i  on
l>oth  si<les.  In  154iJ  he  receivwl  a  letttT  from
Charles  V.  charjjinjr  him  to  see  to  the  execution  of
the  ordijjances  promul^ited  at  the  instance  of
La.s  C'asas  for  the  protectum  of  the  natives.  In
the  civil  war  that  re-sulte<l  from  the  effort  to  give
effect  to  these  onlinanc-es,  he  made  several  attempts
to  bring al>out  a  reconciliation  lH>tween  the  viceroy.
Nufie/  Vela,  and  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and  on  the  tri-
umph of  the  latter  was  sent  by  him,  in  conjunction
witn  the  archbishop  of  Lima,  t<i  Spain,  to  solicit  an
amnesty.  lie  set  out  in  154<5.  but.  meeting  Pedro
de  la  UascA  at  Panama,  who  had  arrived  from  Spain
with  full  i>ower  to  restore  order  in  Peru,  he  n>turned
to  Lima.  In  1550  he  was  commissione«l  by  the  city
of  Lima  to  treat  with  the  c*ourt  of  SjMiin  concerning
the  atlministrntion  of  the  countrv'.  The  emperor
not  only  grante<l  him  all  the  favors  he  asked  for  the
city,  the  princi|«l  of  whir-h  was  the  establishment
of  a  university,  but  pive  him  the  title  of  first
bishop  of  Ijh  Plata  and  the  regency  of  the  royal
audience  in  that  city.  On  his  arrival  in  Lima  he
was  attacked  by  the  iiialadv  of  which  he  died.

SAN  ROMAN,  Miguel  de.  Peruvian  soldier.
b.  in  Puno  in  1802:  d.  in  Chorrillos,  3  April,  1863.
He  was  the  son  of  an  Indian  chief,  and  accom-
paniefl  his  father  in  the  revolt  of  Pumacahua
(o.  v.),  and.  when  the  latter  was  captured  and  shot,
tne  l)oy  swore  vengeance  against  the  Spaniards.  In
1821  he  enteretl  the  army  and  took  part  in  the
campaign  of  independence.  During  the  second  siege
of  Callao  in  1820,  by  order  of  lioMvar  he  protected
BellavistA.  In  the  campaign  of  the  restoration
he  serveil  in  the  constitutional  armv,  and  was  pres-
ent in  the  little  of  Yungai,  30  Jan..  imQ.  In
1841, during  the  war  against  liolivin.  he  commanded
one  of  the  divisions  of  the  Peruvian  army,  and
after  the  battle  of  Ingavi  on  18  Nov..  which  was
fatal  to  his  republic,  he  crosse<I  Desaguadero  river,
occupie*!  the  department  of  Puno,  and  there  he
employed  himself  in  the  reorganization  of  the
armv.  In  1845  he  was  elected  senator  of  the  re-
public, and  he  afterwani  lx>came  i)residcnt  of  the
council  of  state,  and  in  conse<juence  vice-president
of  the  republic.  In  1851.  as  a  deputy,  he  occupied
his  place  in  the  legislative  iKxIy.  lie  was  ap|>ointe(l
minister  of  war  in  1855.  and  in  18.50  was  a  memln'r
of  the  constituent  c<mgn»ss,  and  an  author  of  the
constitution  that  was  promulgatwl  that  year.  In
18.J8.  (luring  several  months,  he  occupied  the  ex-
ecutive as  president  of  the  council  of  ministers.
In  1802  ho  was  elwted  president  of  the  republic;
but  his  ndtninistration  was  of  short  duration,  Jis  he
die<l  early  in  the  following  vear.

SANTA-ANNA.  Antonio  Lopez  de,  president
of  Mexico,  b.  in  .)ala|ia,  21  Feb.,  1795;  d.  in  the
city  of  Mexico.  20  June.  1870.  He  entere«l  the
Spanish  army  as  a  cadet  on  0  Julv,  1810.  and  servetl
against  the  patriots,  rising  gnuiually  till  in  April,


1821.  he  pronounc«Ml  for  the  Plan  de  Iguala  and
jointnl  the  army  «)f  Iturbide.  by  whom  he  was  pro-
mote«I  brigadier  and  governor  «»f  Vi-rnCniz.  After
Iturbide  was  proclaime<I  em|M'ror,  Santa-Anna  be-
gan to  conspire  against  him,  and.  when  he  was
relieve*!  of  his  command  and  onlere«l  to  Mexico.be
pHK-laimed  there|>ublicin  Vera  Cruz  on  2  iKf.,  1828.
In  1823  he  pron<iunce<l  in  .San  Luis  Potosi  for
federation,  and  when  that  principle  was  victorioos
he  was  ap[>oiiit(Hl  governi»r  <»f  Yucatan,  and  after-
wani of  \  era  Cruz.  On  12  Sept..  182X,  he  Iiea4le4l
a  n-volt  against  the  election  of  (iomez  Pe<lraza.
•leclaring  in  favor  of  (ten.  Vicente  (Jiiern-ro.  and
after  the  triumph  <>f  the  latter  he  was  ap[>ointed
gt>vemor  and  commander  of  Vera  Cruz.  There
lie  liegan  to  assemble  forces  against  a  threatene<l
,S[)anish  invasion,  although  his  enemies  insinuated
revolutionary  motives,  atul  when,  on  20  July.  182D.
(Jen.  Barradas,  with  an  army  of  3,000  men,  landed
near  Tampico,  Santa-Anna,  without  awaiting  or-
ders from  ^lexico,  man-lied  against  the  enemy,
whom  he  defeated  on  20  Aug.  and  10  Sept.,  and
forced  to  capitulate  on  the  next  day.  He  wa.s  pro-
moted major-general,  but  retinal  to  his  estate,
where  he  began  to  intrigue  against  the  new  presi-
dent, liuslamante.  On  2  Jan.,  18Ji2,  he  pronounced
in  open  revolt  at  Vera  Cniz.  and  after  finally  de-
feating Kustamante  on  12  Nov.,  1832,  at  Ca.sa»
Blancas,  he  was  elected  president,  but  withdrew  to
his  country  place,  leaving  the  vice-president,  Val-
entin Gomez  Farias,
in  charge.  He  de-
featetl  several  insur-
rections against  the
government,  until  in
1834  he  headed  a
revolution  to  over-
thn)w  Gomez  Farias,
who  was  deposed  by
congress.  5  Jan.,  1 85W.
Gen.  Barragan  was
apjKjinted  provision-
al president,  as  San-
ta-Anna persisted  in  "
his  policy  of  leaving  >^
the  responsibility  of  '  ^
the  executive  to  an-  /  ^  ^
other,  whom  he  could  //  i/^  /  /
control.  He  nowal-  ^^  /x/tnO  aUrJu^'  CO/
lietl  himself  entirely  (q)  /  .  i  U
with  the  reactionary  ^--^CiHra/  CAJr*ta/
party; the Fwleral

system  was  alM)lished.  and  the  governors  of  the
former  states,  now  provinces,  were  made  dejtend-
ent  from  the  central  government.  This  gave
a  pretext  for  the  separation  of Texas,  and  that

Srovince  declared  its  independence.  Immediately
nnta-Anna  abandoned  his  estate  to  take  the  field
in  person,  and  in  PVbniary.  1830.  passeil  the  Rio
Grande  with  O.OtK)  men.  On  0  April  he  stormed
the  Alamo  fort  at  San  Antonio.  killiMl  its  defend-
ers, afterwani  mnssjicnMl  the  garrison  of  Goliad,
and  for  several  weeks  was  victorious.  But  on  21
April  he  was  surprise*!  at  .San  Jacinto,  and  totally
route<l  by  the  Texan  army  under  (ten.  Stimue'l
Houston.  He  fle<!,  but  was  capture*!  three  daj-s
afterward,  and  was  fortunate  in  escaping  retalia-
tion for  his  cruel  execution  of  Texan  troops.  He
gave  a  written  order  to  his  second  in  command  to
n'tire  across  the  Rio(trande.  andon  14  May  signed
a  treaty  with  the  provisional  president  of  Texas,
David  G.  Burnett,  recognizing  the  inde|iendence
of  that  state.  He  was  a  prisoner  for  eight  months,
but  was  finally  sent  by(»en.  Houston  to  the  United
States,  and  released  in  February,  ltj87. On  his  r^


394


SANTA-ANNA


SANTACILIA


turn  to  Mexico  he  was  coldly  received  and  retired
to  his  estate.  When  Vera  Cniz  was  attacked  by
the  French  fleet  on  27  Nov.,  1838,  Santa-Anna
offered  his  services  to  the  government,  was  txp-
pointed  commander-in-chief,  and  prepared  the  city
for  resistance.  Before  daybreak  of  5  Dec.  a  land-
ing force  of  the  French  surprised  his  hea<lquarlers
and  captured  his  second  in  command.  Gen.  Arista,
but  he  had  time  to  escape,  and,  gathering  his
troops,  he  forced  the  French  to  re-embark.  Near
the  fiort  he  was  wounded  by  a  cannon-ball,  and  it
was  found  necessary  to  amputate  his  left  leg.  By
his  valiant  defence  he  regained  his  popularity,
and  when  President  Bustamante  left  to  suppress
the  revolution  of  Tamaulipas,  congress  appointed
Santa-Anna  his  substitute.  Notwithstanding  that
his  wound  had  not  yet  healed,  he  was  transported
to  the  capital,  and  took  charge  of  the  executive
from  17  Feb.,  1839,  till  11  July,  when  he  retired  to
his  estate.  He  was  afterward  made  general  com-
mander of  the  coast  department,  but  conspired
against  Bustamante  till  the  latter's  government
was  overthrown,  and  Santa-Anna  was  appointed
by  the  consulting  junta  provisional  president,  10
Oct.,  1841.  From  that  date  till  (!  Dec,  1844,  either
as  provisional  or  constitutional  president,  some-
times personally,  sometimes  through  his  substi-
tutes, he  exercised  virtually  a  military  dictator-
ship. At  the  latter  date  there  was  a  mutiny  in  the
capital,  the  provisional  president,  Gen.  C'analizo,
was  arresteti,  Santa -Anna  was  impeached,  his
statue  was  demolished,  and  his  portrait  was  burned
by  the  mob.  Ilis  troops  abandoned  him,  and  on
his  flight  toward  the  coast  he  was  arrested,  15
Jan.,  184.J,  near  Jico,  and  imprisoned  in  the  fort
of  Perote  till  the  amnesty  of  May,  when  he  re-
tired to  Havana.  When  the  war  with  the  United
States  began,  and  after  the  unfortunate  battles
of  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma,  a  mutiny
under  Gen.  Mariano  Salas  deposed  President  Pa-
redes  and  recalled  Santa-Anna,  who  returned  on

16  Aug.,  1840,  was  appointed  commander-in-chief,
and  became  president  in  December;  but  leaving
the  vice-president,  Gomez  Farias,  in  charge,  he
went  to  the  north,  organizing  an  army  to  oppose
the  invader.  After  a  march,  full  of  hardships,
through  the  desert  of  Potosi,  he  attacked  the
American  armv  under  Gen.  Zachary  Tavlor  near
the  ranch  of  Buena  Vista  on  22  Feb..  1847.  The
battle  continued  the  next  day,  but,  as  his  cavalry
could  not  operate  in  the  narrow  passes,  and  the
American  artillery  occupied  strong  positions,  he
retired  on  the  evening  of  the  28d  with  great  losses.
Hearing  of  the  overthrow  of  Gomez  Farias,  he
hastened  to  the  capital,  and  occupied  the  execu-
tive on  21  March  ;  but  when  Vera  Cruz  was  taken
by  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  he  left  Gen.  Anaya  in
charge,  and  took  command  of  the  forces  in  the
state  of  Vera  Cruz.  He  established  his  head-
quarters at  Cerro  Gordo,  where  he  was  attjicked  on

17  April,  and  totally  defeated  on  the  18th.  With
the  fragments  of  his  army  he  retreated  to  Mexico,
where  he  adopted  stringent  measures  against  his
opponents,  established  a  severe  censorship  of  the
press,  and  organized  an  army  to  defend  the  capital
against  the  advancing  American  forces.  He  col-
lected 20,000  men,  for  the  greater  part  militia,  and
after  the  van-guard  under  Gen.  Valencia  had  been
routed  at  Contreras  on  19  Aug.,  and  Gen.  Rincon  at
Churubusco  on  20  Aug.,  an  armistice  was  signed  on
the  24th.  Hostilities  began  again  on  7  Sept.,  Mo-
lino  del  Rey  was  stormed  on  the  8th  and  Chapul-
tepec  on  the  13th,  and  on  the  14th  Mexico  was
occupied  by  the  American  army;  Santa-A una  re-
signed the  presidency  and  retired  toward  Puebla.


He  tried  to  retrieve  his  reputation  by  besieging
that  city,  but  was  defeated,  and  retired  to  Tehuacan,
soliciting  from  Juarez,  then  governor  of  Oajaca,
permission  to  reside  in  that  city,  which  was  re-
fused. When  Tehuacan  was  captured  by  Gen.
Lane,  Santa-Anna  barely  escaped  to  the  mountains,
and  from  his  estate  obtained  i)ermission  from  the
Mexican  government  and  Gen.  Scott  to  leave  the
country,  sailing  on  5  April,  1848,  for  Jamaica,  in
1850  he  established  himself  in  Turbaco,  near  Carta-
gena. In  consequence  of  the  revolution  of  7  Feb.,
1853,  he  was  recalled,  arrived  in  Vera  Cruz  on  1
April,  and  on  the  20th  took  possession  of  the  ex-
ecutive. On  21  Dec.  a  congress  of  his  creation  ap-
pointed him  president  for  life,  with  the  title  of
Most  Serene  Highness,  and  the  power  of  nominat-
ing his  successor.  His  rule  soon  became  so  despotic
that  revolutions  began  everywhere,  the  principal
one  being  that  of  Ayutla,  directed  by  Gen.  Juan
Alvarez.  After  a  severe  struggle  and  many  de-
feats, he  abandoned  the  capital  on  9  Aug.,  1855.
and  on  the  16th  sailed  for  Havana,  and  thence  to
Cartagena.  He  lived  afterward  for  some  time  in
Venezuela,  and  finally  in  St.  Thomas,  whence  he
appeared,  after  the  French  intervention,  in  Febru-
ary, 1864,  in  Vera  Cruz  to  offer  his  services  to  the
regency.  He  was  permitted  to  land  only  after  sign-
ing a  pledge  not  to  interfere  in  politics;  but  from
Orizaba,  where  he  had  been  assigned  a  residence,
he  published  a  manifesto,  exciting  disturbances  in
his  favor,  and  Gen.  Bazaine  ordered  him  to  leave
the  country,  sending  him  in  the  frigate  "  Colbert "
to  St.  Thomas.  Maximilian  afterward  made  him
grand  marshal  of  the  empire,  but  he  rewarded  the
emperor  by  a  conspiracy  against  him,  and  fled  to
St.  Thomas  again  in  1865.  In  the  following  year
he  went  to  the  United  States,  proposed  to  Sec.
Seward  to  raise  an  army  to  overthrow  the  empire,
and  even  offered  his  services  to  Juarez ;  but  no  re-
sf)onse  was  made.  In  June,  1867,  he  chartered  the
steamer  "Virginius,"  and  appeared  before  Vera
Cruz,  which  was  still  occupieu  by  the  imperialists,
to  raise  the  banner  of  revolution  ;  but  he  was  de-
tained by  the  U.  S.  squadron  of  observation,  and
after  the  surrender  of  Vera  Cruz,  4  July,  was  per-
mitted to  sail  for  New  York.  He  tried  to  effect  a
landing  at  Sisal,  was  captured  by  the  blockading
squadron,  imprisoned  at  San  Juan  de  Ulua,  ana
sentenced  by  a  court-martial  to  death,  but  was
saved  by  his  counsel.  Alcalde,  who  represented  his
attempt  as  the  ridiculous  enterprise  of  a  decrepit
old  man.  He  was  pardoned  under  condition  of
leaving  the  republic  forever,  and  came  to  the
Unitetl  States,  whence  he  fostered  a  revolutionary
movement  in  Jalapa  in  1870,  Jieaded  by  his  son^
Angel.  After  Juarez's  death  he  took  advantage
of  the  amnesty  that  was  given  by  Lerdo  de  Tejada,
returning  to  Mexico,  and  after  his  request  for
reinstatement  on  the  army  list  and  back-pay  had
been  refused  he  died  amid  general  public  indif-
ference, his  services  being  obscured  and  almost
forgotten  bv  the  misfortunes  that  his  subsequent
conduct  had  brought  upon  his  country.

SANTACILIA,  Pedro,  Cuban  author,  b.  in
Santiago,  Cuba,  in  1829.  At  the  age  of  seven  years
his  parents  took  him  to^Spain,  where  he  was  edu-
cated. In  1845  he  returned  to  his  native  city,
and  began  his  literary  career  on  the  staff  of  a
newspaper.  He  was  banished  in  1851  on  account
of  his  Iil)cral  ideas,  and  in  1853  he  came  to  New
York.  He  went  to  Mexico  in  1861,  where  he
joined  the  Republicans  in  their  struggle  against
the  Conservatives  and  Imperialists.  In  1863  he
married  one  of  the  daughters  of  President  Juarez,
and  filled  several  official  posts  in  the  republic He


SANTA  CRUZ


8ANTANA


305


has  puIiIIhIjcmI  "  InHtnK*cii>ii  tttUrv  cl  pultivo  del  T«-
\mum"  (1S47):  "  Kn.xjiViw  Litorarios"  (IH4H):  "  Kl
l»ap8  on  i-1  Si^lo  MX"  (Now  York.  1H.'>4):  *•  Kl
AriMi  «l«-l  I*rostri|.to"  (IHTWJ);  ••  Kl  liaud  del  Dos-
tcrnulo"  (IKW);  "  Ijeci'ioiies  Milire  la  IliMtoria  de
Cuba"  (IH.'^U);  a  v«)luine  of  "KiUjula.H  y  Alejroruus"
(Mexifo.  1H72);  another  volume  of  ••  P«K'n»«,"  and
other  literary  nrcMl  net  ions.  Some  of  his  works
have  Ikhmi  tniiislated  into  Kiif^lisli  and  Kreneh.

SANTA  liU'Z,  Aiidn'H  (sjm -tali-erooth).  Bo-
livian s)l(Iier,  I),  in  \m  I'u/  in  171>'2:  d.  in  Sainte
Nazaire.  France,  in  IWWi.  He  wji.sdes<-endi'd  through
his  mother  from  the  Peruvian  incas.  Santa  Cruz
entere<l  the  S|HUiish  military  service,  and  obtained
the  rank  of  lieutenant-i-olonel.  but  after  the  defeat
of  (ien.  O'Ueilly  at  I»a.si-o.  fl  IK'C,  1820.  he  went
over  to  the  patriots  with  jmrt  of  his  command.
Towanl  the  en<l  of  1H21  he  wjus  sent  by  (Ien.  San
Martin  to  aid  (Jen.  Sucre  in  Kcua<lor,  and  took
part  in  the  victorious  battle  of  Pichincha.  25  Mav,
1822.  for  which  he  was  promoted  bri>ra<lier.  He
returnetl  to  Peru,  where,  through  his  influence,
Riva  AjrOero  (9.  v.)  was  ele<'ted  president.  28  Feb..
182JJ.  and  he  was  ap|K>inted  commander-in-chief
with  the  rank  of  major-general.  After  defeating
Gen.  V'aldez  at  Zepita  on  2.")  Aug.,  he  was  routed
by  the  united  forces  of  V'aldez  and  (JlaileUi  at  f)e-
.siigiiiulero  on  22  Sept.  He  wa-s  then  called  by
Bolivar  to  Lima,  and  made  chief  of  staff  of  the
unite<l  army.  Ho  was  sent  in  1825  to  Chili  on  a
diplomatic  mission  by Bolivar,  and  in  182G  ap-

Sointed  supreme  military  chief ;  and  after  the
eparture  of  liolivar  for  Colombia  on  3  Sept.  he
took  charge  of  the  executive  as  president  of  the
council  of  government  till  the  constituent  congress
electe<l  Im  Mar  (q.  v.)  president,  16  June,  1827.
After  Sucre's  resignation  of  the  executive  of  Bo-
livia. Santa  Cniz  was  elected  pn-sident,  31  Dec,
1828.  and  became,  in  fact,  dictator,  but  during  his
administration  he  accomplished  many  reforms  and
enlarged  the  army.  He  now  tried  to  realize  his
cherished  idea  of  a  Peru-Bolivian  confederation.
The  civil  n'volts  in  Peru  facilitated  this,  as  under
pretext  of  protecting  the  government  of  Orlwo^ozo,
with  whom  he  had  concluded  a  treatv  on  24  June,
1835,  he  entered  Peru  and  won  several  battles.  He
convoked  congress  in  183(J.  and  accented  the  title
of  protector  of  the  confederation,  uivitling  Peru
into  two  parts,  under  inde|)endent  admuiistra-
tiona.  The  preponderant  influence  of  the  con-
federation alarmed  the  republic  of  Chili,  which
declared  war  on  Santa  Cruz.  The  first  Chilian  ex-
pedition was  unlucky,  and  was  sjived  only  by  the
treaty  of  rH'ace  of  Paucarpatii.  17  Nov.,  1837,  but
the  second  was  more  successful,  and  Stmta  Cruz,
deserted  by  jwirt  of  his  arm  v.  was  totally  defeated
at  Yungay,  20  Jan.,  18J39.  The  confederation  was
dissolve*!,  and  Santa  Cruz  took  refuge  in  Guaya-
quil, whence  he  tried  in  184^3  to  restore  his  govern-
ment, but  was  taken  prist)ner  and  Luinished  to  Chili.
To  remove  a  dangerous  jwlitical  lemler,  who  still
hml  a  large  following,  he  was  in  1H48  sent  as  min-
ister from  Peru  to  France,  and  afterward  remained
in  Kurone  on  diplomatic  missions.  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  was  accredited  again  to  France.

SANTA  CRl'Z.  Maria  de  Iuh  Mercedes,  Count-
ess of  .Merlin.  Cuban  author,  b.  in  Havana  in  1789;
d.  in  Paris.  France,  in  1852.  When  fourteen  years
old  she  sjiiletl  with  her  parents  for  Spain,  and
finished  her  education  in  Madrid.  In  1810  she
marrie<l  the  FixMich  general.  Count  Merlin,  and  in
1813.  when  the  French  troops  left  S|tain.  she  went
to  Paris.  There  she  soon  Ijecame  well  known  in
P^rench  society,  and  her  home  was  the  resort  of
persons  that  were  eminent  in  science,  literature.


and  art.  In  1840  she  made  a  vLoit  to  her  native
city,  but  in  1842  i<he  return«><l  again  to  her  adopted
country,  where  she  htul  aln>>ulv  obtaineil  a  refiuta-
tion  by  her  litemry  lalMtrs.  Her  most  im|>ortant
works  are  "  Mis  d<K'e  nrimeros  aflos"  (Paris,  18!i}{);
"  Mcmoires  d'une  Creole"  (I8JW):  "(>cio»  de  una
mujer  de  gnin  mumlo"  (1K{7):  "  hVs<!lavMge  aux
colonies  KsfMigtioles  "  (1840);  "  Im  llavane"  (3  vols.,
1842):  "Les  linnnes  de  Paris"  (|M45):  and  "  I^e
due  d'Atlu-ncs"  (184X).  Many  of  her  works  ha\'e
l>een  translate<l  into  several  Knro|K'an  languages,
and  s^nue  of  them  wen*  written  originally  in  S(>an-
ish.  though  the  majoritv  were  in  Fn-nch.

SANTA  CKIX.  Kaimiindn,  South  American
missionary,  b.  in  Ibarra.  Kcundor,  alnait  1(520;  d.
in  the  u|>|H'r  Amazon  river  in  Nr)veml«r,  1(MJ2.  He
studied  Ml  the  S-minary  of  San  Luis  de  (^uito.  and
enterecl  the  Company  of  Jesus  in  l(l4iJ.  There  he
c<implete<l  his  four  years'  course  in  theology,  and,
after  l»eing  ordained  priest,  de«licate<l  liimsi*lf  to
the  missions  of  the  MaraHon.  He  liegan  his  work
in  1651,  and  in  a  short  time,  overcoming  great
diflflculties,  founded  several  towns  and  began  to
ojK>n  a  direct  way  from  (^uito  to  the  eastern  mis-
sions. He  also  made  roads  to  the  Napo  and  Par-
tanza.  but  s<k)ii  afterward  wasdmwned  in  the  rapids
of  one  of  the  aflluents  of  the  Amazon.  He  wrote
a  gmmmar  and  vocabulary  of  the  Cofana  lan-
guage, which,  with  the  notes  on  his  travels,  are  men-
tioned in  the  works  of  the  missionaries  Velasoo,
Rodriguez,  and  Carrani.

SANTA  MARIA,  Domingo,  president  of  Chili,
b.  in  Santiago,  4  Aug.,  1825,  He  studinl  in  the
National  institute,  and  in  1845  was  professor  of
geographv  and  arithmetic  there.  In  1840  he  was
appointed  chief  clerk  of  the  ministry  of  justice,
and  in  1847,  after  being  graduated  in  law.  he  filled
the  fwst  of  sul>-secretary  of  state.  At  the  age  of
twenty-three  years  he  was  elected  intendant  of  Col-
chagua.  As  a  Lil)eral  he  t<K>k  an  active  part  in  the
disturbances  of  1850  and  1851,  and  was  exiled  to
Lima.  Returning  to  Chili  in  1852,  he  l)egan  the
practice  of  his  profession,  but  in  1858  was  exiled
again  and  travelled  through  Kurone.  (Jn  his  re-
turn he  was  minister  of  the  treasury  during  18(J3-'4.
In  1865-'6,  as  special  envoy  to  Peru,  he  signed
the  treaties  for  mutual  defence  against  Spain  with
that  republic,  and  on  his  return  in  1867  he  was  ap-
|K>intetl  judge  of  the  supreme  court.  He  was  also
several  times  elected  to  congres.s.  was  dean  of  the
faculty  of  law,  and  in  1874  be<'ame  presitlent  of
the  court  of  api)eals.  Under  President  Pinto  he
was  a  memlx'rof  the  cabinet,  as  .sifretarj'  of  pmb-
lic  works  and  instruction,  in  1878,  of  the  interior
in  1879,  and  of  foreign  relations  in  1880.  In  1881
he  was  elected  president  of  the  republic,  taking
charge  of  the  executive  on  18  Sept.  During  his
administration  the  fimU  jwace  with  Peru  and  Boli-
via wajs  arranged.  Araucania  was  |)acifie4l.  many
reforms  were  inauguratiHl.and  railniads  were  built.
On  24  Jan.,  1885.  an  attempt  was  made  on  his  life,
by  means  of  an  infernal  nuichine.  but  it  was  frus-
trated. Since  the  close  of  his  presidential  terra
on  18  Sept..  1886,  he  has  Iteen  again  president  of
the  court  of  appeals.  He  has  published  "  Biogra-
fia  de  Jos<!  Miguel  Infante"  (Santiago,  185;}),  and
"  Memoria  Historica  sobre  la  aUlicacion  del  direc-
tor Don  Bernardo  O'lliggins"  (IH.'iH).

SANTANA,  Pedro  (s4m-tah*-nah).  pn»sident  of
Santo  Domingo,  b.  in  Hincha,  2i>  June,  1801 ;  d.  in
fhe  city  of  Santo  Domingo.  14  June.  1864.  He  stud-
ied law.  but  was  living  (piietly  on  his  farm  when,
in  184;}.  the  Dominicans  revolttnl  against  HavtL
He  es|H)used  their  cause,  was  ap[H>int4.>d  brigadier
by  the  provisional  governing  junta,  and  at  the  head


396


SANTANDER


SARAVIA


of  2,400  men  defeated  the  southern  array  of  15,000
men  under  Riviere  Herard,  19  March,  1844.  On  13
July,  1H44,  he  was  prochiimed  supreme  chief,  after
vanquishinj;  his  rival,  .luan  Duarte(o.  v.).  In  the
following  November  Santana  was  elected  consti-
tutional president,  receiving  also  the  title  of  liber-
ator of  tne  country.  During  the  four  years  of  his
administration  he  promoted  agriculture  and  com-
merce, and  sought  to  create  financial  resources.  In
1848  the  clerical  party  induced  Soulouque  (q.  v.)
to  invade  Dominican  territory;  but  Sjintana  was
called  to  command  the  troops,  defeated  Soulouque,
and,  deposing  President  Jimenes,  ruled  as  dictator
till  the  election  of  Buenaventura  Baez  in  October,
1849,  He  strongly  favored  the  movement  for  an-
nexation to  the  United  States,  which  Baez  de-
feated. Santana  was  re-elected  president  in  1853,
and  again  defeated  Soulouque's  invasions  in  1855
and  1856  ;  but  the  credit  of  the  government  de-
clined, and  he  resigned  early  in  1857.  Baez  was
now  recalled,  but  was  driven  from  the  island  by  a  re-
volt in  November,  1858,  and  Santana  again  assumed
the  executive.  The  internal  struggles  continued,
and,  despainng  of  his  ability  to  preserve  peace,  San-
tana opened  negotiations  with  Spain,  and,  on  18
March,  1801.  the  incorporation  of  Santo  Domingo
with  the  Spanish  monarchy  was  proclaimed.  San-
tana was  commissioned  lieutenant-general  in  the
Spanish  army,  and  received  patents  of  nobility
and  various  decorations,  which  caused  unsupported
accusations  of  bribery  to  be  made  against  him.  Ho
retired  to  his  farm,  and  when  the  relx'llion  against
the  Spanish  rule  began  he  offered  his  services  to
the  governor  and  marched  to  Azua,  promptly  quell-
ing the  insurrection ;  but,  when  the  opposition
became  general,  he  retired  again,  and  died  of  re-
morse shortly  before  the  end  of  the  Spanish  rule.
He  is  execrated  by  many  of  his  countrymen  for
what  they  call  his  treason,  yet  the  majority  recog-
nize his  unselfish  motives  and  his  thorough  honesty
while  at  the  head  of  the  government,  and  his  un-
doubted bravery  is  acknowledged  by  all.

SANTANDER,  Francisco  de  Paula  (san-tan-
dair),  president  of  Colombia,  b.  in  Kosario  de
Cucuta  in  1793;  d.  in  Bogota,  5  May,  1840.  He
studied  in  the  College  of  San  Bartolome  in  Bogota,
and  was  about  to  be  graduated  in  law,  when  the
news  arrived  of  the  declaration  of  independence
in  Caracas  in  1810,  followed  by  the  revolution  in
Cartagena.  Santander  immediately  took  part  in
the  patriotic  movement,  and  was  appointed  secre-
tary of  the  military  commander  of  Mariquita.  In
1811  he  joined  the  Federal  forces  under  Baraya,  in
the  campaign  against  the  Unitarian  forces  under
Nariilo,  and  he  was  taken  prisoner,  9  Jan.,  1813.
In  February,  1813,  he  joined  the  forces  under
Bolivar,  and  during  that  year  and  1814  kept  up  a
guerilla  warfare  against  the  Spanish  troops  in  the
district  of  Cucuta.  When  New  Granada  was  in-
vaded by  Morillo,  he  retired  in  1816  with  the  rem-
nant of  his  forces  to  the  province  of  Casanare,
joining  there  the  rest  of  the  dispersed  patriot  army
under  several  chiefs.  A  meeting  of  all  the  inde-
pendent leatlers  was  held  in  Arauca  on  16  July,  and
Santander  was  elected  commander-in-chief;  but  he
was  soon  replaced  by  Gen.  Paez  (q.  i'.).  Santander
left  the  army  of  Apure  in  February,  1817,  joined
Bolivar's  staiBf  in  April,  and  accompanied  him  in
the  campaign  against  Guayana  and  the  unfortunate
operations  against  Morillo  in  1818.  In  August  of
that  year  he  was  promoted  brigatlier  and  commis-
sioned by  Bolivar  to  prepare  a  force  for  the  cam-
paign of  1819.  He  joined  Bolivar  in  Guasdualito
in  .June  of  that  year,  and  his  vote  principally  de-
cided the  invasion  of  New  Granada,  in  which  he


participated,  being  promoted  general  of  division
on  the  uattle-field  of  Boyacaon  7  Aug.  When  Boli-
var returned  to  Venezuela,  30  Sept.,  he  appointed
Santander  viccrpresident  of  the  state  of  Cundina-
marca,  and  as  such  he  sent  troops  to  the  south
against  the  Spanish  president  of  Quito.  The  con-
gress of  Cucuta  elected  Santander  on  30  Aug.,
1821,  vice-president  of  the  newly  constituted  re-
public of  Colombia,  and  from  December,  1821,
until  September,  1826.  during  Bolivar's  al)sence  in
Quito  and  Peru,  he  was  at  the  head  of  the  execu-
tive, acting  with  prudence  and  ability,  and  exert-
ing himself  to  forward  re-enforcements  to  Bolivar.
He  was  re-elected  in  the  same  year;  but  after  Boli-
var's return  he  resigned,  and  began  a  systematic
opposition  to  the  latter,  showing  himself  in  the
convention  of  Ocafla,  to  which  he  was  elected  by
the  province  of  Bogota,  to  be  a  personal  enemy  of
the  liberator,  under  the  pretext  that  the  latter  had
tried  to  subvert  the  constitution  for  personal  am-
bition. Santander  was  even  charged  with  com-
plicity in  the  attempt  to  murder  Bolivar  on  25
Sept.,  1828,  and  he  was  condemned  to  death  on  7
Nov.,  but  his  sentence  was  commuted  to  banish-
ment. He  travelled  through  England,  France,  and
Germany,  and  while  absent  was  elected  president
of  the  new  republic  of  New  Granada  for  the  tenn
of  1832-'6,  His  administration  was  just  and  pro-
gressive, especially  in  fostering  primary  education
and  introducing  the  Lancaster  system  in  the  com-
mon schools,  founding  colleges  in  the  provinces,
and  dividing  the  republic  into  three  university
districts.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1837,  re-
elected in  1839,  and  died  during  the  session  of  that
body.  He  wrote  a  justification  of  his  conduct
under  the  title  "Apuntamientos  para  las  Memorias
de  Colombia  y  Nueva  Granada  "  (Bogota,  1837).

SARAIVA,  Matheus  (sah-rah-ee'-vah),  Bra-
zilian physician,  b.  in  Rio  Janeiro  at  the  end  of  the
17th  century ;  d.  there  in  1761.  He  was  graduated
in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Coimbra,  made  a
fellow  of  the  Royal  academy  of  London,  and  on
his  return  to  Brazil  practised  in  Rio  Janeiro,  where
he  became  famous  for  his  charity.  He  wrote
"  Portugueza  e  America  illustrada"  (1750);  "A
voz  evangelica  por  Sslo  Thomaz,"  endeavoring  to
show  that  the  ajX)stle  St.  Thomas  visited  Brazil,
and  pretending  to  decipher  sundry  inscriptions
and  symbolical  characters  that  he  had  met  in  the
mountains  of  Itaquatiara  in  Minas  Geraes  (Rio
Janeiro,  1752);  "Polyanthea  Phisocosmica  ou
Moral,  Politica,  Instrugao  Doutrinal  e  Histories,"
a  work  on  the  education  of  youth  (1755) ;  and  "Poli-
anthea  Brazilica  niedica  historica,"  on  endemic  an^
epidemic  diseases  and  their  treatment  (1757).

SARAVIA,  Francisco  (sah-rah'-ve-ah),  Span-
ish missionary,  b.  in  Seville  about  1530 ;  d.  in
Villa-Alta,  Mexico,  10  Aug.,  16:30.  He  went  about
1550  to  Mexico,  where  he  married  and  worked  as
a  cabinet-maker,  but  after  the  death  of  his  wife  he
entered  the  Dominican  order  in  1574.  After  his
ordination  he  was  sent  to  the  parish  of  Villa-Alta,
in  the  province  of  Oajaca,  where  he  soon  accmired
the  difficult  language  of  the  Chinantec  Indians,
and  set  out  to  convert  that  tribe,  dwelling  in  caves
on  the  mountains  of  Oajaca.  He  met  with  great
success,  persuading  the  Indians  to  leave  their
mountains  fastnesses,  founding  several  large  vil-
lages, and  living  for  more  than  fifty  years  in  their
midst.  He  continued  his  missionary  trips  to  the
mountains  when  a  nonagenarian  with  a  broken
leg,  being  carried  by  the  Indians,  and  he  did  not
return  to  his  convent  of  Villa-Alta  till  he  felt  his
last  days  approac^hing.  He  wrote  "  Gran  Homili-
ario  Ctinanteco,"  which  he  copied  with  his  own


SARAVIA


SARGENT


397


hand  in  miinuHcrint  for  every  villafre  of  his  converts,
8o  that  ill  his  aiMtenoe  the  native  M>xton  mipht
read  the  Siiiitiny  MTvice:  "('litecismo  Cliiiiantwo."
which  is  still  in  us4'  in  the  Mioutitnin-viiiup>s:  uiid
"Noticiado  la  Conversiun  de  la  Xiifion  Chinan-
teca,  y  siiwsos  acatH>i<los  en  ella  al  Alitor,"  which
is  pn»s«Tve<l  in  inamiscri^)t  in  the  archive  of  the
Doiiiinican  convent  of  Oajaca.

SARAVIA,  Mplchor  Bravo  de,  jrovernor  of
Chili.  Ii.  in  S)ria  curly  in  the  Kith  cciitiirv;  d.  in
Sitaiti  nlMnit  l'»71>.  In  1547,  when  the  audienc4>  of
New  tiraimda  was  cn-at***!,  he  wasap|Miinte<I  jiidp>,
but  did  not  take  his  seat,  as  he  wjus  pr< limited  by
the  einjHTor  to  the  auilience  of  Peru,  where  he  ar-
rived ill  June,  1549.  In  1552.  at  the  death  of  An-
tonio de  Mendoza,  viceroy  of  Peru,  the  audience
took  chnrj»e  of  the  ffoveminent,  and  directed  the
operati<»ns  aj^inst  the  relH'llious  Francisco  Iler-
nandcic  (iiron.  Saravia  showe<l  much  zeal  and
gootl-will,  but  little  aptitude  in  military  affairs;
nevertheless,  Kinj;  Philip  II.  in  I'lOiJ  rewarded  him
with  the  governorship  or  Chili,  which  he  held  un-
til 1575.  He  then  returne<I  to  Spjiin,  where  he  died
several  years  afterward.  Saravia  left  an  interesting
book  entitlett  "  AntipQedades  Peruana.s,"  which  is
fre<juently  cited  by  .luan  de  Velasco  in  his  "  Ilis-
toria  del  rciiio  de  Ouitn."

SAROEANT,  Nathaniel  Peaslee,  jurist,  b.  in
Methuen,  Mai>s.,  2  Nov.,  17;n  ;  d.  in  Haverhill,
Mass.,  12  Oct.,  1791.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1750,  and  engagetl  in  the  pnictice  of  law  in
Haverhill.  He  espoused  the  cause  of  liberty,  was
a  delegate  to  the  Provincial  congress  in  1775,  and
became  a  representative  and  judge  of  the  superior
court  the  next  year.  In  17yy-'91  he  was  chief
justice  of  Massachusetts.

S.\R(ilENT,  Aaron  Angrnstas,  senator,  b.  in
Newl.uryport.  Mass.,  2b  Sept.,  1827;  d.  in  San
Francisco,  Cal.,  14  Aug.,  1887.  He  learned  the
printer's  trade,  and  when  twenty  vears  old  was  a
reporter  in  Washington,  D.  C.  lie  removed  to
CiJifornia  in  1849,  where  he  engaged  in  mining,
and  establisheil  the  "  Nevada  Journal."  He  studira
law  while  editing  that  pa|>er,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1854,  and  electe<l  district  attorney  of  Nevada
county  two  years  later.  He  was  vice-president  of
the  liepublican  national  convention  in  1860,  the
same  vear  chosen  to  congress,  served  by  re-elec-
tion till  1872,  and  the  day  following  the  expira-
tion of  his  terra  in  the  house  of  representatives
took  his  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  which  he  held  in
1872-'».  In  1861  he  was  the  author  of  the  first
Pacific  railroad  act  that  was  fmssed  in  congress.
He  was  appointed  Uniteil  States  minister  to  Ger-
many in  March.  1882,  and  held  office  till  the  ac-
tion of  the  (lerman  authorities  in  excluding  Ameri-
can pork  from  the  empire  made  his  incumbency
fersonallv  distasteful.  President  Arthur  offereil
im  the  ftiissian  mission,  but  he  declined  it.  Mr.
Sargent  was  an  able  debater,  and  exercised  much
influence  in  the  Hepu))lican  party.

S.\R<iiENT.  James,  inventor,  b.  in  Chester,
Vt.,  1  Dec,  1824.  He  was  educated  in  district
schools  and  worke<l  on  a  farm  until  he  was  eighteen
years  old.  During  the  ensuing  four  years  he  was
engageil  in  a  woollen-factory,  where  he  ha<l  sjX'cial
charge  of  the  machinery.  In  1848,  having  ac<iuire<l
prrjflciency  in  the  art  of  making  daguerreotyt)es,
ne  travelletl  through  the  countrv  engagetl  in'that
pursuit,  but  in  1852  he  returne«l  to  New  England
and  devoted  himself  to  the  manufacture  and  sale
of  an  automatic  apple-parer.  The  financial  difll-
cultiesof  1H.'57  compelltHl  him  to  give  up  that  busi-
ness, and  he  became  a  partner  in  the  Yale  ancl
Greenleftf  lock  company. Having  a  natural  fond-


ness for  mechanics,  he  devoted  himself  at  flmt  to
the  study  of  the  me<-hani.sin  of  hx-ks,  and  acquire<l
ex|>ertness  as  a  hnk-picker.  Further  investigation
of  the  subject  leil  him  to  invent  a  hn-k  that  was
proof  against  profes-sional  skill,  for  which,  in  1805,
lie  receiv«'<l  a  |iatent.  He  then  established  himself
in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  where  he  )N>gan  its  manufac-
ture. One  of  the  featun's  of  this  lock  was  the  in-
tnnluction  of  a  fKiwerful  mapiet  that  held  the
parts  sufficiently  under  control  to  jirevent  the  use
of  a  micrometer  to  measure  motion  or  determine
the  relative  jxtsitions  of  the  unl<»<-king  devices.
Subs«>quently  he  im()roved  this  hn-k  by  the  intro-
duction of  an  automatic  mec-hanical  device  in  lieu
of  the  magnet.  In  1873  he  invente<l  the  tirae-
locks  that  l»ear  his  name,  which  were  the  first  ever
successfully  ustnl  in  this  country,  and  are  now
largely  used  in  blinking  establishments.  Mr.  Sar-
gent has  devise«l  various  styles  of  his  ]<>ckn  for
s|)ecial  uses,  and  from  time  to  time  has  added
iinj)rovements  to  the  original  jtattems.

SARiSENT,  Nathan,  b.  in  Pultnev,  Vt..  5  May,
1794;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  2  Feb..  1875.  He
was  educated  in  his  native  town,  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  settled  in  Cahawlm.  Ala.,  in  1816,  where  he
l)ecame  county  and  probate  judge.  He  removed  to
liuffalo,  N.  Y.,  in  1826,  and  to  Philadelphia  in  1830,
where  he  established  a  Whig  newspa[)er.  He  after-
ward l>ecame  Washington  corresjxjiident  of  the
"  United  States  Gazette."  and  was  widely  known
under  his  pen-name  of  *•  Oliver  Oldschool."  He
was  sergeant-at-anns  of  the  U.  S.  house  of  repre-
sentatives in  1849-'51,  register  of  the  U.  S.  treasury
in  1851-'3,  and  commissioner  of  customs  in  1861-'7.
For  several  subsequent  years  he  was  president  of
the  Washington  reform-school.  He  pubiishc<l  "  Life
of  Henry  Clay"  (New  York.  1844),  and  "Public
Men  and  Events"  (2  vols..  1875).

SARGENT,  Paul  Dndley,  soldier,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  in  1745;  d.  in  Sullivan,  Me.,  28  Sept.,  1828.
His  ancestor,  William,  came  to  this  country  from
Gloucester,  England,  before  1678,  and  his  father,
E|)es,  was  a  colonel  of  militia  before  the  Revolution,
and  a  justice  of  the  general  session  court  for  more
than  thirtv  years.  He  died  in  Gloucester,  Mass.,
in  1762.  I'aul  commanded  a  regiment  at  the  siege
of  Boston,  was  wounded  at  Bunker  Hill,  command-
ed a  brigade  in  the  summer  of  1776,  an<l  fought
at  Harlem,  White  Plains,  Trenton,  and  Princeton.
After  the  war  he  was  chief  justice  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  of  Hancock  county.  Me.,  for  many
years,  judge  of  probate,  justice  of  the  same,  first
representative  to  the  general  court,  jjostmaster.  and
an  overseer  of  Bowdoin. — His  nephew,  >Vinthrop,
soldier,  b.  in  Gloucester,  Mass.,  1  May.  1753;  a.
in  New  Orleans,  3  June,  1820,  was  graduateil  at
Harvard,  and  in  1771  iiecame  captain  of  a  ship
lielonging  to  his  father,  who  was  a  merchant.  In
1775  lie  entered  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  was
naval  agent  at  Gloucester,  1  Jan.',  1776,  and  cap-
tain of  Gen.  Henry  Knox's  regiment  of  artillery,
16  March,  1776,  serving  throughout  the  war,  and
taking  part  in  the  siege  of  Boston,  the  Imttles  of
Long  Island,  White  Plains.  Trent<m.  the  Brandy-
wine,  Germantown,  and  Monmouth,  attaining  the
rank  of  major.  He  became  coniHftcd  with  the
Ohio  company  in  1786,  under  Gen.  Kufus  Putnam,
and  was  ap|x)inted  surveyor  of  the  Northwest  terri-
tory by  congres.s.  He  was  it.s  secretary  in  1787,
amr  was  its  governor  in  1798-1801.  liuring  the
Indian  wars  in  1791  and  in  1794-'5  he  became  ad-
jutant-general, and  was  wounded  in  the  expe<lition
under  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair.  He  was  a  memlier  of
the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  of
the  Philosophical  society,  an  original  member  of


398


SARGENT


SARGENT


the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  as  a  delejrate  from
Massachusetts,  and  published,  with  Benjamin  B.
Smith,  "  Papers  Relative  to  Certain  American  An-
tiquities" (rhiladelphia,  1796),  and  "Boston,"  a
poem  (Boston,  1803). — Winthrop's  great-nephew,
ritzwilliaiii,  physician,  b.  in  Gloucester.  Mass.,
17  May,  1820,  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college  in
1839,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  in  1843.  He  was  surgeon  to
Wills  hospital,  Philadelphia,  in  1844-'54.  At  the
latter  date  he  removed  to  Switzerland,  where  he  has
since  resided.  He  has  published  *'  Bandaging  and
other  Operations  of  Minor  Surgery  "(Philadelphia,
1848;  with  additions  on  military  surgery,  1862),
and  edited  Robert  Druitt's  "  Principles  and  Prac-
tice of  Minor  Surgery"  (Philadelphia,  1853)  and
James  Miller's  "Principles  of  Surgery"  (1853). —
His  son,  John  Singer,  artist,  b.  in  Florence,  Italy,
in  1856,  studied  under  Carolus  Duran,  and  his  pro-
fessional life  has  been  principally  spent  in  Eu-
rope. In  1879  he  received  honorable  mention  at
the  salon,  and  in  1881  a  medal  of  the  2d  class.  He
has  exhibited  in  London,  Paris,  and  New  York  por-
traits and  genre  paintings.  Among  his  figure-
pieces  are  "  P^ishing  for  Oysters  at  Cancale  "  and
"  En  route  pour  la  peche  "  (1878) ;  "  Neapolitan
Children  Bathing  "  (1879) ;  and  "  El  Jaleso  "  (1882).
He  is  especially  noted
for  his  excellent  por-
traits, among  which
are  those  of  Carolus
Duran  and  "  Docteur
Pozzi " ;  "  Portrait  of
a  Young  Lady,"  ex-
hiViited  at  the  salon  of
1881 ;  a  group  of  four
young  girls.  "  Hall  of
the  Pour  Ci^hildren"
(1882);"  Madame  G.,"
at  the  salon  of  1884 ;
and  "  Mrs.  Mar-
quand "  and  "  Mrs.
Boit"  at  the  Royal
acadcmv  exhibition,
1888.  See  sketch  of
Sargent  by  Henry
James,  in  "  Harpers
Magazine  "  for  Octo-
ber, 1887. — Winthrop's  grandson,  Winthrop,  au-
thor, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  Sept.,  1825 ;  d.  in
Paris,  France,  18  May,  1870,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1845,  and  at  the
Harvard  law-school  in  1847,  and  settled  in  Phila-
delphia, and  afterward  in  New  York,  where  he  prac-
tised his  profession.  Mr.  Sargent  wrote  largely  for
the  periodical  press,  especially  on  genealogical  and
historical  subjects.  His  publications  include  "  His-
tory of  an  Expedition  against  Fort  Duquesne  in
1775.  under  Major-General  Braddock,  edited  from
Original  Manuscripts,"  which  was  commended  by
George  Grote,  the  historian,  and  is  described  by
Washington  Irving  as  "  ably  edited,  with  an  admi-
rable introductory  memoir"  (Philadelphia,  1855);
"The  Loyalist  Poetry  of  the  Revolution"  (1857);
"The  Journal  of  the  General  Meeting  of  the  Cin-
cinnati "  (1858) ;  "  Loyal  Verses  of  Joseph  Stansbury
and  Dr.  Jonathan  Odell,  with  Introduction  and
Notes"  (Albany,  1860);  the  "Life  and  Career  of
Maj.  John  Andre  "  (Boston,  1861) ;  and  "  Les  Etats
Confederes  et  de  I'esclavage  "  (Paris,  1864).  For
many  years  he  was  engaged  in  preparing  a  csita-
logne  rai807ind  of  books  relating  to  America,  which
he  left  unfinished.— Paul  Dudley's  nephew,  Henry,
artist,  b.  in  Gloucester,  Mass.,  25  Nov.,  1770;  d.  m
Boston,  Mass.,  21  Feb.,  1845,  was  the  son  of  Daniel,


fU^ C.  ^c^j  .^^


a  successful  merchant  of  Boston.  Henry  early  de-
veloped artistic  tastes,  and,  after  spending  several
years  at  Drummer  academy,  he  was  sent  abroad,
and  studied  imder  Benjamin  West  in  London.  He
devoted  himself  to  his  profession  on  his  return  to
Boston,  and  was  successful  and  popular.  He  be-
came adjutant-general  of  Massachusetts  in  1814,
and  was  subsequently  aide  to  Gov.  John  Brooks
and  to  Gov.  Caleb  Strong.  He  also  invented  a  plan
for  an  elevated  railway.  His  best-known  pictures
are  the  "  Dinner  Party,"  "  Christ's  Entrance  into
Jerusalem."  and  the  "  Landing  of  the  Pilgrims,"
which  he  presented  to  the  Plymouth  association.
— His  son,  Henry  Winthrop,  horticulturist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  26  Nov.,  1810;  d.  in  Fishkill-on-the-
Hudson,  N.  Y.,  10  Nov.,  1882,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1830,  studied  law  in  Boston,  and  re-
moved to  New  York  city,  but  resigned  his  profes-
sion to  become  a  partner  in  the  banking-nrm  of
Gracie  and  Sargent.  He  retired  from  business  in
1839,  purchased  a  tract  on  Hudson  river  in  the
midst  of  a  native  forest,  and  devoted  himself  to
landscape-gardening.  His  home,  Wodenethe,  be-
came one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  instructive  gar-
dens in  the  United  States,  and  its  owner  during  a
quarter  of  a  century  was  among  the  most  widely
known  and  famous  of  American  horticulturists.
Mr.  Sargent's  publications  include  many  articles  to
horticultural  magazines;  "Skeleton  Tours  through
England,  Ireland,  and  Scotland  "  (New  York,  1866) ;
"  Treatise  on  Landscape  Gardening  "  (1875) ;  and  he
added  a  full  supplement  to  the  6th  edition  of  An-
drew J.  Downing  s  "  Landscape  Gardening  "  (1859).
— Henry's  brother,  Lucius  Manlius,  author,  b.  in
Boston.  Mass.,  25  June,  1786;  d.  in  West  Roxbury,
Mass.,  2  June.  1867,  studied  two  years  at  Harvard,
and  studied  law,  but  did  not  practise,  devoting
himself  to  literary  pursuits,  to  philanthropic  work,
and  to  the  temperance  cause,  for  which  he  wrote
and  lectured  for  more  than  thirty  years.  His  earli-
est publication  was  "Translations  from  the  Minor
Latin  Poets"  (Boston,  1807).  which  was  followed
by  the  original  poems  "  Hubert  and  Helen,  and
other  Verses"  (1812);  an  "Ode"  (1813):  "Three
Temperance  Tales,"  that  passed  through  130  edi-
tions, and  were  translated  into  several  languages
(1848);  "Dealings  with  the  Dead "(1856);  "Remi-
niscences of  Samuel  Dexter  "  (1858) ;  and  "  The  Ir-
repressible Conflict "  (1861).  He  contributed  to  the
"  Boston  Transcript "  for  many  years  under  the
signature  of  "Sigma,"  and  his  writings  were  char-
acterized by  honesty  of  opinion  and  vigor  of  style.
His  papers  on  the  coolie  trade  were  subsequently
collected  and  republished  in  England  by  the  Re?
form  association.  His  numerous  poems  were  never
printed  in  book-form.  He  married  a  sister  of
Horace  Binney.  See  "Reminiscences  of  Lucius
M.  Sargent,"  by  John  H.  Sheppard  (Boston,  1869).
— Lucius  Manlius's  son,  Horace  Binney,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Quincy,  Mass..  30  June,  1821,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1843,  and  at  the  law  depart-
ment there  in  1845.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  he  was  senior  aide  on  the  staff  of  Gov.  John
A.  Andrew,  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  1st  regiment,  Massachusetts  cavalry,  in  1861,
became  colonel  of  the  s^me  regiment  in  October.
1862,  was  on  duty  with  the  forces  in  South  Caro-
lina, in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  and  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Gulf,  participating  in  the  engagements
of  Secessionville.  Culpeper.  and  Rapidan  Station,
and  in  the  battles  of  Antietam,  South  Mountain.
Chancellorsville,  and  in  the  Red  River  campaign
imder  Gen.  Banks,  where  he  was  wounded  in  ac-
tion, 21  March,  1864,  was  bre vetted  brigadier-gen-
eral for  "gallantry  and  good  conduct,"  and  29


SAROENT


SARGENT


899


Sept.,  1804,  was  mustcnMl  out  on  account  of  wounds
nHfivwl  in  action.  He  hna  boon  a  frequent  c<m-
tribut4)r  ti)  |M-riiKlicuI  litenittirv  and  the  pretui,  and
has  deiiveri><l  niinu'nm.s  addrt's*.-**':*. — Another  son
of  Lucius  Manliu.x,  LurluN  MaiiliiiH,  soldier,  b.
in  lioston,  ir)  Sept.,  1H20;  d.  lu-nr  Ucllefli'ld.  V'a.,
9  Di-c,  1804,  wui(  ^niduated  at  Harvard  in  1848,
and  at  the  medical  department  then*  in  1857.  be-
coming; hourM'  .sur{jeon  an<l  ilis|H'nsary  physician  at
the  MassiichuM'tts  jjenenil  liosiiital.  lie  wils  com-
miMiioned  surjjeon  in  the  2d  Ma.ssachusctls  volun-
teers in  May.  18<51,  but  resijjned  in  ()ctol>er  of  that
year,  and  U>c-ame  captain  in  the  1st  Mass^m-hust-tts
cavalry,  was  ordered  to  the  Army  of  the  I'titomac,
and  imrticitmte*!  in  the  Iwtties  of  Kelly's  Ford,
Antietnm,  .Viuth  Mountain.  Fre<lericksbur>;.  and
Chancellorsville.  He  l>ccame  major  in  his  former
reginu'nt,  2  Jan..  1804.  lieutt-nant-colonel,  'M)  S«'pt,.
and  was  mortally  wounded  in  an  en^'agement  on
Meherrin  river— John  Osborne,  lawyer,  b.  in  (Jlou-
eester,  Mass..  20  Sept.,  1811,  is  the  grands<M)  of  the
first  Lucius  Manlius's  first  cousin.  He  was  jn^iu-
ated  at  Harvanl  in  IWJO.  where  he  founde<l  the
"Collegian,"  in  which  he  was  aided  by  his  brother
Eixjs,  Oliver  Weiulell  Holmes,  and  ()ther  students.
He  then  studied  law  in  Boston,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1833,  and  in  1834-'7  contributed  the  |)olitical
articles  to  the  "  Boston  Atlas."  He  removed  to
New  York  city  in  1838  to  l)ecome  jussociate  editor
of  the  "  Courier  and  Encjuirer,"  but  resigned  after
the  election  of  President  Harrison,  resunjed  his
profession  of  the  law,  taking  charge,  in  1848,  as  a
volunteer  for  the  Whig  congressional  comnnttee,
of  the  "  Battery,"  a  campaign  pawr  publishe<l  in
Wa-shington,  to  advocate  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor's
election  to  the  presidency.  He  subsequently-
foundetl  the  '•  Republic"  with  Alexander  C,  Bul-
litt, in  which  he  sup{torte<l  the  compromis«>  meas-
ures, conducting  the  paper  on  the  principle  of  op-
position to  both  the  Abolition  an(I  Secession  par-
ties. He  discontinued  its  publication  at  the  close
of  President  Fillmore's  administration,  and  subse-
quently practised  law  in  Washington  and  New
York  city.  He  resitled  abroatl  in  1801-'73.  and
since  the  latter  date  has  live«l  in  New  York  city.
He  declinetl  the  mission  to  China,  which  was  of-
fered him  by  President  Fillmore.  Mr.  Sargent  has
done  varied  literary  work,  and  his  publications  in-
clude a  "  Lecture  on  the  Late  Improvements  in
Steam  Navigation  and  the  Arts  of  Naval  Warfare,"
with  a  biographical  sketch  of  John  Ericsson  (New
York,  1844).  a  version  of  Anastasius  Grlln's  "  I^ast
Knight."  founded  on  incidents  in  the  life  of  the
Em|>eror  Maximilian  (New  York,  1872).  three  legal
pamphlets  reviewing  "  The  Rule  in  Minot's  Ca.se"
(New  York.  1871).  and  four  nund)ers  of  "Chapters
for  the  Times,  by  a  lierkshire  Farmer."  [wlitical
(Ijee.  Mass..  1884). — John  Osborne's  brother.  Epes,
editor,  b.  in  Gloucester,  Mass.,  27  Sept..  1813;  d.
in  Boston.  Mass.,  31  Dec.  1880,  accompanied  his
father  to  Russia  when  a  lad.  and.  after  studying  at
the  Boston  Iiatin-sch(M>l  and  at  Harvard,  aban-
donetl  a  collegiate  course,  devoting  himself  to  lit-
erature. His  earliest  pro<luctions  ap|K>ared  in  the
"Collegian."  and  he  sulisequently  connected  him-
self with  the  "  Bost^m  Daily  Advertiser"  and  the
"Atlas,"  and  in  1839  removed  to  New  York  to  be-
come an  assistant  editor  of  the  "  Mirror."  He  re-
tume<l  to  Boston  about  1840,  and  edited  the  "  Even-
ing Transcript "  for  sevenil  years.  n»tiring  from  that
charge  to  devote  himsi>|f  to  editing  a  series  of  edu-
cational works.  During  his  editorial  career  Mr.
Sargent  held  pleasant  relations  with  Daniel  Wel>-
ster,  John  C.  Calhoun.  William  (.'.  Preston,  and
Henry  Clay,  and  Mr.  CUy  said  that  Mr.  Sargent's


^^h^yJl^e-n^xyv


"  Memoir"  of  him  was  the  l)est  and  moat  authen-
tic in  existence.  While  a  resident  of  New  York  he
was  a  meml)er  of  the  Cnion  club,  and  a  foun<ler  of
the  New  York  club.  He  was  a  lalK>rious  student  and
worker,  an«l  en^g«Ml
with  success  m  al-
most every  branch
of  literature.  He
Itegan  to  write  inx
the  stAge  in  18:i0,
and  pnHluc«Hl  the
"  Bri«le  of  (Jenoa,"
a  {Mx-tical  drama  in
five  a<;ts,  which  was
played  with  success
at  the  Tremont  the-
atre, I^>ston,  in  Feb-
niary,  1837,  and  sub-
seciuently  in  New
( )rleans  and  New
York.  He  produced
•*  Velasco  "  the  fol-
lowing November  at
the  Tremont  the-
atre, Ellen  Tree  tak-
ing the  part  of  Isi-
dora.  His  other  plavs,  "  Change  Makes  Change,"
a  comedy,  and  the  "  Priestess."  a  tragedy,  were  suc-
cessfully received  in  this  country  and  abroad.  His
novels  and  tales  for  the  voung  include  "  Wealth  and
Worth  "  (New  York.  1840) ;  "  What's  to  l)e  Done,  or
the  Will  and  the  Way  "  (1841) ;  "  Fleetwood,  or  the
Stain  of  a  Birth  "  (1845) ;  and  "  Peculiar,  a  Tale  of
the  Great  Transition."  which  pictures  the  social
changes  in  the  south  during  the  early  years  of  the
civil  war  (18(J3).  His  [K>ems  include  "  .Songs  of  the
Sea  "  (Boston,  1847) ;  a  s<>cond  volume  of  "  Poems  "
(1858);  "The  Woman  who  Daretl  "(1809);  and  nu-
merous fugitive  poems,  of  which  the  most  popu-
lar are  "  Life  on  the  Ocean  Wave."  the  lyric  on  the
death  of  Warren,  and  the  lines  lx>ginning  "Oh.  ye
keen  breezes  from  the  salt  Atlantic."  His  miscel-
laneous works  are  "The  Life  and  Services  of  Henry
Clay"  (Auburn,  1843;  with  additions  by  Horac«
Greeley.  1852);  "American  Adventure  bv  Land
and  Sea"  (2  vols..  Boston,  1847);  "The  Critic  Criti-
cised" (1850);  "Arctic  Adventures  by  Sea  and
liand"  (1^57 :  with  additions,  1800);' "Original
Dialogues"  (1801).  He  edited  the  lives  of  Camp-
bell, Collins,  (Joldsmith.  (iray,  HcmmI.  an<l  Rogers,
with  their  poems ( Boston.  1852-'(55) ;  " Select  W  orks
of  l^njamin  Franklin,"  with  his  autobiography
and  a  memoir  (Philadelphia.  1853) ;  the  •*  Works  of
Horace  and  James  Smith"  (New  York.  1857);  and
the  "  M<Hlem  Drama  "  (15  vols..  184f^-'58).  Shortly
l)efore  his  death  he  completed  a  "CvclopaMlia  of
English  and  American  Poetry  "  (New  York.  18Ki). —
Lucius  Manlius's  great-nephew,  Charlen  Sprag'ue,
arboriculturist,  b.  in  Ikiston,  Mass..  24  .\pril.  1841,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1802.  lH*came  lieuten-
ant and  aide-<le-cainp  of  I'.  S.  volunteers  in  No-
vember of  that  year,  aide-de-camp  in  180:i.  and  was
brevetted  major  of  volunteers  in  1S<>.'>.  He  was
chosen  director  of  the  Itotanic  garden  and  .\niold
arl)oretum  of  Har>'ard  in  1873.  ami  professor  of  ar-
iKiriculture  in  1879.  Prof.  Sargent  planneil  the
Jesup  collection  of  North  American  wikhIs  in  the
American  museum  of  natural  hi.storj%  New  York
city,  in  1880.  He  wjus  chnirniun  of  a  commis.«»ion
to  examine  the  Adirondack  fori'sts  and  devise
mejisures  for  their  j)res<'rvation  in  1885.  and  in
1888  be<'ame  eilitor  and  p-neral  manager  of  "Gar-
den and  Forest."  a  wet-kly  journal  of  horticulture
and  fort'strv.  His  publications  incliule  a  "Cata-
logue of  the  Forest  Trees  of  North  America"


400


SARMIENTO


SARMIENTO  VALLADARES


(Wjishinprton.  D.  C,  1880) ;  "  Pruning  Forests  and
Ornamental  Trees."  translated  from  the  French  of
Adolphe  Des  Cars  (Boston,  1881) ;  "  Reports  on  the
Forests  of  North  America"  (Washington,  1884);
"  The  Woods  of  the  United  States,  with  an  Account
of  their  Structure,  Qualities,  and  Uses  "  (New  York.
1885) ;  and  "  Report  of  the  Forest  Commission  of
the  State  of  New  York"  (Albany,  1885).

SARMIENTO,  Domingo  Faiistiiio  (sar-me-
en'-lo),  president  of  the  Argentine  Republic,  b.  in
San  Juan,  i;J  Feb.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Asuncion,  Paraguay,
11  Sept.,  1888.  In  1829  he  took  part  in  the  rising
against  Rosas  and  Quiroga,  and  at  its  defeat  took
refuge  in  Chili,  where  he  was  successively  clerk,
school-master,  and  overseer  in  a  mine.  He  after-
ward entered  journalism,  and  in  1842,  under  the
protection  of  the  minister,  Manuel  Montt  (q.  v.),
he  founded  the  first  normal  school  for  teachers  in
South  America.  In  1845-'7  he  travelled,  by  order
of  the  Chilian  government,  in  Europe  and  the
United  States,  to  study  the  primary-school  system.
He  made  the  acquaintance  of  (5obden,  (juizot,
Humboldt,  and  Horace  Mann,  and  under  Mann's
influ€ftice  he  prepared  a  work  on  popular  educa-
tion, which  was  afterward  published  by  order  of
the  Chilian  government.  On  his  return  to  Chili
he  founded  a  weekly  paper,  "  La  Cronica,"  in
which  he  advocated  the  establishment  in  his  coun-
try of  a  Federal  republic.  In  1849  he  formed  part
of  the  staff  of  "  El  Progreso,"  and  founded  "  El
Monitor  de  las  Escuelas,"  in  which  he  advocated
the  interests  of  education.  When  Gen.  Urquiza,
aided  by  Brazil  and  Uruguay,  revolted  against
Rosas,  Sarmiento  with  other  exiles  left  Chili  in
1851,  and  took  part  in  the  campaign  that  ended,
3  Feb.,  1852,  with  the  battle  of  Monte  Caseros.  In
1855  he  established  himself  in  Buenos  Ayres,  and
devoted  his  time  to  the  promotion  of  public  in-
struction, founding  the  paper  "  Los  Anales  de  la
Educacion  Comun."  In  1856  he  demanded  the
establishment  of  a  department  of  public  instruc-
tion, and  he  was  appointed  its  director  in  1857,
establishing  a  model  college  in  Buenos  Ayres.  In
1859  he  was  elected  senator,  and  in  1860,  as  minis-
ter of  public  instruction,  he  influenced  the  vote  of
|;100,()00  for  the  establishment  of  schools.  In  1861
he  was  minister  of  the  interior,  and  in  1862  he  was
elected  governor  of  San  Juan,  where  he  suppressed
a  revolt  of  partisan  chieftains.  He  was  made  min-
ister to  Chili  and  Peru  in  1864,  and  to  the  United
States  in  1865.  While  here  he  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  Argentine  Republic  for  six  years,  as-
suming office,  12  Oct.,  1868.  During  his  adminis-
tration the  war  with  Paraguay  was  brought  to  a
successful  termination,  railways  and  telegraphs
were  constructed,  schools  were  multiplied,  a  Na-
tional college  was  established  in  each  province,
the  National  observatory  was  founded,  and  immi-
gration was  promoted.  After  that  time  he  was
senator,  obtained  the  rank  of  general,  and  was
proprietor  and  editor  of  "  El  Censor,"  continu-
ing always  to  protect  the  interests  of  public  edu-
cation. Of  his  many  works  the  most  impor-
tant are  "  De  la  Educacion  popular "  (Santiago,
1848) ;  "  Viajes  por  Europa,  Africa  y  America "
(1848) ;  "  Memoria  sobre  Instruccion  Primaria "
(1849) ;  *'  Argiropolis,  6  la  capital  de  los  Estados
Confederados"  (1850;  French  translation,  Paris,
1851);  "  CMvilizacion  y  Barbaric,  6  Facundo  Qui-
roga y  Aldao "  (1851 :  French  translation,  Paris,
1853);  "  Vida  de  Abran  Lincoln"  (New  York,
1866) ;  and  "  Las  Escuelas.  base  de  la  prosperidad
en  los  Estados  Unidos"  (1868).

SARMIENTO  GAMBOA,  Pedro  de,  Spanish
mariner,  b.  in  Galicia  about  1530 ;  d.  there  about


1590.  He  was  the  commander  of  the  naval  sta-
tion in  the  Pacific  in  1578,  when  Sir  Francis  Drake
committed  depredations  on  the  coast  of  Peru  and
Mexico,  and,  in  the  belief  that  Drake  would  re-
turn by  the  Strait  of  Magellan.  Sarmiento  was
ordered  by  the  viceroy  to  take  possession  of  that
passage  and  intercept  him.  He  left  Callao  with
eleven  vessels  in  1579,  and  after  vainly  waiting  for
Drake,  who  had  returned  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
he  explored  the  coast,  and,  after  some  encounters
with  the  natives,  returned  to  Spain  in  1580.  On
his  reporting  the  results  of  his  expedition  to  Philip
II.,  the  latter  resolved  to  fortify  the  strait,  and
sent,  toward  the  end  of  1581,  an  expedition  of
twenty-four  vessels  with  2,500  men  irom  Cadiz,
under  command  of  Sarmiento  and  Diego  Flores
Valdez.  The  expedition  was  unfortunate,  as  eight
vessels  were  lost  in  a  storm,  and  Flores,  on  account
of  rivalry  with  Sarmiento,  abandoned  him  with
twelve  vessels  in  the  entrj'  of  the  strait  and  re-
turned to  Spain.  With  only  four  vessels  Sarmiento
continued  the  voyage,  arriving  in  January,  1583.
at  a  favorable  point,  where  he  founded  a  fort  and
colony,  which  he  called  San  Felipe  (afterward  Port
Famine).  He  left  a  garrison  of  300  men,  and  sailed
in  1584  for  Europe,  but  was  captured  by  an  Eng-
lish fleet,  carried  to  England,  and  kept  "a  prisoner
till  1588.  Meanwhile  his  colony  had  dissolved  and
gradually  perished  of  starvation,  one  of  the  sur-
vivors being  rescued  by  Cavendish's  fleet  in  1587,
and  another  by  Meriche  in  1589.  After  his  libera-
tion Sarmiento  made  a  representation  of  his  expe-
rience, and  a  complaint  against  Flores,  to  Kmg
Philip  II.,  which  was  first  printed  in  Madrid  in
1708,  and  again  in  vol.  v.,  of  the  collection  of
American  documents  that  has  been  in  course  of

fublication  by  the  Spanish  government  since  1864.
t  seems  that  Sarmiento's  complaint  was  neglected,
as  he  died  soon  afterward  in  poverty.

SARMIENTO  DE  SOTOMAYOR,  Garcia,
Count  de  Salvatierra,  viceroy  of  Mexico  and  Peru,
b.  in  Spain  about  1590 ;  d.  in  Cartagena,  Colombia,
in  1655.  He  was  sent  to  replace  the  Marquis  de
Villena,  who  had  been  deposed  by  royal  order,  on
suspicion  of  favoring  the  independence  of  Portu-
gal, and  arrived  in  Mexico  in  1642,  receiving  the
executive  on  23  Nov.  from  Bishop  Juan  de  Palafox.
In  1644  he  sent  an  unsuccessful  expedition  under
Juan  Gonzalez  Barriga  to  explore  and  colonize
California.  In  the  next  year  the  city  suffered  by
an  inundation  of  the  lagoons,  and  tHe  viceroy  or-
dered the  cut  of  Nochistango,  which  had  been  be-
gun by  Enrique  Martinez,  to  be  repaired.  The
city  of  Salvatierra  (now  in  the  state  of  Guanajuato^
was  founded  in  1647,  and  in  the  same  year  the
viceroy  was  obliged  to  interfere  between  Bishop
Palafox  and  the  Jesuits.  In  1648  he  was  promoted
viceroy  of  Peru,  and,  sailing  from  Acapulco,  he  en-
tered Lima  on  20  Sept.  His  government  in  Peru
did  not  present  any  noteworthy  features,  and  he
delivered  the  executive  to  his  successor,  Count  de
Alva  de  Aliste,  on  24  Feb.,  1655.  dying,  on  his  re-
turn voyage  to  Spain,  in  Cartagena,

SARMIENTO  VALLADARES,  Jos«,  Count
de  Montezuma,  viceroy  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Spain
about  1650;  d.  there  in'1717.  Through  his  wife,
a  descendant  of  the  Emperor  Montezuma  II.,  he
inherited  the  title  of  Count  de  Montezuma  and
Tula,  and  in  1696  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Mexico,
receiving  the  executive  on  18  Dec.  from  the  provis-
ional viceroy.  Juan  de  Ortega  Montafies.  Dur-
ing his  administration  the  Jesuit  Salvatierra  set
out  on  the  first  successful  expetlition  to  Lower
California  in  1697,  and  during  the  same  year  he
quelled  a  riot  that  was  caused  by  scarcity  of  corn.


SARRASIN


SARTAIN


401


In  1007  ho  hIso  wnt  hii  unsuccewful  exwlition  to
expel  the  Daiush  fnun  St.  Thomwt.  When  Kinjf
Charles  11.  ilicd  in  1700,  ap|>ointinK  the  jrrHinlsori
of  Ijouis  XIV.  his  heir,  the  Count  of  Montezuma,
who  fli«l  not  favor  the  house  of  IV»urhon,  solicited
his  nM-ali.  ntu\,  as  the  new  kinj?.  Philip  V.,  feared
Sannicnto's  |uirti»lity  for  the  Au-strian  succession,
the  hitler  wiis  onlennl  to  delivor  the  exe<Mitive
a^iin  to  Hishoi)  Ortejfa,  which  he  did  on  4  Nov.,
1701.  On  25  Nov.,  1704,  Sarniiento  was  created
Duke  of  Atlixco  and  (jjandee  of  S|>ain.

HARKASIN,  Michel,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Prance  in  U'tTA);  d.  »  Sept.,  17:J4.  lie  resided  at
QueUv  when  Canada  was  a  French  de|)en<leney,
and  was  a  nieml>er  of  the  superior  council  of  the
colony.  lie  Uvame  j>hysician  to  the  kinfj,  keejHjr
of  the  kinjr's  seal  in  175W,  and  a  nienib'r  of  the
Academy  of  sciences  of  Paris.  On  his  arrival  the
historian  Charlevoix  expresstnl  .surprise  at  finding
»o  learned  a  nmn  in  the  eolonv.  Sarrasin  contrib-
utwi  many  articles  to  the  nublications  of  various
learned  s«K'ietit.«,  among  otners  a  "  Description  of
the  Castor,"  in  the  memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  sci-
ences (1704);  "A  Ijetter  on  the  Mineral  Waters  of
Cap  de  la  Mag«leleine,"  in  the  memoirs  of  Trevoux
(1730):  "Description  of  the  Water  or  .Musk  Itat  of
America,"  in  the  Paris  "Documents";  and  a  de-
scription of  a  plant  which  he  ha<^l  discovered  and
name<l  "Sarracenia  purpurea."  The  whole  genus
of  which  this  is  a  species  was  named  "Sarracenia  "
by  Tournefort,  in  honor  of  Dr.  Sarrasin.

SARTAIN,  John,  artist,  b.  in  London.  Eng-
land, 24  Oct.,  1808.  He  learned  to  engrave  in  the
line  manner,  in  which  style  he  pn^dnced  several  of
the  plates  in  William  Young  Ottley's  "  Karly  Flor-
entine School"  (Loudon,  lb20). In  1828  he  began

to  practise  mezzo-
tints, and  when  he
came  tothe  United
States  in  1830  was
one  of  the  first
to  introduce  that
branch  of  engrav-
ing here.  Sul)se-
quently  he  usual-
ly mingled  both
styles,  with  the
addition  of  stip-

Eling.  In  England
e had studied
under


yaintmg
ohn  \  arlev  and


Henry  Kichter,
and  in  Philadel-
phia he  became  the
Supil  of  Joshua
haw  and  Manuel
J.  de  Franca.  For
about  ten  years  after  his  arrival  in  this  country  he
was  also  engaged  in  painting  portraits  in  oil  and
miniatures  on  ivory.  During  the  same  time  he
found  employment  in  making  designs  for  bank-note
vignettes,  and  also  in  drawing  on  wood  ft>r  lxK)k-
illustration.  In  184ii  he  became  proprietor  and  ed-
itor of  "  Campbell's  Foreign  Semi-Monthly  Maga-
zine," an<l  thereafter  devoted  himself  entirely  to  en-
graving and  to  literary  work.  He  had  an  intere.st  at
the  same  time  in  the  "  Eclectic  Museum,"  for  which,
later,  when  John  H.  Agnew  was  alone  in  charge,
he  simply  engraved  the  plates.  In  1848  he  pur-
chased a  one-half  interest  in  the  "  Cnion  Maga-
zine." a  New  Yorkj>erio<lical,  which  he  transferrwl
to  Phila<lelphia.  The  name  was  changed  to  "  .Sar-
tain's  Cnion  Magazine,"  and  during  the  four  years
of  its  existence  the  journal  became  widely  known.
VOL.  v.— 26


During  this  |ieri(Ml,  U>siclf>s  his  e<litorial  work  and
the  engravings  that  hwl  to  U*  made  regularly  for
the  [wriodicals  with  which  he  was  c-onneoted,  Sar-
tain  pnKiuced  an  enormous  (juantity  of  platen  for
lMK)k-illustrati(m.  The  framing  prints  from  hia
stu<lio  include  "The  County  Election  in  Miswouri,"
after  Hiiigham  (alK>ut  18.'>.j);  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Rttliert
(iilmor.  of  Haltimore,  two  plates  after  .Sir  Thomas
Ijawrence;  David  Paul  Hrown,  after  John  Neagle;
"Christ  Reie<'ted,"  nfter  H^-iijaiuin  West  (1H82);
"Men  of  Pmgress.  .American  Inventors"  (lH(t2),
"  Z«'islK'rger  prea<'hing  to  the  Indians  at  Oosgo-
shunk"  (al)out  1862),  and  "The  Iron-Worker  and
King  S*)lomon  "  (1870),  the  last  three  after  Chris-
tian Schuessele;  "John  Knox  and  Mary,  (^ueen  of
Scots,"  after  Emmanuel  Ix»utze;  "  Homestea*!  of
Henry  Clav,"  after  Hamilton;  "  E<lwin  Forrest"
and  "'The  liattle  of  Getty.sburg"  (1876-'7),  after
Peter  F.  liothermel.  Since  he  came  to  Philadel-
phia, Mr.  Sartain  has  taken  an  active  interest  in
art  matters  there.  He  has  held  various  offices  in
the  Artists'  fund  society,  the  School  of  design  for
women,  and  the  Pennsylvania  academy,  and  has
been  ac-tively  connected  with  other  e<lucational
institutions  m  the  city.  He  has  vi.sited  Europe
several  times,  and  on  the  occasion  of  his  second
visit  in  1862  he  was  elected  a  njemljer  of  the  society
"Artis  et  AraicitiiB"in  Am.sterdam.  In  1876  he
ha<l  charge  of  the  art  department  at  the  Centennial
exhibition  in  Philadelphia.  In  riK'ognition  of  his
services  there,  the  king  of  Italy  conferral  on  him
the  title  of  cavaliere,  and  he  has  receivetl  also  other
decorations  and  medals.  His  architectural  knowl-
edge has  been  freijuently  called  into  retjuisition,
and  he  has  designed  .several  monuments,  notably
that  to  Washington  and  l^afayette  in  Monument
cemetery,  Philadelphia,  for  which  he  al.so  nuMlelled
the  two  me<lallion  heads. — His  son,  Samuel,  en-
graver, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  8  Oct.,  1830.  at  the  age
of  sixteen  l)egan  to  engrave  under  his  father,  and
since  his  twenty-first  year  has  been  in  business  for
himself.  His  print^s  include  "  Clear  the  Track."  after
C.  Sc^huessele^'  (1854);  "Christ  blessing  Little  Chil-
dren," after  Sir  Charies  lx)cke  Eastlake  (1861);
"One  of  the  Chosen,"  after  Guy ;  "Christ  stilling
the  Tempest,"  after  Hamilton  ; ""  The  Song  of  the
Angels,"  after  Thomas  Moran ;  "  Evangeline  " ;  and
various  portraits  after  Thomas  Sullv.  John  Neagle,
and  others.  He  has  principally  devotetl  himself
to  engraving  portraits  and  other  i)lates  for  books.
He  holds  offices  in  the  Artists'  fund  society,  the
Franklin  institute,  and  other  art  and  scientific
soc-ieties  of  Philadelphia. — Another  son.  >Villiani,
b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa..  21  Nov..  1843.  practised
engraving  under  his  father  until  about  his  twenty-
fourth  year,  producinjf  some  very  go<xl  plates,
notablv  "Young  America  crushing' Rebellion  and
Sedition  "  (1864)  and  "  Little  Samuel,"  after  James
Sant  (1866).  During  1867-8  he  .studietl  under
Christian  Schues.sele  and  at  the  Pennsylvania  acad-
emy. He  then  went  to  p^urofH",  where  he  studied
with  Iakmx  B<mnat  and  at  the  l<k?ole  des  In^auxarts,
in  Paris.  After  an  absence  of  eight  years  he  re-
turned to  the  Cniteil  States  in  1877,  settling  in
New  York,  where  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the
National  academy  in  1880.  He  was  one  of  the
original  members  of  the  Society  of  American  art-
i.sts,  an<l  is  a  meml>er  also  of  other  art  a-ssociat ions.
He  receivetl  a  silver  me<lal  in  lioston  in  1881,  and
honorable  mention  in  Philailelphia  in  1887.  Mr.
Sartain  paints  Iwth  landsca{>e  and  figure  .subjects.
Many  of  his  pictures  n'presentstrwt  scenes  in  Italy
and  Algiers.  Among  his  works  are  "  Tomlw  of  the
Saints, at  Bouzareah"  (1874); "  Italian  I^>v's  Head"
and  "Italian  Girl's Head"  (1876);  "  >?arci88us "


402


SARTORI


SATTERLEE


(1878).  owned  by  Smith  college,  Northampton,
Mass.;  "Nubian  Sheik"  (1879);  "A  (juiet  Mo-
ment "  (1879-'80) ;  "  A  Chapter  of  the  Koran  "  and
'*  Paquita"  (1883).  An  exhibition  of  his  works  was
held  in  Boston  in  1884.  He  is  well  known  as  a
teacher,  and  has  been  connected  with  several  art
academies  in  New  York  and  Philadelphia. — John's
daughter,  Emily,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  17
March,  1841,  first  practised  art  as  an  engraver  un-
der her  father.  She  studied  from  1864  till  1872  at
the  Pennsylvania  academy  under  Christian  Schues-
sele,  and  then,  until  1875,  with  Evariste  Luminals
in  Paris.  Her  style  in  engraving  is  a  mixture  of
line  and  mezzotint.  She  has  engraved  some  fram-
ing prints,  and  a  large  number  of  portraits  for
book-illustration.  As  a  painter,  she  has  devoted
herself  principally  to  portraiture,  painting  genre
pictures  occasionally.  Her  "  Reproof  "  was  at  the
Centennial  exhibition  of  1876,  where  she  gained  a
medal.  The  "  Mary  Smith  prize  "  was  awarded
her  at  the  Philadelphia  acailemy  in  1881,  and  again
in  1883.  Prom  November,  1881,  till  February,
1883,  she  was  art  editor  of  "  Our  Continent,"  and
since  September,  1886,  she  has  been  principal  of
the  Philadelphia  school  of  design  for  women.

SARTORI.  Lewis  Constant,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Bloomsburv,  Burlington  co.,  N.  J.,  3  June,  1812.
He  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman.  2  Feb.,
1829,  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  8  Sept.,  1841,
and  during  the  Mexican  war  wjis  attached  to  the
bomb-brig  "'Stromboli,"  in  which  he  participated
in  the  capture  of  Goatzacoalcas  and  Tabasco  in
1847-'8.  He  next  served  in  the  Mediterranean
squadron,  and  was  in  the  sloop  "John  Adams,"  of
the  Pacific  souadron,  in  1855-'6,  during  which  time
he  commanaed  an  expedition,  and  had  engage-
ments with  the  Feejees.  Upon  his  return  from
this  cruise  he  was  on  duty  at  the  Philadelphia
navy-yard  in  1857-'8.  He  was  promoted  to  com-
mander, 7  April,  1861,  and  assigned  to  the  steamer
"  Flag"  on  the  South  Atlantic  blockade.  He  com-
manded the  sloop-of-war  "  Portsmouth  "  in  the
Western  Gulf  blockading  squadron  in  1863-5,  and
the  steamer  "  Agawam,"  of  the  North  Atlantic
squadron,  in  1865-'6.  He  was  promoted  to  cap-
tain, 26  Sept.,  1866,  served  in  the  North  Pacific
squadron  in  1868-'70,  was  made  commodore,  12
Dec,  1873,  and  retired,  3  June,  1874.

SARTWELL,  Henry  Parlier,  scientist,  b.  in
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  18  April,  1792;  d.  in  Penn  Yan,
N.  Y.,  15  Nov.,  1867.  After  receiving  a  classical
education,  he  began  to  practise  medicine  at  nine-
teen years  of  age.  He  was  a  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.
army  during  the  second  war  with  Great  Britain,
and  subsequently  settled  in  Bethel,  Ontario  co.,
N.  Y.,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of
botany.  He  removed  to  Penn  Yan,  N.  Y..  in  1830,
where  he  continued  to  reside.  His  botanical  la-
bors extended  over  a  |)eriod  of  forty-six  years,  and
his  collections  of  American  plants  are  found  in
many  herbariums  in  Europe  and  America.  About
1846  he  gave  his  entire  attention  to  the  study  of
the  genus  Carex,  one  of  the  most  extensive  and
diflicult  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  He  then  con-
ceived the  idea  of  gathering  and  grouping  all  the
indigenous  species  of  Carex  in  North  America,
which  resulted  in  his  publication  of  his  work  en-
titled "  Carices  Americanae  Septentrionalis  Exsic-
cata? "  (2  vols..  New  York,  1848).  The  third  part
of  this  work,  intended  to  include  fifty  new  species,
was  begun,  and  more  than  forty  species  had  already
been  collected  for  it,  when  he  died.  His  herbarium,
the  labor  of  forty  vears.  containing  about  8,000
species,  is  now  in  Hamilton  college,  N.  Y.  Dr.
Sartwell  kept  daily  records  of  the  weather  for  forty


years  previous  to  his  death,  which  were  published
in  Penn  Yan,  and  sent  to  the  Smithsonian  institu-
tion. Hamilton  college  recognized  his  work  by
conferring  upon  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  1864.

SASNETT,  William  Jacob,  clergyman,  b.  in
Hancock  county,  Ga.,  29  April,  1820;  d.  in  Mont-

g ornery,  Ala.,  3  Nov.,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at
'glethorpe  university  in  1839,  and  studied  law,,
but  abandoned  it  for  the  ministry,  and  speedily
rose  to  eminence.  He  was  professor  of  English  in
Emory  college,  Ga.,  in  1849-'57,  president  of  La-
grange female  college  in  1858,  and  the  next  year
became  principal  of  East  Alabama  college  in  Au-
burn, lie  wrote  and  six)ke  constantly  in  favor  of
the  higher  education  or  women.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Emory  college.  Dr.  Sasnett'»
publications  include  many  magazine  articles,  "I)is-
cussions  in  Literature  and  Religion"  (Nashville,.
Tenn.,  1850),  and  "Progress"  (18.55).

SASOONAN,  or  ALLUMMAPEES  ("one  who
is  well  wrapped  up  "),  Indian  chief,  d.  in  the  autumn
of  1747.  He  was  king  of  the  Delawares  as  early
as  1718,  and  in  that  year  headed  the  deputation
of  Indian  chieftains  at  Philadelphia  who  signed
an  absolute  release  to  the  proprietaries  for  lands-
"situate  between  Delaware  and  Susquehanna  from
Duck  creek  to  the  mountains  on  this  side  Lechay,"
which  lands  had  been  granted  by  their  ancestors
to  William  Penn.  In  1728  he  removed  to  the
Susquehanna.  He  was  friendly  to  the  whites,  and
an  honest,  true-heartetl  man  of  good  natural  sense.
SASSACUS,  Pequot  chief,  b.  near  Groton,.
Conn.,  about  1560;  d.  in  the  Mohawk  settlement
in  June,  1637.  He  was  chief  of  the  Petiuot  Indians,
a  brave  warrior,  and  thought  by  the  other  tribes  ta
be  endowed  with  supernatural  nowers.  He  was,  in
consequence,  the  terror  of  the  New  England  coast,
and  a  dreaded  foe  to  the  settlers.  His  domain
comprised  the  present  towns  of  Waterville,  Ston-
ington,  North  Stonington,  and  Groton,  and  his
tribe  numbered  700  warriors,  besides  women  and
children.  In  1637  they  attacked  a  small  English
fort  at  Saybrook,  murdered  several  women  at
Wethersfield,  and  carried  two  girls  into  captivity.
The  colonists  then  mustered  all  their  able  men,
and,  under  command  of  John  Mason  {q.  v.),  attacked
the  Pequot  settlement  at  Porter's  rocks  on  Mystic
river,  5  June,  1637.  The  colonists  were  aided  by
several  Indian  tribes,  including  the  Narragansetts,
who  were  so  alarmed  by  the  fact  that  Sassacus  was
in  command  of  the  Pequots  that,  when  the  hour  of
the  attack  came,  they  fell  back  in  terror,  exclaim-
ing: "Sassacus  in  the  fort!  Sassacus  in  the  fort!
Sassacus  all  one  god  !  Nobody  can  kill  him  ! "  The
whites  were  finally  victorious,  but  the  chief  escaped
to  the  Mohawks,  by  whom  he  was  soon  murdered.
SATTERLEE.  Henry  Yates,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city,  11  Jan.,  1843.  He  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1863,  and  at  the  General  theo-
logical seminary.  New  York  city,  in  1866,  was  or-
dained deacon  the  same  year  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  and  priest  in  1867.  He  was  as-
sistant rector  of  the  church  at  Wappinger's  Falls,
Dutchess  CO.,  N.  Y.,  in  186.5-'75,  became  its  rector
at  the  latter  date,  and  since  1882  has  had  charge
of  Calvary  church.  New  York  citv.  Union  college
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1882.  In  1888  he
declined  the  assistant  bishopric  of  Ohio.  Dr.  Sat-
terlee  has  been  actively  interested  in  the  Epis-
copal church  congress,  the  parochial  missions  and
temperance  movements,  and  in  the  home  and  for-
eign missionary  work  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  He  has  published  serial  articles  in  the
magazines,  and  several  sermons,  and  manuals  of
religious  instruction.— His  cousin,  Walter,  artist,.


SATTERLER


SAUNDERS


403


b.  In  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  18  Jnn..  1H44.  whs  a  pnpil  of
the  Nationnl  nrafieniy,  and  him  t<tu«lic(l  hIm)  under
Edwin  White  and  li''on  I^nnAt.  He  was  eli<cte<l
an  a8!K)ciate  df  the  academy  in  1879,  and  is  alsf)  a
member  «)f  the  Water-<'olor  wxrietv  and  the  New
York  etohinjf  elnb.  In  1880  he  fr»ine<l  the  Clarke
prize  at  the  aradeniy.  Anionif  his  works  are  the
oil-paintinp*. '•  Contemplation. '  in  Smith  college.
Northampton,  Maiw.(1878):  "Kxtreme.s  Meet"and
"The  Convent  Com|K^M»er"  (1881);  "Autumn."
"  0«KHl-bye,  Summer,"  "  The  Cronies."  and  "  Fortune
bv  Tea-I/eaves  "  (1886) :  and  the  water-colon* " Soli-
taire "  and  "Old  Ballatls "  (1878) ;  "  Two  Sides  of  a
Convent-WaH"(1884):  and  "The  Fortune-Teller,"
"The  Net-Mender."  and  "The  Lightened  Load"
(18H7).  His  jM'ncil  hits  U'en  fre<|uently  employinl  in
book-ilhistnif  ion.  and  he  is  well  known  as  a  teiu-her.

SATTERLEE,  Richard  Sherwood,  sur>reon,
h.  in  Fairfield.  Herkimer  co..  N.  Y.,  rt  Dec..  1798:  d.
in  New  York  city,  10  Nov.,  1880.  His  father.  Maj.
William  Siitterlee,  servetl  in  the  Revolutionary
army.  After  a  collepiate  course  the  son  studiwl
mcilicine,  was  admitted  to  practice,  and  in  1818
settled  in  Seneca  county,  N.  Y.,  sui)sequently  re-
moving to  Detroit.  He  l)ecame  assistant  surgeon
in  the  V.  S.  army  in  1822.  served  in  the  first  and
second  Florida  wars,  and  in  1846  was  assigned  to
duty  under  Gen.  William  J.  Worth,  as  chief  sur-
geon of  the  1st  division  of  regulars.  After  the
capture  of  Mexico  he  l)ecame  medical  director  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  Winfleld  Scott.  He  became  U.  S.
meilical  purveyor  in  1855i,  held  that  office  till  the
close  of  the  civil  war,  and  in  1864  was  l)revette<l
"  lieutenant-colonel,  colonel,  and  brigadier-gtMieral
for  diligent  care  and  attentiim  in  priKruring  pro|)er
army  supplies  as  medical  purveyor,  and  for  econo-
my and  fidelity  in  the  disbursement  of  large  sums
of  money."  lie  became  lieutenant-colonel  and
chief  medical  purveyor  in  July,  1866,  and  was  re-
tire<l,  22  Feb..  1809.

SAU(«ANASH,  The,  Indian  name  of  Capt.
Billy  Caluwell,  a  half-breed  lea<ler,  b.  in  Canada
about  1780;  d.  in  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  28  Sept.,
1841.  His  father  was  an  Irish  officer  in  the  British
ser%'ice,  and  his  mother  a  Pottawattamie.  He
received  a  good  education  from  the  Jesuits  at  De-
troit, could  speak  and  write  P^nglish  and  French,
and  was  master  of  several  Indian  dialects.  He
early  formed  an  acquaintance  with  Tecumseh,  and
from  1807  till  the  death  of  the  latter  they  were
intimate  and  devoted  friends.  The  Sauganash  was
a  faithful  friend  to  the  whites,  and  did  all  he
could  to  mitigate  the  horrors  of  savage  warfare.
Although  he  was  hostile  to  the  whites  at  the
time  of  the  Chicago  massacre  in  August,  1812,  it
is  said  that  the  lives  of  the  prisoners  were  save<l
through  the  intercession  of  Caldwell  and  Shalx)na,
who  were  not  in  the  engagement.  The  Sauganash
tfM)k  up  his  residence  in  C'hicago  alx»ut  1820.  In
1820  he  was  one  of  the  justices  of  the  peace  there.
In  1828  the  Imlian  department,  in  consideration  of
his  services,  built  him  the  first  frame  house  in
Chicago.  He  <x.'cui»ied  this  house  (near  what  is
now  the  comer  of  North  State  street  and  Chicago
avenue)  till  he  left  the  country  with  his  trib<^  m
I8!i0  for  Council  Bluffs.  By  a  tn'aty  that  was
ma«le  2  Jan.,  1830,  the  Sauganash.  Shalx)na,  and
other  friendly  Indians  had  R*servations  grante<l
them  by  the  government,  and  1.240  at'res  on  the
north  branch  of  the  Chicago  river  was  set  apart  for
Caldwell,  whit'h  he  sold  before  leaving  the  country.
Caldwell  owe«l  allegiance  to  three  distinct  nations
at  the  same  time.  He  was  captain  of  the  Indian
department  under  Great  Brit-ain  in  the  war  of
1812,  and  never  renounced  his  allegiance,  was  a


justice  of  the  peace  in  Chicago,  and  a  chief  of  the
Ottawan  and  Pottawattamies.  So©  "  Waubun,  the
Earlv  Day."  bv  Mrs.  John  H.  Kinzie  (Chicago,  1857).

SXl'LSBl'RY,  Ell,  senator,  b.  in  Kent  county,
Del..  29  Dec.,  1817.  He  attende<l  c<»mmon  and  s^
lect  sc-h<K)l».  followed  an  irn-gidar  c«»urs*»  at  Dick-
inson. studie4l  law.  was  admitted  to  the  liar  in
1845,  and  practisinl  in  Dover.  Del.  He  was  a  mem-
Ix-r  of  the  legislature  in  18.Vt-*4.  and  succeinlcd
his  brother,  Willard.  as  V.  S.  senator,  having  lieen
electetl  as  a  Democrat  in  1870.  He  was  re-elected  in
1876.  and  again  in  188JJ  for  the  term  that  will  expire
on  3  March.  18H9.  He  offere<l  an  amendment  to  the
"force  bill  "  in  the  42d  congrtiiss.  and  in  the  same
session  opjKised  in  two  speeches  and  voted  against
the  act  "to  enforce  the  provisions  of  the  14th
amendment  to  the  constitution  of  the  United  States
and  for  other  purp*>ses."  He  move<l  an  amend-
ment to  the  specie-ftayment  bill,  and  siM>ke  and
vote<I  in  the  negative  against  military  interference
in  the  organization  of  the  Ivouisiana  legislature  in
the  4iM  congress. — His  brother,  Willard.  senator,
b.  in  Kent  county,  Del..  2  June,  1820,  was  educated
at  Delaware  and  Dickinson  colleges,  studied  law,
practise<l  in  Georgetown,  Del.,  and  in  18.'K)-'5  was
state  attorney-general.  In  the  mean  time  he  took
an  active  part  in  inilitics,  and  became  known
throughout  the  state  as  an  orator.  He  was  chosen
U.  S.  senator  as  a  Democrat  in  1858,  and  served  by
re-election  till  1871.  During  his  first  tenn  of  ser-
vice in  that  Ixxly  he  devoted  all  his  energies  to  the
preservation  of  the  Union,  and  the  prevention  of
cinl  war.  Among  his  imfM)rtant  speeches  was  that
on  the  state-rights  resolution  of  Jefferson  Davis,
delivered  2  April,  1800;  that  on  the  resolution  pro-
posing to  ex|K>l  Jesse  D.  Bright  {q.  v.),  delivered  29
Jan.,  1862;  that  on  the  bill  to  prevent  officers  of
the  army  and  navy  from  interfermg  in  elections  in
the  soutliern  states,  delivered  24  March,  1864 ;  and
that  on  amending  the  constitution  of  the  United
States,  delivered  6  March,  1866.  In  the  36th  con-
gress he  closed  the  debate  on  disunion  by  calling
attention  to  the  fact  that  "  as  Delaware  wa-s  the  first
to  adopt  the  constitution  of  the  Unitetl  .States,  she
would  be  the  last  to  do  any  act  looking  to  separa-
tion." He  offered  a  resolution  proj>osing  a  confer-
ence for  the  settlement  of  difficulties  in  the  37th
congress,  and  argued  against  the  constitutionality
of  the  bill  on  compensated  emancipation  in  Mis-
souri. He  served  on  the  reconstruction  committee
in  the  39th  congress,  voted  in  the  affirmative  on
the  15th  amendment  in  the  40th  congress,  and  in
the  negative  on  the  Virginia  bill  in  the  41st  con-
gress. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  Demo-
cratic convention  in  1864.  Since  1873  he  has  been
chancellor  of  Delaware.

SAUNDERS,  Alvln,  senator,  b.  in  Fleming
county,  Ky..  12  July,  1817.  His  father,  a  native  of
Virginia,  removed  to  Kentucky  in  early  youth.
The  son  went  with  his  father  to  Illinois'in'  1829,
and  attende<l  school  in  the  intervals  of  farm  work.
He  removed  in  1830  to  Mount  Pleasant,  in  that
part  of  Wisconsin  territory  that  is  now  Iowa,  and
was  postmaster  there  for  seven  years.  At  the  same
time  he  studie<l  law;  but.  instead  ot  practising,  he
engaged  in  business  as  a  merchant  and  linker.
Mr.  Saunders  was  a  meml)er  of  the  convention  that
framed  the  constitution  of  Iowa  in  1846,  and  a
state  siMiator  for  eight  years.  He  sat  in  the  first
He|mblican  convention  in  the  state,  and  in  the
National  conventions  of  1800  and  1868,  was  a  com-
missioner to  organize  the  Pacific  railroad  comfiany,
and  servwl  as  governor  of  Nebraska  territory  from
1861  till  its  admission  into  the  Union  in  1867.
During  bis  term  of  office  the  [)opulation  of  the


404


SAUNDERS


SAUNDERS


territory  was  only  about  30,000,  yet  he  not  only
raised  3,000  men  for  the  National  armies,  but  suc-
cessfully carried  on  operations  against  hostile  In-
dians. Much  of  the  prosperity  of  the  state  is  due
to  his  energy.  He  was  instrumental  in  causing
the  Union  Pacific  railroad  to  cross  Missouri  river
at  Omaha,  instead  of  several  miles  below,  thus  in-
suring the  rapid  growth  of  that  city.  In  1877-83
be  served  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  secured
for  his  state  more  than  600,000  acres  of  land  by
straightening  the  northern  lx)undary-line,

SAUNDERS,  Sir  Charles,  British  naval  officer,
b.  in  Scotland  about  1705 ;  d.  in  London  in  Decem-
ber, 1775.  lie  joined  the  navy,  served  under  Lord
Anson,  and  won  notice  by  his  gallant  defence  of
the  "  Yarmouth,"  while  he  was  captain  of  that  ves-
sel in  1747.  In  1759  Pitt  gave  him  the  command
of  the  fleet  that  was  intended  to  co-operate  with
Gen.  Wolfe  and  the  land  forces  at  the  capture  of
Quebec.  He  rendered  the  greatest  assistance  to
Wolfe  by  his  bombardment  of  the  town,  and  dis-
played much  skill  and  courage  during  the  period
when  the' fleet  ^as  in  St.  Lawrence  river.  He  was
appointed  lieutenant-general  of  marines  in  1760,
in  1765  a  lord  of  the  admiralty,  and  in  1766  first
lord  of  the  admiralty.

SAUNDERS,  Ephraim  Dod,  clergyman,  b.  in
Brookside,  Morris  co.,  N.  J.,  30  Sept.,  1808 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13  Sept.,  1872.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1831,  and,  after  studying  theology
in  New  Haven  for  a  few  months,  went  to  Virginia,
where  he  engaged  in  teaching.  He  was  licensed
to  preach  there  in  1833,  ordained  to  the  Presby-
terian ministry  in  1834,  and  was  instrumental  m
building  three  churches,  but  relinquished  preach-
ing on  account  of  a  throat  trouble,  and  became
prmcipal  of  an  academy  in  Petersburg,  Va.  After
travelling  in  Europe,  he  engaged  in  missionary
work  in  the  Pennsylvania  coal  region,  but  in  1852
he  established,  in  West  Philadelphia,  Saunders  in-
stitute, a  military  school,  which  attained  a  high
reputation.  He  discontinued  the  school  in  1870,
and  in  1871  gave  the  buildings  and  grounds,
which  were  valued  at  $100,000,  to  found,  as  a
memorial  of  his  son,  Courtland,  the  Presbyterian
hospital,  toward  whose  endowment  he  raised'  $100,-
000  more  by  his  personal  efforts.  He  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Lafayette.  During  the  civil
war  Dr.  Saunders  was  active  in  raising  volunteers
and  obtaining  money  for  bounties,  and  established
a  drill  class,  in  which  he  trained  many  officers  for
the  volunteer  service.  See  his  "  Life,"  by  Thomas
D.  Suplce  (Philadelphia,  1873). — His  son.  Court-
land,  who  was  a  teacher  in  the  institute,  served  as
a  captain  in  the  National  army,  and  was  killed  at
Antietam.  He  published  a  work  on  "  Paradigms
of  Latin  Verbs  "  (Philadelphia,  1860).

SAUNDERS,  Frederick,  author,  b.  in  London,
England,  14  Aug.,  1807.  He  came  to  New  York
in  1837,  and  opened  a  branch  of  the  publishing
establishment  of  Saunders  and  Ottlev,  London,  for
the  purpose  of  issuing  American  editions  of  their
own  publications,  and  to  seek  the  protection  of  an
international  copyright  law.  After  a  persistent
effort  had  been  made  in  behalf  of  this  object,  in-
volving a  large  amount  of  money,  the  enterprise
was  abandoned.  In  this  work  Mr.  Saunders  ob-
tained the  co-operation  and  sympathy  of  the  chief
literary  men  oi  the  country,  ana  his  six  petitions
to  congress,  presented  at  distant  intervals,  bore  the
signatures  of  Washington  Irving,  William  Cullen
Bryant,  George  Bancroft,  and  many  others.  He
was  thus  the  pioneer  in  this  important  movement.
Mr.  Saunders  was  for  some  time  city  editor  of  the
"Evening  Post,"  and  in  1859  became  assistant


librarian  of  the  Astor  library,  of  which,  since  1876.
he  has  been  librarian.  Madison  universitv  gave
him  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1853.  He  has  Wen  a
frequent  contributor  to  magazines  and  reviews,  and
has  published  "  Memoirs  of  the  Great  Metropolis,
or  London  from  the  Tower  to  the  Crystal  Palace  "
(New  York,  1852) ;  '•  New  York  in  a  Nutshell "
(1853);  "  Salad  for  the  Solitary,  by  an  Epicure"
(1853),  and  "Salad  for  the  "Social"  (1856),  of
which  many  editions  appeared  in  New  York  and
London,  and  which  were  reissued  in  one  volume,
illustrated  (New  York,  1872;  new  ed.,  1883);
"  Pearls  of  Thought,  Religious  and  Philosophical,
Gathered  from  Old  Authors"  (1858);  "Mosaics"
(1859) ;  "  Festival  of  Song  "  (1866) ;  "  About  Wom-
en, Love,  and  Marriage  (1868) :  "  Evenings  with
the  Sacred  Poets"  (1869;  revised  and  enlarged,
1885);  "Pastime  Papers"  (1885);  and  "Story  of
some  Famous  Books "  (London,  1887),  in  "  The
Book-Lover's  Library."  Most  of  his  books  were
published  both  in  New  York  and  in  London,  and
ran  through  numerous  editions.  He  has  also  edit-
ed "  Our  National  Centennial  Jubilee  "  (1877),  and,
with  Henry  T.  Tuckerman,  "  Homes  of  American
Authors  "  (1853).

SAUNDERS,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1754;  d.  in  Fredericton,  New  Brunswick,  in  1834.
His  grandfather  emigrated  to  Virginia  from  Eng-
land, and  acquired  large  landed  estates.  John  re-
ceived a  liberal  education,  and  studied  law,  but  in
1776  raised  a  troop  of  horse  at  his  own  expense,
and  joined  the  royal  forces.  He  was  subsequently
captain  of  cavalry  in  the  Queen's  rangers,  was  often
in  engagements,  and  was  twice  wounded.  At  the
peace  he  went  to  England,  became  a  member  of  the
Middle  Temple,  and  practised  law.  In  1790  he  be-
came a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Bruns-
wick, and  he  was  appointed  soon  afterward  a  mem-
ber of  the  council  of  that  colony.  In  1822  he  be-
came chief  justice.  Judge  Saunders  possessed  two
estates  in  Virginia,  both  of  which  were  confiscated.
— His  only  son,  John  Simcoe,  held  the  offices  of  ad-
vocate-general, justice  of  the  court  of  judicature,
and  member  of  the  council,  and  at  his  death  was
secretary  of  the  province.

SAUNDERS,  Prince,  attorney-general  of  Hay-
ti,  b.  in  Thetford,  Vt.,  about  1775;  d.  in  Hayti,  12
Feb.,  1840.  He  was  of  African  descent,  and,  after
receiving  an  excellent  education  and  teaching  in
free  colored  schools  in  Colchester,  Conn.,  and  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  emigrated  to  Hayti  in  1807.  Here  he
was  employed  at  once  by  Henry  Christophe  to  im-
prove the  state  of  education  in  the  islana,  and  sent
to  England  to  procure  teachers,  books,  and  appac
ratus.  In  that  country  his  first  name  was  mis^
taken  for  a  title,  and  as  he  took  no  pains  to  correct
this  misapprehension  he  received  much  attention,
and  was  a  guest  at  many  great  houses.  At  that  of
Sir  Joseph  Banks,  president  of  the  Royal  society,
"  everybody,"  says  Charles  R.  Leslie  in  his  "  Recol-
lections" (1860),  "asked  to  be  presented  to  'His
Highness.'  I  got  near,  to  hear  what  passe<l  in  his
circle,  and  a  gentleman,  with  a  star  and  ribbon,
said  to  him :  '  What  surprises  me  is  that  you  speak
English  so  well.'  Saunders,  who  had  never  spoken
any  other  language  in  his  life,  bowed  and  smiled
acceptance  of  the  compliment."  The  result  of  this
mission  was  not  satisfactory  to  Christophe,  and
immediately  after  its  close  Saunders  returned  from
Hayti  to  the  United  States,  where  he  studied  di-
vinity, and  preached  for  some  time  in  Philadelphia.
A  few  years  later  he  went  again  to  Hayti.  where
he  was  made  attorney-general,  which  office  he  held
at  his  death.  He  was  the  author  of  the  Haytian
criminal  code,  and  published  "  Documents  Relative


SAUNDERS


SAVAGE


405


to  the  Kingdom  of  Ilayti,  with  a  Prefare "  (Ijon-
doii.  1816) :  "  Memoir  on  Slavery  "  (Philadelphia,
1«1«) :  "  Addr««»»  on  FMucation"  ('I8I8);  and  "  llaj-
tian  PaiHTs"  (lioston.  IHIH).

SArS'DKKS.  KomuliiM  Mitrholl.  statiH^man,
I),  in  ('»i.iwfli  county,  N.  ( '.,  A  .Murth,  171M  ;  d.  in  Ilii-
leigh,  X.  ('.,  21  April,  1807.  His  uncle,  Jann's  S»iun-
ders,  n'presente<i  Orange  county  in  the  Provincial
congress  of  North  Carolina  which  met  at  Halifax,
4  April,  177G,  and  also  in  the  con>rr««*  held  at
the  same  place,  12  Nov.,  177rt,  and  was  appointiHl
colonel  of^  the  northern  reciiuent  of  his  county.
James's  younijer  brother,  William,  the  father  of
Romulus,  was  an  officer  in  the  North  Carolina
line.  The  son  was  e«lucate<l  at  the  University
of  North  Carolina,  studied  law  in  Tennessee,  and
was  admitted  to  practice  in  that  state  in  1812,
having  been  a<lopted  by  his  uncle  James  on  the
deatlt  of  his  father.  He  returned  to  North  Caro-
lina and  was  elected  to  the  house  of  commons
from  Cjuiwell  count v  from  1815  till  1820.servinjr  as
speaker  of  the  hous^'  in  1819  and  1820.  In  1821  he
was  electe<i  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,  where  he
servetl  until  1827,  and  in  1828  he  was  chosen  attor-
ney-general of  the  state.  In  IWiS  he  wasappointetl
by' President  Jackson  one  of  the  Iward  of  commis-
sioners to  decide  and  allot  the  amounts  that  were
due  citizens  •)f  the  United  States  for  injuries  by
Prance,  as  settled  by  the  treaty  of  4  July,  1831.  In
18S5  he  was  elected'  by  the  legislature  judge  of  the
superior  courts,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1840
to  become  the  candidate  of  the  Democratic  party
for  governor,  but  he  was  defeated  by  John  Aloore-
head.  In  1844  he  was  again  elected  to  congress,
and  in  the  Democratic  national  convention  of
that  year  he  intnxiuced  the  celebrated  two-third
rule,  by  which  the  votes  of  two  thirds  of  all  the
members  of  the  convention  were  made  necessary
for  a  nomination.  The  adoption  of  this  rule  re-
sulted in  the  defeat  of  Martin  Van  Buren  for  the
nomination  and  the  selection  of  James  K.  Polk.
He  continued  in  congress  until  1845,  when  he  was
appointed  minister  to  Spain.  He  whs  specially
directed  bv  President  Polk  to  negotiate  for  the
purchase  of  Cuba,  and  was  authorized  to  offer  f  100,-
000.000  for  that  island.  He  returned  home  in
October,  1849.  and  was  elected  to  the  house  of  com-
mons from  Wake  county  in  1850,  where  he  was
earnest  in  securing  the  construction  of  the  North
Carolina  railroad,  in  the  reconstruction  of  the
Raleigh  and  Gaston  railroad,  and  in  the  develop-
ment of  internal  improvements  by  the  state.  lie
was  elected  judge  of  the  superior  courts  in  1851,  and
one  of  the  commissioners  to  revise  and  cotlify  the
laws  of  the  state.  He  served  as  judge  until  180,5,
when  he  wa*  deposed  by  Gov.  William  W.  Holden.

SAL' VEL'R,  Baudoin  (so-vur),  Flemish  natural-
ist, b.  in  VpR-s  in  1779;  d.  in  Brussels  in  18^32.
He  enlistetl  early  in  the  French  army,  served  in
the  West  Indies,  and  afterward  went  to  New  Or-
leans, where  he  became  a  wealthy  merchant  and
devoted  his  leisure  to  the  study  of  natural  history
and  geology.  Declining  health  and  heavy  losses  in
busint^s  (iecidetl  him  to  return  to  Europe,  and  he
tixe<l  his  residence  in  a  suburb  of  Brussels.  His
works  include  "Carte  g^ologique  du  delta  du  Mis-
sissipi"  (Brussels,  1827);  "Voyages  scientifiques
dans  les  bassins  du  Mississipi  et  de  I'Arkansas"
(1828);  and  "  fttudes  critiaues  sur  les  formations
geolojrinut's  dans  la  vallce  (iti  Mississipi  "(18JJ0).

SAVA(«E,  Kdward,  artist,  b.  in  Princeton,
Mass.,  20  Nov.,  1701  ;  d.  there.  6  July,  1817.  Ho
was  originally  a  goldsmith,  but  later  turned  his
attention  to  {jortrait-painting.  Washington  sat  to
him  soveral  times,  and  in  17w-'90  Savage  painted


his  portrait  for  Harvard.  He  produced  also  the
well-known  "  Family  (Jrf)un  at  Mount  Vernon."
This  was  for  a  long  \iun-  t-xnibiteil  in  the  museum
that  Savage  estalilished  in  New  York,  and  is  now
in  the  Boston  museum.  His  |x»rtraits  of  Wash-
ington and  Henry  Knox  were  frequently  engraved
by  the  artist  himself  ami  by  others.

HAVA(jE:,  Edward  Huftnell,  iK)lic«man,  b.  in
Alstiad,  N.  H.,  18  May,  1812.  He  n-ceived  a  pub-
lie-school  education,  and  since  1H51  has  s«'rve<l  as
a  memlK?r  of  the  iH)lice  force  in  Boston,  Mass.,  Ihj-
ing  chief  of  |K)lice  in  1870-'8.  Since  1801  he  luis
been  justice  of  the  i>eace  for  Suffolk  county,  Ma.ss.
He  has  published  "Boston  Police  Kecollectiims,  or
lioston  by  Daylight  and  Gaslight "  (Hoston,  1800).
and  "  Five  Thousand  Boston  Events  from  1030  to
1880"  (1884).

SAVAGE,  JanieH,  anti(|uarv,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
13  July,  1784;  d.  there.  8  >rarch,  1873.  He  was
descended  from  Maj.  Thomas  Savage,  who  came  to
Massachusetts  from  Englatid  in  H>i5.  After gra<lu-
ation  at  Harvard  in  1803  he  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  l)ar  in  1807,  and  servi-d  in  both
houses  of  the  legislature.  He  was  also  a  member
of  the  executive
council,  and  a
delegate  to  the
State  constitu-
tional conven-
tion of  1820,
fllletl  several  mu-
nicipal offices,
and  was  a  mem-
l)erof  the  school
committee.  He
was  the  founder
of  Provident  in-
stitution for  sav-
ings, the  first
savings  bank  in
Boston,  and  the
second  in  the
United  States,  of
which  he  was
also  secretary,
treasurer,  vice-president,  and  president,  and  for
nineteen  years  he  was  treasurer  of  the  Massachu-
setts historical  society,  of  which  he  was  also  presi-
dent, and  edited  several  of  its  collwlions.  Tnack-
eray  was  much  impressed  by  his  sturdy  individu-
ality, and  remarked  to  a  friend :  "  I  want  to  see
that  qiiaint,  charming  old  Mr.  S»ivage  again."  Ed-
win P.  Whipple  calls  him  "the  soul  of  integri-
tv."  and  says:  "It  is  curious  that  James  Savage,
the  most  eloquent  of  men  when  his  soul  was  stirred
to  its  depths,  should  now  lie  particularly  honored
merely  as  an  acute  antiquarian.  .  .  .  His'hatretl  of
iniquity  sometimes  blazed  out  in  a  fury  of  wrath-
ful elcMjuence  which  amazed  those  who  s[)eciallv
esteemetl  him  as  a  protliey  of  genealogical  knowl-
edge, and  even  disturbed  the  equanimity  of  those
who  chiefly  knew  him  as  the  most  valued  and  trust-
worthy of  friends."  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1841.  For  five  voars  ^Ir.  Savage  was
an  associate  editor  of  the  "Monthly  Anthology,"
which  was  founded  in  Boston  in  1803  and  con-
tinued until  1811,  preparing  the  way  for  the  "  North
American  Review."  The  discovery  of  the  missing
manuscript  of  John  Winthrop's  jounial  in  the
tower  of  the  Old  South  church,  Boston,  in  1810,  led
Mr.  Savage  to  prepare  and  annotate  the  original
manus<'rij)ts,  which  he  publishe«l  under  the  title  of
"John  Winthrop's  History  of  New  F^ngland  from
1630  to  1640,  with  Notes  to  illustrate  the  Civil  and
E^lesiastical Concerns, the Geography,  Settle-


^^'-y^U^/.  cku/^i^^


406


SAVAGE


SAWTELLE


ment,  and  Institutions  of  the  Country,  and  the
Lives  ami  Manners  of  the  Ancient  Planters  "(2
vols.,  Hoston,  1825-'6;  2d  cd.,  with  corrections,
1853).  The  first  volume  of  Winthrop's  "Journal  "
had  been  published  from  the  family  manuscripts
(Hartford,  1790).  In  addition  to  numerous  genea-
logical, historical,  political,  and  controversial  pam-
ghlets,  he  edited  William  Paley's  works  (5  vols..  Cam-
ridge,  1828 ;  new  ed.,  1830),  and  prepared  a  "  Gene-
alogical Dictionary  of  the  First  Settlers  of  New
England,  showing  Three  Generations  of  Those  who
came  before  Mav,  1092  "  (4  vols.,  Boston,  1800-'4).
This  work,  which  occupied  him  twenty  vears,  and
which  displays  extraordinary  industrv  and  research,
has  been  called  "the  most  stupendous  work  on

fenealogy  ever  completed."  He  delivered  the
'ourth-of-July  oration  in  Boston  in  1811,  and  an
address  on  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts  on  26
Jan.,  1832,  l)oth  of  which  were  published.

SAVAGE,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  New  York  in
1779 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  19  Oct..  1863.  After  gradu-
ation at  Union  in  1799  he  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar,  and  practised  his  profession.  In
1814  he  was  a  meml>er  of  the  state  assembly,  and
he  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
serving  from  4  Dec,  1815,  till  3  March,  1819,  after
■which  he  became  U.  S.  district  attorney.  He  was
state  comj)t  roller  from  12  Feb.,  1821,  till  13  Feb.,
1823,  chief  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court  from
1823  till  1827,  and  U.S.  assistant  treasurer  in  New
York.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Polk
and  Dallas  ticket  in  1845.  Union  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  in  1829.

SAVAGE,  John,  journalist,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ire-
land, 13  Dec,  1828.  He  was  educated  in  his  native
city,  and  studied  in  the  art  school  of  the  Royal
Dublin  society,  winning  several  prizes.  He  became
active  in  revolutionary  clubs,  established  two  jour-
nals that  were  suppressed  by  the  British  govern-
ment, and  afterward  organized  and  led  armed  peas-
ants in  the  south  of  Ireland.  When  the  cause  was
lost,  he  escaped  to  New  York  in  1848,  and  became  a
proof-reader  for  the  New  York  "  Tribune."  After-
ward he  was  literary  editor  of  "  The  Citizen,"  wrote
for  the  "  Democratic  Review"  and  "American  Re-
view." In  1857  he  removed  to  Washington,  where
he  was  chief  writer  for  "The  States,"  the  organ  of
Stephen  A.  Douglas,  of  which  paper  he  became  the
proprietor.  He  was  active  in  organizing  the  Irish
brigade  and  the  Irish  legion  for  the  National  army
during  the  civil  war,  and  served  in  the  69th  New
York  regi inent.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  by  St.  John's  college,  Fordham,  N.  Y.,  in
1875.  Mr.  Savage  wrote  several  popular  war-songs,
including  "  The  Starry  Flag  "  and  "  The  Muster  of
the  North."  He  is  the  author  of  "  Lays  of  the
Fatherland  "  (New  York,  1850) ;  "  '98  and  '48 :  the
Modern  Revolutionary  History  and  Literature  of
Ireland  "  (1856) ;  "  Our  Living  Representative  Men  "
(Philadelphia,  1860) ;  "  Faith  and  Fancy,"  poems
(New  York,  1863);  "Campaign  Life  of  Andrew
Johnson"  (1864);  "Life  and  Public  Services  of
Andrew  Johnson "  (1866) ;  "  Fenian  Heroes  and
Martyrs"  (Boston.  1868);  "Poems:  Lyrical,  Dra-
matic, and  Romantic  "  (1870) ;  "  Picturesque  Ire-
land" (1878-'83);  and  several  plays,  including
"Sybil."  a  tragedy,  which  was  produced  in  1858
(1865) ;  "  Waiting  for  a  Wife,"  a  comedy  (1859) ;  and
"Eva,  a  (toblin  Romance"  (1865).

SAVAGE,  John  Houston,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mc-
Minnville.  Warren  co.,  Tenn.,  9  Oct.,  1815.  He  re-
ceived a  public-school  education,  and  liefore  he  was
of  age  served  as  a  private  under  Gen.  Edmund  P.
Gaines  on  the  Texas  frontier,  and  also  for  six
months  against  the  Seminoles  in  Florida. After-


ward he  studied  law,  and  began  to  practise  in
Smithville,  Tenn.  He  was  made  colonel  of  Ten-
nes.see  militia^,  and  in  1841-'7  was  attorney-general
of  the  4th  district  of  his  state.  In  1844  he  was
an  elector  on  the  Polk  ticket.  In  1847  he  was  ap-
pointed major  of  the  14th  infantry,  U.  S.  army,
and  served  in  the  Mexican  war,  being  wounded  at
Chapultepec,  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  11th  infantry,  and.  after  the  death  of  Col.  Will-
iam M.  Graham,  commanded  this  regiment  until
the  close  of  the  war.  On  returning  to  Tennessee
he  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  and  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  3  Dec,  1849,
till  3  March,  1853,  and  again  from  8  Dec,  1856,
till  3  March,  1859,  being  a  member  of  the  commit-
tee on  military  affairs.  During  the  civil  war  he
was  colonel  of  the  16th  Tennessee  Confederate  in-
fantry, and  was  wounded  at  Perryville  and  at  Mur-
freesboro'.  He  served  in  the  legislature  of  Ten-
nessee in  1877, 1879,  and  1887,  and  now  (1888)  prac-
tises law  in  McMinnville.

SAVAGE,  Minot  Jndson,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nor-
ridgewock.  Me.,  10  June,  1841.  He  was  educated
at  Bowdoin,  graduated  at  Bangor  theological  semi-
nary in  1864,  and  became  a  Congregational  mis-
sionary in  California.  He  was  pastor  of  churches
in  Framingham.  Mass.,  in  1867,  and  Hannibal.  Mo.,
in  1869.  In  1873  he  had  charge  of  a  Unitarian
church  in  Chicago,  and  since  1874  he  has  been
pastor  of  the  "Church  of  the  Unity"  in  Boston.
Among  his  publications  are  "  Christianity,  the  Sci-
ence of  Manhood "  (Boston,  1873);  "The  Religion
of  Evolution"  (1876);  "Bluffton.  a  Storv  of  To-
day" (1878);  "Life  Questions"  (1879);  "the  Mor-
als of  Evolution  "  (1880);  "  Belief  in  God  "  (1881) ;
"Beliefs  about  Man"  (1882);  "Poems"  (1882);
"  Beliefs  about  the  Bible  "  (1883) ;  "  The  Modem
Sphinx"  (1883);  "The  Religious  Life"  (1886);
"  Social  Problems  "  (1886) ;  and  "  My  Creed  "  (1887).

SAWTELLE,  Charles  Greene,  soldier,  b.  in
Norridgewock,  Me.,  10  May,  1834.  His  father,
Cullen  Sawtelle,  was  a  member  of  congress  in
1845-'7  and  1849-51.  After  graduation  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1854,  he  served  in  quell-
ing Kansas  border  disturbances,  in  the  Utah  ex-
pedition in  1858,  and  on  garrison  duty  in  California
in  1859-60.  On  17  May,  1861,  he  became  cap-
tain of  the  staff  and  assistant  quartermaster.  He
superintended  the  forwarding  of  troops  and  sup-
plies for  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  until  17  Aug.,
1862,  and  the  embarkation  during  the  Maryland
campaign.  He  was  chief  quartermaster  of  the
2d  corps  in  the  Rappahannock  campaign,  and  en-
gaged on  Gen.  Stoneinan's  raid  toward  Richmond,
in  May,  1863.  From  21  June  till  6  Aug.,  1863,  he
was  assistant  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Army  of
the  Potomac,  and  forwarded  supplies  from  Wash-
ington and  Alexandria,  Va.,  for  the  Pennsylvania
campaign.  He  was  chief  quartermaster  of  the  cav-
alry bureau  in  Washington  from  6  Aug.,  1863,  till
15  ^eb.,  1864,  and  then  was  transferred  to  Browns-
ville, Tex.,  and  was  in  charge  of  the  transports  and
supplies  for  Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks's  array  on  its
return  from  Red  river,  which  he  met  at  Atchafala-
ya.  He  constructed  a  bridge  of  900  feet  across  the
river,  using  21  steamers  as  pontoons.  From  19  May
till  6  June.  1864,  he  was  in  charge  of  steam  trans-
portation in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,  and  was
chief  quartermaster  in  the  military  division  of  west
Mississippi,  from  0  June,  1864,  till  2  July,  1865.
He  received  the  brevets  of  major,  lieutenant-colo-
nel, colonel,  and  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  armv,  on
13  March,  1865.  In  1881  he  attained  the  raiik  of
lieutenant-colonel,  and  has  since  served  in  the
quartermaster's  departments  of  the  Columbia  and


8AWTELLE


SAWYER


407


of  the  South,  ami  of  the  military  divijiions  of  the
Atlantic  ami  nf  tho  Kast,  and  is  "now  (1HM8)  in  the
quartt-riimstcr's  tlt'pHrttnont  in  Washinjrton.  !>.('.

SAWTKLLi:,  Henrjr  Allen,  tlerfrvinan,  b.  in
Sidn.'y.  Me..  U  iHt-.,  18JJ2:  d.  in  Watervillf.  Me..
22  Nov..  18M.  His  early  yean*  were  sjH'nt  on  a
farm.  He  wiuo  f^idiiattHl  at  Colliy  university  in
1854.  and  at  Newton  theolopenl  institution  in  IHW,
After  which  he  win*  orduine<l  |ia.st<>r  of  a  cliurch  in
Liniericic.  Me.,  itut  in  IHHQ  he  went  a.s  a  missionary
to  China,  remaining  there  until  1801.  when  ho  re-
siffneil.  owin^  to  ini|iaired  health.  From  lHtt2  till
1874  he  was  |Historof  Itaptist  churches  in  San  Fran-
cisco, editing  there  the  "  Evan);el  "  and  the  "  Siiare
Hour."  Sul»se<juently  he  ha<l  charjjes  in  Chelsea,
Mass..  and  KalamaziK).  Mich.  Hillsdale  colleee,
Mich.,  jrave  him  the  defjn'O  of  D.  I),  in  1874.  Dr.
Sawtelle  contriltutetl  to  the  "  Hibliothecn  Sacra"
and  the  "Baptist  Ouarterly,"  and  was  the  author
of  "  Things  to  Think  of "  (San  Francisco.  1873).

SAWYER.  Fredorick  AdolphiiH.  senator,  b.  in
Bolton.  Mjlss..  12  Dtf..  1822.  After  serving  as
clerk  in  a  store  and  teaching  for  several  winters  he
wa.s  grHduate<l  at  Harvard  in  1844.  and  continued
to  teach  in  various  towns  in  Maine.  Massachusi'tts.
and  New  Hampshire  till  1859.  when  he  to<ik  charge
of  the  normal  sc-hool  in  Charleston.  S.  C.  He  |>as.se<l
thnmgh  the  lines  to  the  National  forces  in  1804,
and.  gt)ing  to  New  England,  njade  many  s|>ee<'hes
in  advocacy  of  the  re-election  of  President  Lin-
coln. In  February,  1805,  he  went  to  Charleston
again  and  took  an  active  |>art  in  the  reconstruction
of  South  Carolina.  He  was  ap|K)inted.  on  30  May,
collector  of  internal  revenue  for  the  2d  district  of
South  Can)lina — the  first  civil  aniK>intment  in  the
state  after  the  war — was  elected  to  the  State  con-
stitutional convention,  but  was  unable  to  take  his
seat,  and  afterwanl  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate  for
the  term  that  ended  in  1873.  In  that  body  he
servwl  on  the  committees  on  private  land-claims,
educati(^n  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  pensions,  and
appropriations.  Mr.  Sawyer  was  one  of  the  leaders
in  oj)position  to  the  re-election  of  Gov.  Franklin
J.  M(>ses.  (Jn  19  March,  1873.  he  became  assistant
secretary  of  the  tri'asury,  which  office  he  held  till
June,  1874.  From  that  time  till  1880  he  was  en-
gaged in  private  business,  being  also  connected
with  the  coast  survey  for  some  time.  Then  he  was
a  spe(-ial  agent  of  the  war  department  till  1887,
ana  since  that  time  he  has  conducted  a  preparatory
school  in  Ithaca.  N.  V.

SAWYER,  Frederick  William,  author,  b.  in
Saco.  Me..  22  April,  1810;  d.  in  Boston,  Ma.ss..
about  1875.  He  removed  to  lioston,  Mass.,  in  1838,
where  he  began  to  practise  law  in  1840,  and  estal)-
lished  the  Pawners'  bank.  He  has  published  "  Mer-
chant's and  Shipmaster's  Guide  (1840);  "Plea
for  Amusements  (1847);  and  "  Hits  at  American
Whims,"  which  had  previously  appeared  in  the
Boston  "Tninscript"  under  the  signatures  of
"CaH  "  and  "  Canty  Cari  "  (1800).

SAWYER.  Horace  Biioklin.  naval  officer,  b.  in
Burlington.  Vt..  22  Feb..  1797;  d.  in  Washington.
D.  C„  14  Feb.,  1800.  He  entered  the  navy  as  mid-
shipman. 4  June,  1812.  and  l)ecame  lieutenant.  1
April.  1818.  commander.  9  Dec.,  18;i9.  and  captain,
12  April,  185i}.  He  served  on  the  "Constitution  "
when  she  tcx)k  the  "  C'yane  "  and  "  licvant "  in  1815,
and  ill  the  sui>i)ression  of  piracy  in  the  West  In-
dies ami  the  Mecliterranean,  in  t he  "  Snark  "  and
"  Warren,"  respectively.  In  1850  the  legislature
of  Vermont  gave  him  a  hands^nne  swonV  for  his
■ervices  in  the  se<-ond  war  with  (Jreat  Britain.

SAWYER.  lieicenter  Ambrose,  clergyman,  b.
in  Pinckney,  N.  Y.,  28  July,  1807. He  wjw  gradu-


attnl  at  Hamilton  college  in  1828.  studie<l  theology
at  Princeton  for  two  yeare,  and  was  ordained  to
the  Pre.sbyterian  ministry'  in  1832.  He  watt  pastor
of  various  churchiw  in  New  York  and  Connecticut,
and  was  president  of  Central  college,  Ohio,  in
1842-'7.  Fmiu  his  entrance  into  the  ministry  he
devotinl  himself  to  the  study  of  the  Bible  in' the
original  tongues,  ami  finally,  altaiidoning  the  com-
monly received  d<H-trine  of  the  insiiiration  of  the
Scrii>tures,  he  left  the  Presbyterian  church  in
1854,  and  until  1859  wa.s  |iastor  of  a  Congregational
church  in  Westmoreland,  N.  Y.  .Since  1800  he
has  n'side«l  at  White8lK)n).  N.  Y..  where  he  has  en-
gage<l  in  literarv  work,  and  was  for  a  time  con-
nectwl  with  the  I'tica  "  Morning  Herald."  He  has
publishtvl  "  Klements  of  Biblicnl  Interpretation"
(New  Haven.  18JJ0);  "Mental  Philosonhv  "  (18:19) ;
"Moral  Philosoithy "  (1845);  "Critical  fcxposition
of  Baptism "  (Columbus,  Ohio.  1845) ;  "  Organic
Christianity,  or  the  Church  of  God  "(1854);  "Re-
construction of  Biblical  Theories,  or  Biblical  Sci-
ence Improved"  (1862);  and  "Final  Theology,
Vol.  I..  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament.  His-
toric, Theologic,  and  Critical  "  (WhiteslM>ro.  N.  Y.,
1879).  He  also  made  a  new  translation  of  the
New  Testament  (lioston.  1858).  and  his  "American
Bible."  with  critical  studies,  is  now  in  coursse  of

i)ublication  in  numl>ers(18<K)-'88). — Hisfirst  cou-nin,
iOrenzo.  jurist,  b.  in  Le  Kay.  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y..
23  May,  1820.  worked  on  his  father's  farm  in  his
youth,  and,  after  removing  to  Pennsvlvania  and
then  to  Ohio,  finished  his  studies  at  Western  Re-
serve college.  He  then  studied  law.  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1846.  and.  after  successive  removals
to  Illinois  and  Wisconsin,  went  in  1850  to  Cali-
fornia, where  he  worked  for  some  time  in  the
mines.  He  settled  in  Sacramento  in  the  i)ractice
of  his  profession,  and,  after  a  brief  residence  in
Nevatia,  went,  in  1853,  to  .San  Francisco,  where  he
has  since  ri»maine«l.  He  became  city  attorney  in
1854,  was  ap{)ointetl  iudge  of  the  district  court  of
the  state  in  1802.  and  in  18(>;i  was  electetl  a  justice
of  the  state  supreme  court,  of  which  he  was  chief

{'ustice  in  1808-'70.  In  the  latter  year  he  l)ecame
J.  S.  circuit  judge  for  the  9th  circuit,  embracing
all  the  Pacific  states.  Judge  Sawyer's  decisions,
both  as  a  state  and  a  Federal  judge,  have  been
highly  commended.  In  1877  Hamilton  college
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  has  delivered
numerous  public  a<ldresses.  including  one  at  the
laying  of  the  comer-stone  of  Leland  Stanford.  Jun-
ior, university.  14  May,  1887.  of  whose  board  of
trustees  he  was  chf)seii  president.

SAWYER,  Lemnel,  {>olitician,  b.  in  Camden
county.  N.  C.  in  1777;  d.  in  Washington.  I).  C,  9
Jan.,  1852.  He  was  educated  at  Flat  bush  academy.
Ijong  Island.  N.  Y.,  studied  law.  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  but,  instead  of  practising,  devoted  him-
self to  |)olitics.  He  served  in  the  legislature  in
1800-'l.  having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat,  was  a
presidential  elector  in  1804,  and  served  in  con-
gress in  1807-13.  1817-23.  and  182.'>-'9.  He  was
eccentric  in  his  conduct,  of  dissipate«l  habits,  and
negligent  of  his  legislative  duties,  yet  he  was  re-
elected rej)eatetlly.  often  over  powerful  opjwnents.
His  prodigality  and  goml-fellowship.  though  they
made  him  many  friends,  brought  him  near  to  pov-
erty in  the  closing  years  «)f  his  life.  In  1850  he
removed  to  Washington,  where  he  was  a  clerk  in
one  of  the  dei»artments  till  his  death.  He  i»nh-
lishetl  a  "Life  of  John  Randolph"  (New  ^ork,
1844).  and  an  "Autobiography'  (1844).  and  was
also  the  author  of  s«'veral  plavs.

SAWYER.  Philetufi,  senator,  b.  in  Whiting,
Vt.,  22  Sept.,  1810. When  he  was  a  year  old  his


408


SAWYER


SAWYER


father,  who  was  a  farmer  and  blacksmith,  removed
to  Essex  county,  N.  Y.,  where  the  son's  youth  was
8pent  in  manual  labor  and  in  attending  the  com-
mon schools  at  intervals.  At  seventeen  years  of
age,  by  an  arrangement  with  his  father,  he"  became
the  master  of  his  own  time,  and  in  1847,  when  he
had  saved  about  f  2,000,  he  removed  to  Wisconsin.
After  two  years  of  farming  he  went  to  Algoum
(now  part  of  Oshkosh)  and  engaged  in  the  lumber
business,  in  which  he  was  verv  successful  and  won
a  reputation  for  integrity.  He  was  chosen  to  the
legislature  in  1857  and  1861,  served  as  mayor  of
Oshkosh  in  1863-'4,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
Loyalists'  convention  of  1866.  He  was  chosen  to
congress  as  a  Republican  in  1864.  and  served  by
successive  re-elections  from  1865  till  1875,  declin-
ing a  renomination.  In  1881  he  was  elected  U.  S.
senator,  and  he  was  re-elected  in  1887.  He  has
been  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican  con-
ventions of  1864,  1876,  and  1880.  In  the  lower
house  of  congress  Mr.  Sawyer  served  for  some  time
as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  the  Pacific  rail-
road, and  as  a  member  of  the  committees  on  com-
merce, manufactures,  and  invalid  pensions.  Both
there  and  in  the  senate  he  has  been  known  as  a
valuable  working  member,  but  he  seldom  takes  the
floor.  He  has  given  f  12,()00  toward  a  building  for
the  Young  men's  Christian  association  in  Oshkosh,
and  contributed  liberally  to  other  religious,  be-
nevolent, and  educational  enterprises.

SAWYER,  Sylvanns,  inventor,  b.  in  Templeton,
Worcester  cc,  Mass.,  15  April,  1822.  His  father
was  a  farmer,  mill-owner,  and  lumberman,  and
from  childhood  the  son  showed  great  mechanical
ingenuity.  While  he  was  a  lad  he  invented  a  reed-
organ  that  embodied  many  of  the  features  of  those
that  are  now  in  use.  From  about  his  twelfth  till
his  twenty-first  year  feeble  health  unfitted  him  for
farm  labor,  and  he  occupied  himself  largely  with
carpenter's  and  smith's  tools.  In  1839  he  went  to
Augusta,  Me.,  with  a  view  of  working  with  his
brother-in-law,  a  gunsmith,  and,  though  his  health
soon  forced  him  to  return,  he  gained  knowledge
that  enabled  him  to  repair  fire-arms  and  do  much
similar  work,  in  which  he  engaged  till  his  majority.
During  this  time  he  also  made  several  inventions,
including  a  steam-engine,  a  screw-propeller,  and  a
car  to  be  operated  by  foot-power.  He  went  to
Boston  about  1843,  and,  while  working  in  a  ma-
chine-shop there,  invented  a  machine  for  preparing
chair-cane  from  rattan.  Thousands  of  dollars  had
been  spent  in  vain  attempts  to  construct  such  a
machine,  but  Mr.  Sawyer's  was  successful,  and
after  it  was  patented,  in  June,  1851,  he  and  his
brother  Josepn  established  a  shop  at  East  Temple-
ton,  where  they  manufactured  chair-cane  by  its
means.  In  the  following  December  the  American
rattan  company  was  formed  to  use  their  machine,
and  erected  a  large  shop  in  Fitchburg,  Mass.  Mr.
Sawyer  devised  several  auxiliary  machines,  and,  be-
sides serving  as  director,  was  manager  of  the  com-
pany's shop.  His  inventions  have  entirely  revolu-
tionized the  chair-cane  business,  transferring  it
from  southern  India,  China,  and  Holland  to  this
country.  In  the  summer  of  1853  he  invented
improvements  in  rifled  cannon  projectiles,  which
were  patented  in  1855.  These  embrace. the  placing
of  a  coating  of  lead  or  other  soft  metal  on  the  rear
and  sides  of  the  shell,  which  is  expanded  laterally
by  the  discharge  and  prevents  the  "  windage  "  or
passage  of  gas  by  the  projectile,  also  filling  the
grooves  of  the  rifling  and  obviating  the  use  of  heli-
cal projections ;  and  the  arrangement  of  a  percus-
sion-cap so  as  to  insure  the  explosion  of  the  shell
on  impact. In  1857-'8,  with  his  brother  Addison,


Mr.  Sawyer  conducted  experiments  on  his  inven-
tion, at  his  own  expense,  for  the  benefit  of  the
U.  S.  ordnance  bureau,  and  after  thorough  tests  it
was  approved,  and  the  secretary  of  war  announced
that  tlic  practicability  of  rifled  cannon  and  projec-
tiles had  at  last  been  demonstrated.  It  was  recom-
mended that  four  field-guns  be  issued  for  practice,
but  before  the  order  was  carried  into  effect  the
civil  war  had  begun.  The  42-pounders  (rifle)  co-
lumbiads  were  mounted  at  Newport  News  and  upon
the  Rip  Raps  (Fort  Wool),  the  latter  being  the  only
guns  there  that  could  reach  Sewell's  Point  battery,
a  distance  of  three  and  one-half  miles,  which  they
did  with  great  accuracy,  and  made  fearful  havoc
with  the  railroad-iron-clad  batteries.  An  18-pound-
er  Sawyer  rifle  also  did  great  execution  on  board
the  steamer  "  Fancy."  Mr.  Sawyer  claims  that
he  was  treated  unjustly  by  the  ordnance  officers
during  the  civil  war.  Notwithstanding  the  report
in  his  favor,  his  guns  were  not  extensively  adopted,
but  his  improvements  were  incorporated  in  others
that,  he  says,  were  infringements  on  his  patents.
He  was  advised  by  government  officials  to  wait  till
the  war  had  ended  and  then  prosecute  the  chiefs
of  ordnance  of  the  army  and  navy ;  but  they  both
died  shortly  after  its  close,  and  nothing  has  been
done  in  the  matter.  But  he  received  several  orders
for  guns  directly  from  department  commanders,  to
whom  he  furnished  the  first  batteries  of  cast-steel
rifled  guns  made  in  this  country.  He  made  other
improvements  in  projectiles  in  1861-'2,  and  in
1864-'5  built  a  shop  for  the  manufacture  of  ord-
nance ;  but  the  close  of  the  wars  in  this  country  and
South  America  caused  it  to  be  turned  to  other  uses.
He  took  out  patents  on  dividers  and  calipers  in
1867,  a  steam-generator  in  1868,  a  sole  sewing-ma-
chine in  1876,  and  a  centring  watchmaker's  lathe
in  1882.  He  has  recently  engaged  in  the  manu-
facture of  watchmakers'  tools,  but  has  now  retired
from  business,  and  takes  much  interest  in  agricul-
ture. He  has  served  as  an  alderman  in  Fitchburg.
SAWYER,  Thomas  Jefferson,  clergyman,  b.  in
Reading,  Vt.,  9  Jan.,  1804.  He  was  graduated  at
Middlebury  in  1829,  and  in  1830-'45  was  pastor  of
a  Universalist  church  in  New  York  city,  where  he
also  edited  the  " Christian  Messenger "  in  1831-45.
In  the  latter  year  he  became  principal  of  Clinton
liberal  institute,  Oneida  county,  where  he  also
taught  theology.  In  1852  he  retunied  to  his
charge  in  New  York,  but  in  1861  he  retired  to  a
farm  at  Clinton,  where  he  lived  in  retirement,  de-
clining the  presidencies  of  St.  Lawrence  university,
Canton,  N.  Y.,  Lombard  university.  111.,  and  Tufts
college,  Mass.,  which  he  had  been  instrumental  in
founding  in  1852.  He  was  also  active  in  establish-
ing the  theological  school  of  St.  Lawrence  uni-
versity in  1856.  In  1863-'6  he  edited  the  "  Chris-
tian Ambassador,"  and  he  then  resided  on  a  farm  in
New  Jersey  till  1869,  when  he  became  professor  of
theology  in  Tufts.  Prof.  Sawyer  has  defended  the
doctrines  of  Universalism  in  the  press,  and  in  pub-
lic discussions  with  clergymen  of  other  denomina-
tions. Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1850,  and  he  is  a  member  of  the  Theological  his-
torical society  of  Leipsic.  Besides  contributions  to
denominational  literature,iie  has  published  in  book-
form  "  Letters  to  Rev.  Stephen  Remington  in  Re-
view of  his '  Lectures  on  Universalism ' "  (New  York,
1839) ;  "  Review  of  Rev.  E.  F.  Halfield's '  Universal-
ism as  it  Is'"  (1843);  "Endless  Punishment,"  and
other  discourses  (1845);  "  Memoirs  of  Rev.  Stephen
R.  Smith"  (Boston,  1852);  discussions  with  Rev.
Isaac  Westcott  on  "  The  Doctrine  of  Endless  Mis-
ery "  (New  York,  1853)  and  "  The  Doctrine  of  Uni-
versal Salvation  "  (1854) ;  "  Who  is  Our  God,  the


8AXB


SAXTON


409


Son  or  the  Father f"  oppf>sinfr  the  views  of  Ilonry
W»nl  It«H'oh<»r  (18.59);  Htid  "  Kiidleiis  Punishment
in  the  Very  Wonls  of  its  A«lv(X'ate««"  (I^)»«t4>n,
1880).— Ilirt  wife.  Caroline  MeheUbel  (Fishkr),
author,  I),  in  Newton,  Mass.,  8  iHxr.,  1812.  was  e<iu-
catetl  princi|)ally  at  homo  by  an  invalid  uncle,
and  U'gan  to  write  at  an  early  a^^e.  hut  iiublished
nothing  till  her  marriage  to  Dr.  Sawver  in  Sei>-
temlier,  IKJI,  when  she  removinl  with  him  to  N't-w
York,  an<l  l)epin  to  contritmte  in  pros*'  nn<I  verse
to  the  mairazines.  She  e«lite«l  the  "Ladies'  l{ciK)si-
torv,"  a  Lnivi'rsalist  monthly,  from  1861  till  i8tt4,
and  t>u)>lishe<l  the  "Juvenile  Library "(4  vols..
New  York.  1845);  "The  Poetry  of  Hebrew  Tra-
dition" (Hartford,  1847);  the  "Poems"  of  Mrs.
Julia  II.  Scott,  with  a  memoir  (lioston,  IKVt);
"  Frie«lel."  from  the  (German  of  Van  Horn  (Phi lii-
delphiii,  IH-W);  and  "The  Itose  of  Sharon,"  an  an-
nual (H  vols.,  ia5()-'8).

SAXE,  John  (iodfreT,  poet,  b.  in  HichRate,
Vt.,  2  June,  181«;  d.  in  Allianv.  N.  Y.,  31  March,
1887.  Hocnteretl  Wesleyan  university  in  1835,  but
left  in  his  freshman  year,  and  was  graduated  at
Middlebury  in  \m9.
During  the  four  years
following  he  studied
lawin  Loc'k|)fjrt,N.  Y.,
and  then  in  St.  Al-
bans, Vt.,  where,  in
1843,  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  He  prac-
tised with  success  in
Franklin  county  for
several  years,  liecom-
ing  in  1850-'l  state's
attorney  for  Chitten-
den county,  and  in
1847-'8  he  was  super-
intendent of  common
schools.  His  fond-
ness for  literature
gradually  led  him  in-
to journalism,  and  in
1850  he  purchased  the
•*  Burlington  Sentinel,"  which  he  etlittnl  until  1856.
Mr.  Saxe  served  as  attorney-general  of  Vermont  in
18.56,  and  for  a  time  was  deputy  collector  of  cus-
toms. In  1859,  and  again  in  1860,  he  was  the  un-
successful Democratic  nominee  for  governor.  Set-
tling in  New  York,  he  devoted  himself  to  litera-
ture and  lectured  until  1872,  when  he  moved  to
Albany,  and  became  an  editor  of  the  "  Evening
Journal."  In  1866  Middlebury  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  Mr.  Saxe  achieved  his  greatest  repu-
tation by  his  poetry.  As  a  young  lawyer  he  sent  nis
earliest  verses  to  the  "  Knickerbocker,"  and  in  after
years  he  contributed  to  "  Harper's  Magazine"  and
the  "Atlantic  Monthly."  His  "  Rhvme  of  the
Rail,"  "The  Briefli»ss  Barrister,"  "The  Proud  Miss
Mc Bride,"  and  similar  humorous  poems,  as  well  as
his  more  serious  "  Jerrv,  the  Miller,"  "  I'm  growing
Old,"  "The  Old  Church-Bell,"  and  "Treasures  in
Heaven,"  were  very  popular.  His  published  works
include  "  Progress:  a  Satirical  Poem  "  (New  York,
1846);  "  Humorous  and  Satirical  Poems"  (Boston,
1850);  "The  Money  King,  and  other  Poems"
(1859);  "The  Flying  Dutchman,  or  the  Wrath  of
Herr  Von  Stopi>eluo8e"(New  York,  1862);  "Clever
Stories  of  Manv  Nations  rendere<l  in  Rhvme"
(Boston.  1865);  "The  Times,  the  Telegraph'  and
other  Poems"  (London,  1865):  "The  Masfiuenwle.
and  other  Poems"  (Boston,  1866);  "  FabK-s  and
Legends  of  Many  Countries  "  (18?2) ;  and  "  Leisure-
Day  Rhymes"  (1875).  There  have  also  been  nu-
merous collections  of  his  poems.


SAXEWEIMARKISENACH,  Carl  Bent-
hard,  Duke  of,  b.  in  Weimar  in  1792;  d.  in  Hol-
land. 31  July.  1862.  He  entered  the  wrvice  of  the
king  of  the  Netherlands,  trwk  part  in  the  principal
canifukigns  of  1 806-' 15  against  the  French,  and  be-
came lieutenant-gt^neral  in  IWM.  In  1825  he  ob-
taine<l  leave  of  alisence,  and  sailinl  for  this  country
in  the  royal  slfM)j>-of-war  "  Pallas."  He  visited  afl
the  prin<-i|>al  cities  of  the  rnite<l  States  and  Caiia-
•la,  and  cm  his  return  published  "Trav<-Is  through
North  America,  1825-*26"  (Philadelphia,  1828).  In
this  work  he  shows  himself  to  be  an  excellent  and
intelligent  oliserver.

SAaTON.  JoHeph.  mechanician,  b.  in  Hunting-
don, Pa.,  22  March.  ITtHI;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
26  Oct.,  1873.  He  receiv«Hl  a  limite<l  e<lucation,
and  was  apprenticed  to  a  watchmaker,  after  which
he  constructed  a  firinting-press,  and  publishe<l  a
small  newspapt'r  at  irregular  intervals.  In  1817  he
went  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  worked  at  his  trwle,
and  invented  a  machine  for  cutting  the  teeth  of
wheels,  the  outlines  of  which  were  true  epicycloidal
curves.  Meanwhile  he  learned  to  draw  with  facil-
ity, and  devoted  some  time  to  the  study  of  en-
f raving.  He  then  became  associate*!  with  Isaiah
(Ukens,  a  celebrated  machinist  of  Philadelphia,
and  constructe<l  an  astronomical  cl(X'k  with  com-
pensating pendulum  and  an  csca|>ement  on  a  new
Elan  devised  by  himself.  The  town  ckx-k  in  the
elfry  of  Independence  hall  was  also  made  by  him
about  this  time.  In  his  ambition  to  obtain  knowl-
etlge  he  became  a  member  of  the  Franklin  institute,
and  acquired  reputation  among  its  members  for
his  ingenuity.  In  1828  he  visite<l  England,  and,
being  attracted  to  the  Adelaide  gallery  of  practical
science  in  Ijondon,  he  constructed  many  ingenious
mechanical  toys  for  that  institution.  He  also  made
numerous  original  investigations,  met  many  cele-
brated engineers  and  mechanicians,  and  was  intro-
duced by  Michael  Faraday  to  the  meetings  of  the
Rojal  institution.  In  1833  he  exhibited  before  the
British  association  for  the  advancement  of  science
a  magneto-electric  machine,  with  which  he  showed
a  brilliant  electric  sjiark.  decompose*!  water,  exhib-
ited the  electric  light  between  charcoal  points,  and
gave  a  rapid  series  of  intense  sho<"ks.  During  his
residence  in  England  he  also  invente*!  the  Toco-
motive  differential  pulley,  an  apparatus  for  meas-
uring the  velocity  of  vessels,  and  a  fountain-pen,
and  perfected  the  medal-niling  machine,  an  appa-
ratus for  tracing  lines  on  metal  or  glass  at  a  mi-
nute distance  from  each  other  that  shall  represent
by  an  engraving  the  design  on  the  face  of  the
medal.  He  was  tendered  the  office  of  director  of
the  printing  machinery  of  the  Bank  of  England,
but  declined  this  place  in  order  to  accept,  in  1837,
that  of  constructor  and  curator  of  the  standard
weighing  apparatus  of  the  U.  S.  mint  in  Philadel-
phia, During  his  connection  with  the  mint  he
constructed  tne  large  standard  Ltalance-o  that  are
use*!  in  the  annual  inspection  of  the  assays  and  the
verification  of  standard  weights.  In  1843  he  was
given  charge  of  the  construction  of  the  standard
balances,  weights,  and  measures  to  be  presented  to
each  of  the  states  for  insuring  uniformity  of  meas-
ures in  all  parts  of  the  country  under  the  auspices
of  the  U.  S.  coast  survey.  He  inventet!  an  auto-
matic instrument  for  recording  the  height  of  the
tides,  and  applied  the  reflecting  pyrometer  that  had
been  previously  invente<l  to  the  construction  of
measurini^  nxis  that  would  retain  their  length
while  subjected  to  different  temfwratures.  A  deep-
sea  thermometer  and  an  immersed  hydrometer  were
among  his  later  inventions.  Mr.  ^xton  received
from  the  Franklin  institute  in  1884  a  medal  for  bis


410


SAXTON


SAY


reflecting  nyrometer.  and  in  1851  was  awarded  a
cold  medal  at  the  World's  fair  in  London  for  a
large  balance  of  extreme  precision.  In  1837  he
was  elected  a  member  of  the  American  philosophi-
cal society,  and  in  1863  became  a  charter  mem-
ber of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  A  sketch
of  his  life  was  contributed  by  Joseph  Henry  to  the
first  volume  of  the  "  Biographical  Memoirs  of  the
latter  bodv  (Washington,  1877).

SAXTON,  Luther  Calvin,  impostor,  b.  in  Mas-
sachusetts in  180G ;  d.  after  1806.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Hamilton  college  in  1825.  In  1850  he  pub-
lished the  "  Fall  of  Poland  "  (New  York).  He  went
to  Kochester,  N.  Y.,  about  1860,  and  there  interested
Aristarehus  Champion,  an  aged,  wealthy,  and  some-
what eccentric  man,  in  three  schemes — the  Union
book  company,  with  a  capital  of  $3,000,000;  an
International  bank,  with  a  capital  of  many  mill-
ions ;  and  a  vast  manufacturing  corporation.  Only
the  book  company  was  put  into  operation.  Half
the  stock  was  to  be  in  books,  manuscripts,  and
copyrights,  and  of  these  Saxton  professed  to  have
a  great  supply.  Champion  furnished  capital  in  the
form  of  notes  and  mortgages  to  the  amount  of
$51,475.  Saxton  established  a  magazine  and  visited
Europe  as  the  general  agent  of  the  company ;  but
after  a  time  Champion  grew  suspicious,  and  had
him  arrested  and  indicted  for  false  pretences.  He
was  brought  to  trial,  8  Dec,  1863,  convicted,  sen-
tenced to  Auburn  prison,  31  Dec,  for  three  years,
and  served  out  his  full  term.

SAXTON,  Riifllg,  soldier,  b.  in  Greenfield,
Mass.,  19  Oct.,  1824.  He  attended  Deei-field  acad-
emy, worked  on  a  farm  until  his  twentieth  year,
and  afterward  entering  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy, was  graduated  in  1849.  He  entered  the  3d
artillery,  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1855,  and  in
1853-'4  led  a  surveying  party  across  the  Rocky
mountains.  In  1855-'9  he  was  employed  in  the
coast  survey,  and  made  improvements  in  the  in-
struments for  deep-sea  soundings,  one  of  which,
a  self-registering  thermometer,  bears  his  name.
In  1859  he  became  an  instructor  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy,  and  at  the  opening  of  the  civil  war
he  was  at  St.  Louis  acting  as  quartermaster  with
the  rank  of  captain,  and  was  engaged  in  break-
ing up  Camp  Jackson.  (See  Lyox,  Nathaniel.)
He  joined  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan  in  western
Virginia,  afterward  accompanied  Gen.  Thomas  W.
Sherman  to  Port  Royal  as  quartermaster,  and
on  15  April,  1862,  was  made  brigadier-general  of
volunteers.  For  a  short  time  after  the  retreat  of
Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  from  the  Shenandoah,
Gen.  Saxton  commanded  at  Harper's  Ferry,  and
successfully  resisted  an  attack  on  his  position  by
Confederate  troops  under  Gen.  Ewell.  He  was
military  governor  of  the  Department  of  the  South
in  186^'5,  and  was  appointed  quartermaster  with
the  rank  of  major  in  July,  1866.  He  was  brevetted
brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army.  13  March,  1865,  for
faithful  and  meritorious  services  during  the  war,
and  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  and  deputy  quar-
termaster-general, 6  June,  1872,  and  colonel  and
assistant  quartermaster-general,  10  March,  1882.
From  1883  till  1888  he  was  in  charge  of  the  Jefifer-
sonville  department  at  Louisville,  Ky.

SAY,  Thomas,  merchant,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  16  Dec,  1709;  d.  there  in  1796.  His  father,
William  Say,  was  an  early  Quaker  colonist.  The
son  was  educated  in  the  Friends'  school,  and
learned  the  saddler's  trade,  but  afterward  became
an  apothecary.  When  a  young  man  he  supposed
that  ne  visited  heaven  in  a  trance.  William  Mentz
published  "  The  Visions  of  a  Certain  Thomas  Say,  of
the  City  of  Philadelphia,  which  he  saw  in  a  Trance  "


(Phihwlelphia,  1774),  on  the  appearance  of  which
Say  printed  in  the  "  Pennsylvania  Journal "  of  2
March,  1774,  the  following  notice:  "Whereas  a
certain  William  Mentz  has  printed  for  sale,  with-
out my  knowledge  or  consent,  '  The  Vision  of
Thomas  Say,'  which  is  but  an  incorrect  and  imper-
fect part  of  what  I  propose  to  make  public.  And
as  I  never  intended  what  I  had  wrote  on  that  head
to  be  published  during  my  life,  all  persons  are  de-
sired not  to  encourage  the  said  Mentz  in  such
wrong  proceeding."  After  his  death  his  son.  Dr.
Benjamin  Sav,  published  an  account  of  the  vision
in  "  A  Short  Oompilation  of  the  Extraordinary  Life
and  Writings  or  Thomas  Say,  copietl  from  his
Manuscripts  "  (Philadelphia,  1796).  He  was  a  man
of  noted  benevolence,  a  zealous  promoter  of  educa-
tion, and  for  many  years  was  the  treasurer  of  the
Society  for  the  instruction  of  blacks.  He  helped
to  found  the  Pennsylvania  hospital,  and  was  one
of  the  founders  of  the  House  of  employment. — His
son,  Benjamin,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in
1756;  d.  there,  23  April.  1813,  was  educated  in
Quaker  schools,  and  in  1780  received  the  degree  of
M.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He
sympathized  with  the  colonies  during  the  Revolu-
tion, and  in  1781  he  was  among  those  known  as
the  "  fighting  Quakers,"  who  initiated  the  forma-
tion of  the  society  entitled  "The  Monthly  Meet-
ing of  Friends,  called  by  some  Free  Quakers,  dis-
tinguishing us  from  the  brethren  who  have  dis-
owned us."  Dr.  Say  was  well  known  in  his  pro-
fession, and  in  1787  was  a  founder  of  the  College
of  physicians  of  Philadelphia,  whose  treasurer  he
was  from  1791  till  1809.  He  was  a  contributor  to
the  Pennsylvania  hospital,  a  founder  of  the  Penn-
svlvania  prison  society  (1790),  and  for  many  years
the  president  of  the  Humane  society.  From  1808
till  1811  he  served  in  congress.  He  published
"Spasmodic  Affections  of  the  Eye"  (Philadelphia,
1792),  and  the  work  mentioned  above  (1796). — Ben-
jamin's son.  Thomas,  naturalist,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  27  Julv,  1787;  d.  in  New  Harmony,  Ind.,
10  Oct.,  1834,  aban-
doned commercial
pursuits  and  devot-
ed himself  to  the
studv  of  natural  his-
tory." In  1812  he
was  a  founder  of  the
Academy  of  natural
sciences  at  Philadel-
phia, and  he  became
a  chief  contributor
to  its  journal.  In
1818  Mr.  Say  took
part  in  a  scientific
exploration  of  the
islands  and  coasts
of  Georgia,  visiting
eastern  Florida  for
the  same  purpose,
but  progress  of  the
party  to  the  interior
was  stopped  by  hos-
tile Indians.  In  1819-20  he  accompanied  the  ex-
pedition under  Maj.  Stephen  H.  Long  to  the  Rocky
mountains  as  chief  geologist,  and  in  1823  took
part  in  that  to  the  sources  of  St.  Peter's  river.  He
removed  to  the  New  Harmony  settlement  with
Robert  Owen  in  1825,  and  after  their  separation
remained  there  as  agent  of  the  property.  His  prin-
cipal work  is  "  American  Entomology "  (3  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1824-'8).  His  "American  Conchol-
ogy,"  seven  numbers  of  which  were  published  at
New  Harmony,  was  incomplete  at  the  time  of  his


SAYLER


SAYRE


411


death.  nU  cliucovories  of  new  xijoc-ios  of  inMcto
wore  supposed  to  have  been  jf renter  than  ha<l  ever
been  made  by  a  single  individual  ttofore.  He  was
a  frei|uent  contributor  to  the '•  TransartionH"  of
the  Americ-an  |)hil(«ophic«l  society,  the  New  York
lyceum,  "  Aniericun  Jounial  of  Science."  and  many
other  publications.  His  complete  writinjfs  on  the
ooncholoffv  of  the  Uniteil  States  wen*  edited  by
William  0.  Bimey  (New  York,  IRW).  and  his  writ-
inffs  on  entomolofjy  bv  Dr.  .John  L.  Le  Conte,  with
a  memoir  bv  (ieorpe  Ord  (New  York,  lM5ft).

SAYLER,  Milton,  congressman,  b.  in  Ijewis-
burjf,  Pri'ble  co.,  Ohio,  4  Nov.,  1831.  .He  was
graduatetl  at  Miami  university  in  1852.  and  after-
wanl  at  Cincinnati  law-school,  and  pnu-tised  law  at
Cincinnati.  He  was  a  mem})er  of  the  lejjislature  of
Ohio  in  lH<J2-''{.  was  ehn-ted  to  congress,  and  serve«l
bv  sucwssive  elwtions  from  1  Dec.,  1873,  till  1880,
lie  was  chosen  speaker  of  the  house  of  representa-
tives prti  lemporr,  24  June,  1870.

8AYLES,  John,  author,  b.  in  Vernon,  Oneida
CO.,  N.  Y.,  U  March,  1825.  His  ancestor  came  to
this  c*ountry  in  the  ship  with  Roger  Williams,
whose  daughter  he  marrie<l.  .John  was  educated
in  his  native  town  and  at  Hamilton  college,  an<l
in  1844  removcii  to  Georgia.  He  taught  there  and
in  Texas,  ami,  having  studied  law  in  the  mean
time,  was  ailmitted  to  the  bar  of  Texas  in  1846.
He  practised  successfully  at  IJrenham,  and  was  a
memlK-r  of  the  legislature  in  1853-'5.  When  the
civil  war  l»egan  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of
Texan  militia,  and  he  was  subsenuently  on  the
staff  of  (len.  John  B.  Magruder.  He  was  anpoint-
ed  special  judge  of  the  suprt>me  court  of  Texas  in

1851,  and  in  1880  became  one  of  the  law  faculty  of
Baylor  university.  He  has  published  '*  A  Treatise
on  the  Practice  in  the  District  and  Supreme  Courts
of  Texas"  (1858);  "Treatise  on  the  Civil  Jurisdic-
tion of  Justices  of  the  Peace  in  the  State  of  Texas"
(1867);  "Treatise  on  the  Principles  of  Pleading  in
Civil  Actions  in  the  Courts  of  Texas  "  (18?2) ;  "The
Probate  Laws  of  Texas"  (1872);  "Laws  of  Busi-
ness and  Form- Book  "  (18?2);  "Constitution  of
Texas,  with  Notes"  (1872);  "Notes  on  Texan  Ke-

fsrts"  (1874);  "The  Ma.sonic  Jurisprudence  of
exas,  with  Forms  for  the  Use  of  Lodges  and  the
Grand  Lodge"  (1879);  and  "Revised  Civil  Stat-
utes and  Laws  passed  by  the  Legislature  of  Texas,
with  Notes  "  (St.  Louis,  1888).

SAYRE,  Darid  Ansten,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Bottle  Hill,  N.  J..  12  March,  1793;  d.  in  I^xing-
ton,  Ky..  1 1  Sept.,  1870.  He  removed  in  early  life  to
Lexington,  where  he  became  a  successful  merchant
and  banker.  Though  re|H>atedly  meeting  with  heavy
losses,  he  gave  alx)ut  $.500,(X)0  to  Ijenevolent  objects
during  his  life-time,  including  $100,000  to  found
the  Sayer  institute. — His  nephew,  Lewis  Albert,
surgeon,  b.  in  Bottle  Hill  (now  Madison),  N.  J.,  29
Feb.,  1820,  was  graduated  at  Transylvania  univer-
sity. Ky.,  in  1838,  and  at  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  1842.  The  office  of  prosector  to  Dr.
Willard  Parker,  professor  of  surgery  in  that  insti-
tution, was  at  once  given  to  him,  and  he  held  it  until

1852.  He  was  appointed  in  1853  surgeon  to  Belle-
rue  hospital,  and  in  1859  sureeon  to  the  Charity
hospital  on  Blackwell's  island,  TK)th  of  which  posts
he  continued  to  hold  until  1873,  when  he  be<>ame  i
consulting  surgeon.  Dr.  .Sayre  advocated  clinical  ;
practice  in  medical  colleges,  and  was  in  1861
among  the  first  to  suggest  the  establishment  of
Belle vue  hospital  medical  college.  On  the  forma-
tion of  its  faculty,  he  lx>came  professor  of  ortho-  '

Cdic  surgery,  and fractures  and  luxations,  and  \
ter  of  clinical  surgery,  which  chair  he  still  (1888)
holds. In  1844  he  was  appointed  hospital  surgeon  i


of  the  1st  division  of  the  New  York  state  militia,
but  he  resigne*!  in  1866.  Since  1H70  he  has  been
consulting  surgeon  to  the  Home  for  incurable*  in
Westchester  county.  N.  Y.  From  1860  till  lHfl6  he
was  resident  physician  of  the  city  of  New  Y'ork,
during  which  time  he  presenttnl  many  ftapers  to
the  l)oard  of  health.  Among  tlies«'  was  one  show*
ing  that  choleni  is  a  fxirtable  disease*,  if  not  a
contagious  one,  and  could  U^  f>revente<l  by  eflW-ient
quarantine  r(>gulations.  In  1N76  he  was  an|M>inted
by  the  American  me«lical  ass<x-iation  a  delegate  to
the  International  medical  congn>ss  that  convened
in  Phila<lelphia.  and  in  1877  he  was  sent  by  the
same  body  as  a  flelegate  to  the  British  me<lical  a»-
sfK'iation.  On  this  «K'casion  he  was  invited  to  give
demonstrations  of  his  mcnle  of  tn'atmeiit  of  hip-

i'oint  and  spinal  diseas«'s  in  the  University  college
lospital,  Guy's,  St.  Bartholomew's,  St.  Thomas's,
and  the  Royal  orthoiM»<lic  hosjtilal  in  I^mdon,
also  in  Liver|K)ol,  Manchester.  Birmingham,  and
Cork.  In  1879  he  went  as  a  delegate  to  the  6th
International  medical  congress  in  Amstenlam,  and
before  that  bo<ly  gave  demonstrations  of  his  jdan
of  treatment  for  Pott's  disease  and  lateral  curva-
ture of  the  spine.  He  was  prt'sent  at  the  In-
ternational medical  congresses  in  London  in  1881,
Coi)enhagen  in  1884,  and  in  Washington  in  1887.
at  each  of  which  he  read  papers  des<'riptive  of  his
recent  improvements  in  the  treatment  of  the  dis-
eases of  which  he  makes  a  specialty.  Dr.  Sayre's
inventions  include  many  surgical  api)liances,  among
which  are  a  uvulatome,  splints  for  extension  of
the  hip-,  knee-,  and  ankle-joints  in  chronic  disease,
a  flexible  prol)e,  improved  tracheotomv-tul>e.  bris-
tle prolwmg  for  removing  foreign  Vxxlles  from  the
a'Sf)phagus,  scrotal  clamp,  club-fof)t  sh(H',  new
metluKl  for  treating  fractured  clavicle,  and  the  use
of  plaster  of  Paris  in  the  treatment  of  spinal  dis-
eases and  curvature.  In  18?2  he  was  made  a
knijjht  of  the  order  of  Wasa  bv  Charles  XIV.,  king
of  Sweden  and  Norway,  for  his  services  to  metlical
science.  He  is  a  memlier  of  numerous  medi(*al
societies  at  home  and  abroad,  and  was  one  of  the
original  members  of  the  American  medical  assf»ci-
ation,  of  which  he  was  vice-president  in  1806,  and
president  in  1886.  His  bibliograj>hy  is  exceedingly
large,  consisting  chiefly  of  contributions  to  profes-
sional journals,  and  includes  the  books  "Practical
Manual  of  the  Treatment  of  Club- Foot"  (New
York,  1869) ;  "  Lectures  on  Orthopedic  Surgery  and
Diseases  of  the  Joints"  (1876).  of  which  several
editions  have  been  issued  and  which  have  been  re-
published in  Germany  and  France ;  and  "  S[)inal
Curvature  and  its  Treatment  "  (London,  1877).

SAYRE,  Stephen,  patriot,  b.  on  Long  Island,
N.  Y.,  in  1734;  d.  in  Virginia,  27  Sept.,  1818.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1757,  engaced  early
in  business,  and  l)ecame  a  successful  men-nant  anil
banker  in  Ixmdon.  He  was  sheriff  of  that  citv  in
1774,  and  possessed  the  confidence  of  the  J^arl  of
Chatham  at  a  critical  peritMl.  He  anlently  favored
the  cause  of  the  independence  of  the  American
colonies,  and  suffered  for  his  devotion  to  his
country.  An  officer  of  the  royal  guards,  named
Richardson,  also  an  American,  brought  a  charge
of  high  treason  against  him  for  the  use  of  a  light
and  unguanled  expression  referring  to  the  king's
death.  Mr.  Sayre  was  committed  to  the  tower,
and,  though  released  soon  afterwanl.  his  Itanking-
h<>ust>  failinl,  and,  having  lost  everything,  he  was
force<l  to  leave  England.  He  was  afterwartl  em-
ploywl  by  lienjamin  Franklin  on  some  im|M)rtant
missions,  was  his  private  secretary  for  a  jH^riod,
and  went  with  Arthur  Lee  to  Berlin  at  the  time
of  the  first  suggestion  of  the scheme  of  armed


412


SAYRES


SCAMMELL


neutrality.  After  leaving;  Berlin,  Mr.  Sayre  went
to  CoiMjnhagen,  Stockholm,  and  St.  Petersburg,  and
in  each  of  those  cities  received  ample  supplies  to
support  the  cause  of  the  independence  of  the  United
States.  In  1795  he  was  an  active  opponent  of  Wash-
ington's administration.

SAYRES,  Edward  Smith,  consul,  b.  in  Mar-
cus Hook.  Pa.,  (i  Oct..  1799;  d.  in  I'hiladelphia,  29
March.  1877.  His  father,  Caleb  .Smith  Sayres,  was
a  distinguished  physician,  who  is  mentioned  by
Dr.  Henjamin  Rush  as  being  particularly  skilful
in  the  treatment  of  yellow  fever  during  the  epi-
demic of  1798.  The  son  was  educated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania.  He  was  appointed  vice-
consul  of  Brazil  in  1841,  of  Portugal  in  1850.  of
Sweden  and  Norway  in  1854,  of  Denmark  in  1862,
and  in  1872  honorary  consul  of  Brazil  for  long  and
faithful  services  to  the  empire.  He  was  at  the  time
of  his  death  dean  of  the  consular  corps  at  Phila-
delphia, and  probably  the  oldest  foreign  consul  in
point  of  service  in  the  United  States.

SCADDINO,  Henry,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Dunkeswell.  Devonshire.  England,  29  July.  1813.
He  came  to  Canada  with  his  parents  in  1821,  and
lived  near  York  (now  Toronto).  He  was  educated
at  Upper  Canada  college.  Toronto,  and  at  St.  John's
college,  Cambridge,  England,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1837.  In  1838  ne  was  appointed  to  a  clas-
sical tutorship  in  Upper  Canada  college,  and  in  the
same  year  he  was  ordained  a  priest  of  the  Church
of  England  in  Canada.  In  1847  he  became  rector
of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity  in  Toronto,
which  post  he  resigned  in  1875.  He  was  also  a
canon  of  St.  James's  cathedral,  Toronto.  He  has
been  president  of  the  Canadian  institute,  Toronto,
was  awarded  the  confederation  medal  in  1885,  in
appreciation  of  his  useful  public  labors  as  a  man
of  letters,  was  president  of  the  Pioneer  association
of  Toronto,  and  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Cambridge  university  in  1852.  He  edited  the
"  Canadian  Journal  of  Science,  Literature,  and  His-
tory" in  1868-'78,  and  published  "Memorial  of  the
Rev.  William  Ilonywood  Ripley  "  (Toronto,  1849) ;
"Shakespeare  the  Seer — the  Interpreter"  (1864);
"  Truth's  Resurrection  "  (1865) ;  "  Christian  Pan-
theism "  (1865) ;  "  Toronto  of  Old  "  (1873) ;  "  The
Four  Decades  of  York,  Upper  Canada"  (1884);
"A  History  of  the  Old  French  Fort  at  Toronto"
(1887)  ;  brief  memoirs  of  John  Strachan,  first
bishop  of  Toronto  (1868),  and  Henry  Dundas  and
Sir  George  Yonge  (1878) ;  and  numerous  pamphlets
and  articles  on  the  archaeology  and  history  of  tipper
Canada,  and  other  subjects.  In  his  writings  Dr.
Scadding  has  principally  aspired  to  the  reputation
of  a  local  historian  and  annalist,  and  as  such  has
done  much  valuable  work.

SCALES,  Alfred  Moore,  governor  of  North
Carolina,  b.  in  Reedsville.  Rockingham  eo.,  N.  C,
26  Nov.,  1827.  He  was  educated  at  the  University
of  North  Carolina,  but  was  not  graduated.  He  af-
terward taught  for  a  time,  then  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851,  and  in  1853  became  so-
licitor of  Rockingham  county.  He  was  a  member  of
the  lower  house  of  the  legislature  in  1852, 1853,  and
1856,  and  was  then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  from  7  Dec,  1857,  till  3  March,  1859.
He  became  clerk  and  master  of  the  court  of  equity
of  Rockingham  county  in  1859,  which  office  he  held
till  the  civil  war.  In  1860  he  was  a  presidential
elector  on  the  Breckinridge  ticket,  and  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  Confeder-
ate array  as  a  private.  He  was  elected  captain,
subsequently  promoted  colonel,  and  then  made
brigauier-general.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Williamsburg  and  in  the  engagements  near  Rich-


mond, and.  after  Gen.  Pender  wa.s  wounded  at
the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  took  command  of  his
brigade.  He  was  severely  wounded  at  Chancellors-
ville  and  Gettysburg,  and  was  present  at  most  of
the  other  battles  till  the  close  of  the  war.  He  re-
sumed the  practice  of  his  profession  after  the  war,
was  elected  to  the  legislature  of  North  Carolina  in
1866-'7,  and  served  in  congress  by  successive  elec-
tions from  1875  till  1885.  On  4  Nov.,  1884.  he  was
elected  governor  of  North  Carolina  for  the  term
that  will  end  in  January,  1889.

SCALIjAN,  Thomas,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Wexford,  Ireland,  about  1770;  d.  in  St.  John,
Newfoundland,  29  May,  1830.  He  studied  the-
ology in  the  Convent  of  St.  Isidore,  Rome,  where  he
entered  the  Franciscan  order.  Aft^r  his  ordination
he  was  appointed  professor  of  philosophy  in  the
Franciscan  college.  He  returned  to  Ireland  in
1794,  and  after  teaching  in  the  seminary  of  his  or-
der at  Waterford  went  to  Newfoundland  in  1812,
but,  after  serving  in  the  diocese  for  a  few  years,  re-
turned again  to  his  native  country.  In  January,
1816,  he  was  nominated  coadjutor  of  Dr.  Lambert,
vicar  apostolic  of  Newfoundland,  and  was  conse-
crated bishop  of  Drago,  in  parfibus,  in  Wexford,  on
1  May.  In  1817  he  succeeded  Dr.  Lambert  as  vicar
apostolic.  During  his  administration  the  Roman
Catholics  of  Newfoundland  increased  in  numbers,
wealth,  and  social  standing.  The  island  of  Anticosti
and  that  part  of  Labrador  that  is  bounded  by  the
northern  part  of  St.  John  river  were  added  to  his
vicariate  m  1820.  He  was  of  a  mild  and  tolerant
disposition  and  an  especial  favorite  with  the  Prot-
estants of  the  island.  He  was  accused  of  allow-
ing his  liberality  to  carry  him  too  far  in  his  desire
to  conciliate  all  religious  denominations,  and  a  for-
mal censure  was  sent  from  Rome ;  but,  as  he  was
on  his  death-ljed,  it  was  not  read  to  him.

SCAMMELL,  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  Mendon
(now  Milford),  Mass.,  probably  in  1746;  d.  in  Will-
iamsburg, Va.,  6  Oct.,  1781.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1769,  and  taught  in  Kingston  and  Plym-
outh, Mass.  In  1771  he  went  to  Portsmouth,  N.H.,
and  in  the  following  year  he  was  employed  by  the
government  in  exploring  and  surveying  land  and
timber  for  the  royal  navy,  and  in  assisting  to  make
surveys  for  a  map  of  New  Hampshire.  Also  he
served  on  board  a  sloop-of-war  to  transmit  de-
spatches, plans,  and  reports  to  the  plantation  office
in  Great  Britain.  Later  he  studied  law  with  John
Sullivan  in  Durham.  N.  H.,  until  1775.  On  14  Dec,
1774,  he  was  of  the  force  under  John  Sullivan,  John
Langdon,  and  others  that  captured  William  and
Mary  fort,  Newcastle,  and  secured  its  arms  and,
96  barrels  of  powder,  one  of  the  first  overt  acts  of*
the  Revolution,  which  was  declared  treason  by  the
royal  governor.  While  Sullivan  was  a  member  of
the  Continental  congress  Scammell  had  charge  of
his  legal  affairs,  which  detained  him  from  joining
the  army  at  Cambridge.  When  his  preceptor  was
appointed  major  -  general  in  the  Revolutionary
army,  Scammell  was  made  a  brigade-major.  On  10
Dec,  1776,  he  became  colonel  of  the  3d  New  Hamp-
shire regiment,  and  he  was  transferred  later  to  the
1st  regiment.  In  1777  his  regiment  was  ordered
to  the  northern  army  under  Gen.  Horatio  Gates.
In  that  campaign  he  was  notably  active,  and  was
wounded  at  Saratoga,  5  Jan..  1778.  He  was  appoint-
ed adjutant  -  general  of  the  American  army,  and
consequently  became  a  member  of  Gen.  Washing-
ton's military  family.  Preferring  active  command
and  the  post  of  danger,  in  March,  1781,  he  was  given
command  of  a  chosen  regiment  of  light  infantry,
and  on  30  Sept..  at  the  siege  of  Yorktown,  as  officer
of  the  day,  while  reconnoitring  the  enemy's  position.


8CAMM0N


SCANNELL


413


7^^t'U****^t*-y


he  WMcapturpd  br  Ilpwian  clra^^oftriA.  and  wounded
after  hb  !*urrend»T.  <Jn  refjuest  of  (Jen.  Washing-
ton, Corn  wall  is  |i(>rinittod  hun  to  Ixj  taken  to  Wifl-
ianiiiltiir;;,  wli««n?  h«.<  tlitnl.

SCAMMON,  Jonathan  Yonnfr.  lawyer.  K  in
Whit.n.l.l.  Mr..'.»7.liilv.  1M12:  «l.  in  CliicHK'o.  111..  17
Marili.  IHIM).  lie  studied  at  Waterville,  fruuj  which
he  nveived  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  18Ui),  Ktudied

law  in  IlHllowell,
Me..  wa-HwImittod
to  the  Iwr.  and  re-
move<l  in  IMIW  to
Chicajjo,  whore  he
bepin  the'pnu'tice
of  his  profession.
Hepr»'|>Hredanew
edition  of  the  laws
of  Illinois("  Gale's
Statutes"),  was  ap-
pointed reporter
of  the  supreme
court,  and  pul>-
lishe<i  "  Scam-
mon's  Reports  "  (4
vols.,  1832-'43).
He  associated  Kz-
raB.  McCaffgwith
him  in  1847,  and
subsei^uently  Samuel  W.  Fuller,  in  the  firm  of
Scammon,  SicCagg,  and  Fuller.  He  took  an  im-
portant part  in  pioneer  enterprises,  was  one  of
the  main  organizers  and  directors  of  the  first  rail-
road west  of  Ijake  Michigan,  the  Galena  and  Chi-
cago (now  the  Northwestern),  laid  the  foundation
of  the  first  successful  public-school  system  in  Chi-
cago, and  actively  identified  himself  with  man^
societies.  He  w^as  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Chi-
cago astronomical  society  and  its  first  president,
and  built  and  maintained  at  his  own  exjiense  for
many  years  DeaH)orn  observatory,  in  which  was
placed  the  first  grand  refractor  that  was  manufac-
tured by  Alvan  Clark  and  Sons,  of  Cambridge,  Mass.
The  observatory  cost  $30,000.  He  acquired  wealth,
most  of  which  was  lost  in  the  great  fire  of  1871
and  the  panic  of  1873,  and  he  was  at  the  head  of
several  large  and  successful  financial  institutions.
Mr.  Scammon  was  a  Whig,  and  a  Republican  in
politics.  He  was  one  of  several  gentlemen  that
establisheil  the  "Chicago  American"  in  1844  to  aid
in  the  election  of  Henrv  Clay,  and  when,  in  1872,
the  Chicago  "Tribune''  favored  the  election  of
Horace  Greeley,  he  established  the  "  Inter-Ocean"
as  a  Republican  |)aper.  'He  was  a  Swedenborgian,
was  the  first  of  that  belief  in  Chicago,  instituted
the  Chicago  society  of  the  New  Jerusalem  and  the
HIinois  association  of  that  church,  and  was  for  ten
years  vice-president  of  the  general  convention  of
his  denonunation  in  the  United  States.  He  was
the  first  layman  to  introiluce  the  homu?oi>athic
svstem  of  me<licine  in  Chicago,  and  founded  the
llahnemann  hospital,  of  which  and  the  Hahne-
mann medical  college  he  continued  many  years  a
trustee.  Many  acts  of  the  legislature  originated
with  him,  osfKK-ially  those  reforming  the  circu-
lating nuHlium  and  driving  out  of  circulation  the
depnt'iatetl  currency  that  iimndated  Illinois  and
the  northwest.  He  had  been  ofilcially  connect-
ed with  the  city,  county,  and  state  government,
and  a  niemiwr  of  the  legislature,  and  of  the  Re-

!)ublican  national  conventions  of  18(W  and  1872.
kir.  Scammon  contribute*!  largely  to  the  iH«ri-
odical  press. —  His  brother,  Eliakini  Parker,
soldier,  b.  in  Whitefield.  Me.,  27  Dec.,  1810,  was
gnuluate<I  at  the  V.  S.  military  academy  in  is:^7,
and  promoted  2d  lieutenant  of'  artillery.' In  18^


he  was  appointed  2<1  lieutenant  of  topographical
engineers,  and  he  wius  assistant  professor  uf  mathe-
matics at  West  Point  from  I8:i7  till  1838.  and  of
ethics  from  184 1  till  1840.  He  was  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  Winfield  S<'ott  in  Mexico  in  184tt-'7,  engalged
on  the  survey  of  the  northern  lakes  in  1847-«')4,
I  in  \>dA  liecame  captain.  In  18.')0  he  was  di»-
I  missed  the  army  f«)r  "  disobcHlience  of  orders."
\  He  was  then  professor  in  Mount  St.  Marjr's  col-
1  lege,  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  in  1850-'8.  and  {>n>8ident  of
the  polytechnic  college  in  that  city  from  1859-'01.
He  became  colonel  of  the  23<l  (jliio  regiment  in
June,  1801,  servetl  in  western  Virginia  ami  Mary-
land, and  was  promoted  briga<lier-general  of  vol-
unteers. W  Oct..  1802.  for  gallant  conduct  at  the
battle  of  South  Mountain.  mA.  He  coniinandc<l  the
tlistrict  of  Kanawha  from  Novemln'r,  1802,  till  8
Feb.,  1804,  was  a  prisoner  of  war  from  the  latter
ilate  till  3  Aug.,  and  then  led  a  se|>aratc  brigade  at
Morris  island,  .S.  C.  From  Noveml)er.  1804.  till
April,  1805.  he  was  in  charge  of  the  district  of  Flor-
ida. He  was  U.  S.  consul  \\\  Prince  Kdward  island
from  1800  till  1870.  and  afterward  profess<ir  of
mathematics  and  history  in  Seton  Hall  college.
Orange,  N.  J. — Another  brother,  Charles  Mell-
vllle,  navigator,  b.  in  Pittston,  Me.,  28  May.  1825,
Ijecame  a  ship-captain  and  sailed  to  California  in
1850.  He  engagefl  in  the  whale-fishery  and  discov-
ered the  habitat  of  the  gray  whale  in  a  bay  on  the
coast  of  California,  which  was  named  Scammon
lagoon.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  in  1801
he  became  commander  of  a  U.  S.  revenue  cutter  in
San  Francisco,  and  he  was  sulisequentlv  appointed
captain  in  that  branch  of  the  service,  in  wnich  he
still  remains.  He  is  the  author  of  a  work  on  "  The
Marine  Mammals  of  the  Northwestern  Coast  of
America  and  the  American  Whale  Fishery  "  (San
Francisco.  1874).

SCANLAN,  Laurence,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Ballintarsna.  County  Tip[>erarv,  Ireland,  29  Sept.,
1843.  He  studied  classics  in  1'hurles  in  1800,  and
in  1803  entered  the  mission  college  of  All  Hallows,
Dublin,  to  prepare  for  the  priesthood.  He  was  or-
dained priest  m  1808,  and  immediately  emliarked
for  the  United  States,  where  he  was  appointed  as-
sistant pastor  of  St.  Patrick's  church,  San  Francis-
co. In  1871  he  was  sent  to  Pioche.  Nevada,  which
had  become  suddenly  a  place  of  treat  im|)ortance,
owing  to  the  discovery  of  mines.  He  built  a  church,
the  first  in  this  part  of  the  state,  and  was  bringing
alx)ut  a  marked  change  in  the  reckless  lives  of  the
miners,  when,  in  1873.  he  was  transferred  to  Salt
Lake  City.  A  few  years  afterward  he  was  an|x)int-
ed  vicar  forane  of  the  territory  of  Utah,  in  this
post  he  gave  proof  of  financial  ability  as  well  as
missionary  zeal.  After  liquidating  a  heavy  debt
on  the  church  in  Salt  I^ake,  he  secured  a  site  for
an  acatlemy  in  1875.  To  collect  funds  for  the
purpose  he  travelled  on  horselwick  wght  and  day
through  every  part  of  the  territory,  and  before  the
end  of  the  year  he  succeeded  in  erecting  the  finest
building  of  the  kind  in  Utah.  He  afterward  built
five  churches,  five  .schools,  and  two  hospitals.  In
1881  he  erected  a  fine  hospital  in  Salt  Lake  City.
In  1880  he  founded  the  Collep  of  All  Hallow's,
which  is  the  largest  school-building  within  a  range
of  1.000  miles.  Dr.  Scanlan  was  his  own  architect
and  sujK'rintendent  in  erecting  these  buildings,  all
of  which  were  built  by  the  contributions  of  the
Roman  Catholics  of  Ctah  without  aid  from  any
other  quarter.  He  was  appointed  vicar  apostolic
of  Utah  territory  in  1887.

SCANNELU'Riohard.  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Coun-
ty Cork,  Ireland.  12  .May.  1H44. After  completing
i  a  course  of  mathematics  and  classics  in  a  colleire


414


SCARBOROUGH


SCHAEFPER


at  MidcUoton,  Cork,  he  entered  the  Poreijjn  mis-
sionary collejje  of  All  ^fallows,  Dublin,  where  he
studied  theoloprv,  and  afAliatcd  himself  to  the  dio-
cese of  Nashville.  Ho  was  ordained  a  priest  ejirly
in  1871.  and  einbarked  immediately  afterward  for
the  United  States.  He  was  apfiointed  assistant  at
the  cathedral  of  Nashville  after  his  arrival,  then
pa.stor  of  St.  Colomba's  church.  East  Nashville,
and  after  a  few  years  rector  of  the  cathedral.  He
jfovemed  the  diocese  as  a<lministrator.  during  a  va-
cancy in  the  see,  from  November,  1880,  till  June,
1883.  In  1885  he  organized  the  congregation  of
St.  Joseph's,  in  West  Nashville,  and  on  the  crea-
tion of  the  diocese  of  Concordia,  Kansas,  was  elected
bishop,  and  consecrated  on  30  Nov.,  1887.

SCARBOROUGH,  John,  P.  K  bishop,  b.  in
Castlewellan,  in  the  north  of  Ireland,  25  April,
1831.  On  his  father's  death  in  1840  he  came  to
the  United  States,  and  obtained  his  early  educa-
tion and  training  in  Lansingburg,  N.  Y.  He  was
graduated  at  Trinity  in  1854,  and  at  the  Episcopal
general  theological  seminary  in  1857,  and  was  or-
dained deacon  in  Trinity  church,  New  York,  28
June,  1857,  by  Bishop  Horatio  Potter,  and  priest
in  St.  Paul's  church,  Troy,  N.  Y.,  14  Aug.,  1858,
by  the  same  bishop.  His  first  post  was  as  assist-
ant in  St.  Paul's  church,  Troy,  in  1857-'60.  He
was  rector  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Communion,
Poughkcepsie,  N.  Y.,  in  186(>-'7,  and  then  became
rector  of  Trinity  church,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  which
post  he  held  until  1875.  He  received  the  degree  of
S.  T.  D.  from  Trinity  in  1872,  and  served  as  deputy
to  the  general  convention  in  1871  and  1874.  Hav-
ing been  elected  bishop  of  New  Jersey,  he  was  con-
secrated in  St.  Mary's  church,  Burlington,  N.  J..
2  Feb.,  1875.  Bishop  Scarborough  has  published
a  few  occasional  sermons,  and  several  addresses
and  pastoral  letters.

SCARBOROUGH,  William  Saunders,  educa-
tor, b.  in  Macon,  Ga.,  16  Feb.,  1852.  He  is  of  African
descent.  He  was  graduated  at  Oberlin  in  1875,  and
taught  in  the  Lewis  high-school  at  Macon,  but  in
1876  returned  to  Oberlin  and  entered  the  theologi-
cal department  for  the  purpose  of  studying  Hebrew
and  Hellenistic  Greek.  He  declined  an  offer  from
the  American  missionary  association  to  go  to  Af-
rica, and  in  1877  was  called  to  fill  the  chair  of  an-
cient languages  in  Wilberforce  university,  near
Xenia,  Ohio.  He  is  a  member  of  the  American
philological  society,  the  Modern  language  associa-
tion, and  other  similar  societies.  Liberia  college,
Africa,  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1882.
His  publications  include  "  First  Lessons  in  Greek"
(New  York,  1881),  and  "  Theory  and  Functions  of
the  Thematic  Vowel  in  the  Greek  V'erb."

SCARTH,  William  Bain,  Canadian  member
of  parliament,  b.  in  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  10  Nov.,
1837.  He  was  educated  at  Aberdeen  and  Edin-
burgh, and  came  to  Canada  in  1853.  He  settled
in  loronto,  was  instrumental  in  forming  the  North
British  Canadian  investment  company  and  the
Scottish  Ontario  Manitoba  land  company,  and  was
manager  of  both  for  several  years.  On  the  forma-
tion of  the  Canadian  northwest  land  company  he
became  its  managing  director.  Mr.  Scarth  then
removed  to  Winnipeg,  was  chosen  president  of  the
Liberal-Conservative  association,  and  in  1887  was
elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament.

SCATES,  Walter  Bennett,  jurist,  b.  in  South
Boston,  Va.,  18  Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  26
Oct.,  1887.  His  parents  removed  to  Kentucky,
where  he  remained  till  1831,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  He  settled  at  Frankfort,  111.,
was  appointed  attorney-general,  and  then  resided
at  the  capital,  Vandalia. In  1836  he  was  made


judge  of  the  3^1  judicial  district,  and  in  1841  he
was  called  to  the  supreme  l)ench  of  the  state.  In
1847  he  resigned  his  post  and  resumed  his  law-
practice  at  Mt.  Vernon,  111.  In  1853  he  was  ngain
elected  to  the  supreme  court  bench,  and  again  re-
signed, to  return  to  his  law-practice  in  Chicago.  In
1862  Judge  Scates  was  commissioned  major  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  McClernand,  and  before  tlie  close  of  the
civil  war  was  assistant  adjutant-general.  When  he
was  mustered  out  of  service  in  1866  he  was  brevet-
ted  brigadier-geneml  of  volunteers.  On  his  return
to  Chicago  he  completed  his  revision  of  the  statutes
of  Illinois  and  firnctised  law  till  his  death.

SCATTERGOOD,  Thomas,  Quaker  preacher,
b.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  23  Jan.,  1754;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  24  April,  1814.  His  great-grand-
father, of  the  same  name,  was  of  the  company  of
Quakers  that  went  to  Burlington  in  1676.  His
father,  Joseph,  at  first  a  mariner,  became  a  lawyer,
and  died  when  Thomas  was  six  years  old,  leaving
him  to  the  care  of  his  mother,  who,  after  giving
him  a  good  English  education,  apprentice<l  him  to  a
trade.  He  became  a  tanner,  in  which  business  he
continued  throughout  his  life.  He  was  an  active
member  in  the  Society  of  Friends,  was  for  many
years  a  noted  elder  of  the  sect,  and  in  the  work  of
the  ministry  travelled  extensively  in  this  country
and  in  Great  Britain.  His  "  Memoirs  "  were  nrinteil
in  the  "  Friends'  Library."  vol.  viii.  (Philadelphia,
1844),  and  afterward  published  in  a  separate  vol-
ume (London,  1845).

SCHAEFFER,  Frederick  David,  clergyman,
b.  in  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  Germany,  15  Nov.,
1760;  d.  in  Frederick,  Md.,  27  Jan.,  1836.  In  1768
he  was  sent  to  the  gymnasium  in  Hanau,  where  he
remained  until  the  death  of  his  father  in  1774.  In
1776  he  emigrated  with  an  uncle  to  this  country,
but  shortly  after  their  arrival  the  uncle  died,  and
he  was  left  destitute.  After  teaching  in  York
county,  Pa.,  he  studied  theology,  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1786,  and  ordained  in  1788.  He  became
pastor  of  Lutheran  congregations  at  Carlisle  and
other  places,  and  in  1812-'34  was  the  colleague  of
Rev.  Dr.  Helmuth  in  Philadelphia.  In  1834,  in
consequence  of  the  infirmities  of  age,  he  relin-
quished the  ministry,  and  removed  to  Frederick,
Md.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1813  from
the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Dr.  Schaeffer
was  a  close  student,  a  fine  classical  scholar,  and  a
good  Hebraist.  He  published  "  Antwort  auf  eine
Vertheidigung  der  Methodisten "  (Germantown,
Pa.,  1806)  and  "Eine  hcrzliche  Anrede"  (1806).—
His  eldest  son,  David  Frederick,  clergyman,  b.  in
Carlisle,  Pa.,  22  July,  1787;  d.  in  Frederick,  Md.,
5  May,  1837,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1807,  studied  theology,  and  was
ordained  by  the  ministerium  of  Pennsylvania  in
1812.  In  1808  he  became  pastor  of  the  Lutheran
congregation  at  Frederick,  Md.,  which  post  he  held
until  the  end  of  his  life.  He  was  an  able  theologi-
an, always  having  students  under  his  direction,  and
was  connected  with  all  the  important  enterprises
of  his  own  church  and  with  many  outside  of  it.
From  1826  till  1831  he  was  the  editor  of  the  first
English  periodical  that  was  established  in  the  Lu-
theran church  in  this  country,  the  "  Lutheran  Intel-
ligencer." He  took  an  active  part  in  the  establish-
ment of  the  theological  seminary  at  Gettysburg,  Pa.,
in  1826,  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  general
synod  of  the  Lutheran  church  (1821),  secretary  in
1821-9.  and  its  president  in  1831-'3.  In  1836  he
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  St.  John's  college,
Annapolis,  Md.  Besides  a  large  number  of  doctrinal
and  other  articles  in  the  "Lutheran  Intelligencer,"
he  published  various  addresses  and  sermons. — An-


SCHABFFEtt


SCUAFP


415


other  son,  Frederick  Christian,  clirffyman.  b.  in
Gennaiitowii,  I'u..  Vi  Nov..  17U2;  d.  in  New  York
city,  20  Marih,  IKJ'i,  stu(iie<i  tho  classics  tmrtly  in
the  iicadcmy  of  his  nativo  place  and  nartly  under
his  fattier,  with  whom  he  also  n*ad  tnenlo^y,  and
in  1812  wiis  liwnse*!  to  preach.  In  the  same  year
he  Ixx-anie  jmstor  of  the  Lutheran  cong repi't  ion
at  Ilarrisburg,  I'a.,  where  he  reniainc<l  three  years.
In  1815  he  accepto<l  a  call  to  Christ  church.  New
York  city,  where  he  prejiched  in  German  and  Enjj-
lish  until  182JJ,  when  ho  orgimized  St.  Matthew's
Eiielish  Lutheran  congregation.  Stxm  afterward
dilncullies  al)out  the  church  pro[>erty  amso  be-
tween the  German  and  Knglish  congregations,  and
he  organized  .St,  Janjes's  Knglish  Lutheran  congre-
gation, which  he  .served  until  his  death.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  I).  D.  in  1830  from  Columbia,
and  in  the  same  year  he  was  electeil  professor  of
the  German  language  and  literature  there.  He  was
deeply  interested  in  the  study  of  natural  science,
and  received  froni  the  king  of  Prussia  a  gold  medal
for  his  valuable  services  in  the  interest  of  this
studv.  He  published  "The  Blessed  lleformation  I
and  I'arables  and  Parabolic  Sayings"  (New  York,
1817).  and  several  sermons. — Another  son,  Charles  ;
Frederick,  clergyman,  b.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,  3  >
Sept.,  1807;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  Nov.,  1879,
was  educatal  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
and  studied  theology  partly  under  the  direction  of

his  father.  He
was  ordained  in
1829,  and  became
pastor  at  Car-
lisle, Pa.,  where
he  remained  un-  I
til  1834.  In  the  ;
latter  year  he  re-
moved to  Hagers-
town,  Md.,  where
he  had  charge  of
several  Lutheran
congregations  un-
til 1839.  He  was
professor  of  the-
ology in  Capitol
university,  Co-
lumbus, Ohio,  in
1840-'3.  and  pas-
tor at  Lancaster,
Ohio,  in  1843-'5,  at  Red  Hook,  N.  Y.,  in  1845-T)1,
and  at  Easton,  Pa.,  in  1851-'5.  From  the  last  yejir
till  1864  he  was  professor  of  the  German  language
and  literature  in  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,
and  then  till  his  death  he  was  professor  of  syste-
matic theology  of  the  newly  established  theological
seminary  at  Philadelphia,  and  its  president.  He
was  a  ri'presentative  of  the  strictly  conservative  and
confessional  party  in  the  Lutheran  church,  defend-
ing his  position  with  great  force  in  many  publica-
tions, and  was  a  leader  in  the  organization  of  the
general  council  in  1807.  He  published  a  large
numl>er  of  historical,  homiletical,  and  doctrinal  ar-
ticles, and  left  several  manuscripts  of  value,  includ-
ing a  complete  "System  of  Lutheran  Theology."
Among  his  works  are  "  Manual  of  Sacred  History,"
translated  from  the  German  (Philadelphia,  185o);
"  Luther's  Small  Cate<'hisra,"  a  revise<l  translation
(1850);  "Inaugural  Address  at  Gettysburg"  (New
York,  1850);  and  "Amdt's  True  Christianity,"
translateil  from  the  German  (1868).  —  Frederick
David's  grandson,  Charles  William,  theologian,
b.  in  Hagerstown,  Md.,  5  May.  1813,  is  the  son  of
Rev.  Fre<k'rick  Solomon  SchaefTer.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  18^32,  and
at  Gettysburg theological seminary  in 1835,  li-


^^ TScI^cu^


oeniied  to  nrearh  in  1835,  and  ordained  in  1886.
Inime<liately  afterward  he  took  charge  of  a  parish
in  Montgomery  county,  which  he  scrvwl  until  1841.
He  was  pastor  at  Harrisburg.  Pa.,  in  1841-'9,  and
at  (termantown.  Pa.,  in  1849-'75,  when  he  was  re-
tinal as  i)astor  emeritus.  In  18414,  when  the  theo-
logical seminary  was  establishe<l  in  Philadelphia,
he  was  elected  profess4)r  of  ecclesiastical  history,
which  {K>st  he  has  since  held.  He  has  held  high
office  in  the  councils  of  his  church,  and  has  been
one  of  the  trustees  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania since  1859,  receiving  from  it  the  degree  of
D.  I),  in  1879.  That  of  LL.  I),  was  given  him  in
1887  by  Thiel  college,  Greenville,  Pa.  Dr.  Schaeffer
has  long  lx>en  one  of  the  leatlers  of  the  conservative
and  confessional  party  in  the  Lutheran  church.
He  took  an  active  part  in  the  establishment  of  the
theological  seminary  at  Philmlelphia  in  1864,  and
in  the  organization  of  the  general  council  in  1867.
He  is  si)eciallv  versed  in  American  Lutheran  his-
tory ana  the  historical  and  doctrinal  development
of  the  Lutheran  church  in  this  country,  and  has
written  numerous  articles  for  church  papers  and
theological  reviews.  He  was  for  several  years  co-
editor  of  the  "  Lutheran  Home  Journal "  m  Phila-
delphia, and  the  "  Philadelphian,  Lutheran  and
Missionary."  Since  1879  he  has  l>een  editor-in-
chief  of  "The  Foreign  Missionary"  in  Philadel-
phia, and  since  1886  he  has  lx»en  one  of  the  editors
of  the  "Lutheran  Church  lieview."  He  has  pub-
lished "  Mann's  Explanation  of  Luther's  Small
Catechism,"  translated  from  the  German  (Phila-
delphia, 1855) ;  "  Early  History  of  the  Lutheran
Church  in  America  "  (1857) ;  "  Golden  Trejisury  for
the  Children  of  God,"  translated  from  the  German
(I860);  "Family  Prayer,  for  Morning  and  Even-
ing, and  the  Festivals  of  the  Church  i  ear  " ;  and
"  Halle  Reports,"  translated  from  the  German
(vol.  i.,  Reading,  Pa.,  1882).

SCHAFF,  Philiu,  clergyman,  b.  in  Coire.  Swit-
zerland, 1  Jan.,  1819.  He  was  educat«d  at  Coire,
the  Stuttgart  gymnasium,  and  the  universities
of  Tubingen,  Halle,  and  Berlin.  At  Berlin,  in
1841,  he  took  the  degree  of  B.  D.,  and  passed  his
examinations  for  a  professorship  there.  He  then
travelled  in  Europe  as  tutor  to  a  Prussian  noble-
man, and,  on  his  return  to  Berlin,  lectured  in  the
university  on  exegesis  and  church  history  in  1842-'4.
On  the  recommendation  of  several  eminent  theo-
logians he  was  called  to  a  professorship  in  the
theological  seminary  of  the  German  Reformed
church  of  the  United  States  at  Mercersburg,  Pa.
He  was  ordained  at  Elberfeld,  came  to  this  coun-
try in  1844,  and  in  1845  was  trie<l  for  heresy,  but
acquitted.  In  1854  he  visited  Eurojie,  represent-
ing the  American  German  churches  at  the  ecclesi-
astical diet  at  Frankfort,  and  at  the  Swiss  pas-
toral conference  at  Basel,  lectured  in  Germany  on
America,  and  receivetl  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from
Berlin.  His  connection  with  Mercersburg  was  re-
tained from  1844  till  1863,  when  he  removed  to
New  York.  He  was  .secretary  of  the  New  York
Sabbath  committee  in  1864-'9,  and  during  that
period  deliveretl  courses  of  lectures  on  church  his-
tory in  the  thet>logical  seminaries  at  Andover,
Hartford,  and  New  York.  He  paid  a  second  visit
to  Euroi)e  in  1865,  and  a  third  in  1809.  In  1870
he  accepted  the  professorship  of  sacred  literature
in  Union  theological  seminary.  New  York  city.
Dr.  Schaff  is  a  member  of  the  Ijeipsic  historical,
the  Netherland,  and  other  historical  and  literary
societies  in  Europe  and  America.  He  is  one  of  the
founders,  and  honorary  s<H'n>tary.  of  the  American
branch  of  the  Evangelical  alliance,  and  was  sent  to
Europe  in  1809,  1872,  and  1873  to  arrange  for  the


416


SCHAFP


SCHARP


4^  ^^''#>


general  conference  of  the  alliance,  which,  after  two
postponements  on  account  of  the  Franco-German
war,  wjis  held  in  New  York  in  October,  1873.  Dr.
Schaff  was  also,  in  1871,  one  of  the  alliance  dele-
gates to  the  emperor  of  Russia  to  plead  for  the
religious  liberty  of  his  subjects  in  the  Baltic  prov-
inces. He  was  presi-
dent of  the  Ameri-
can Bible  revision
committee,  which
was  organized  in
1871  at  the  request
of  the  English  com-
mittee, and  in  1875
he  was  sent  to  Eng-
land to  negotiate
and  arrange  terms
with  the  British  re-
visers and  the  uni-
versitv  presses  with
regari  to  co-opera-
tion and  publication
of  the  Anglo-Ameri-
can revision.  That
same  year,  in  Au-
gust, he  attended  a
conference  of  the
Old  Catholics,  Greeks,  and  Protestants  at  Bonn,
with  a  view  to  promote  Christian  unity  among  the
churches  there  represented.  Dr.  Schaff  is  the  first
president  of  the  newly  (1888)  organized  American
society  of  church  history,  with  its  officers  repre-
senting all  the  leading  branches  of  the  Protestant
church ;  and,  in  addition  to  the  cultivation  of  that
particular  branch  of  literature  to  which  it  is  spe-
cially devoted,  the  society  aims  at  xmifying  Chris-
tian thought  and  sentiment  throughout  the  world.
Dr.  Schalf's  works  are  mostly  historical  and  exe-
getical ;  some  of  them  are  written  in  German,  and
others  in  English,  but  the  German  ones  have  been
translated.  Among  the  most  important  are  his
**  Historv  of  the  Apostolical  Church  "  (New  York,
1853);  "Sketch  of  the  Political,  Social,  and  Re-
ligious Character  of  the  United  States"  (1855);
"  German V,  its  Universities,  Theology,  and  Re-
ligion "  (1857) ;  "  History  of  the  Christian  Church  "
(6  vols.,  1858-'88) ;  "  German  Hymn-Book,  with  In-
troduction and  Notes"  (1859;  ed.  with  music,
1874) ;  "  The  Christ  of  the  Gospels  "  (1864) ;  "  The
Person  of  Christ,  with  Replies  to  Strauss  and  Re-
nan"  (1865);  "  Lectures  on  the  Civil  War  and  the
Overthrow  of  Slavery  in  America  "  (1865) ;  "  Christ
in  Song  "(1869);  "lievision  of  the  English  Version
of  the  New  Testament"  (1874);  "The  Vatican
Council"  (1875);  "History  and  Collection  of  the
Creeds  of  Christendom  "  (3  vols.,  1876) ;  "  Harmony
of  the  Reformed  Confessions  "  (1877) ;  "  Through
Bible  Lands"  (1878);  "Dictionary  of  the  Bible"
(1880) ;  "  Library  of  Religious  Poetry,"  edited  in
conjunction  with  Arthur  Oilman;  "Companion  to
the  Greek  Testament  and  the  English  Version"
(1883;  3d  revised  ed.,  1888);  "Historical  Account
of  the  Work  of  the  American  Committee  of  Revis-
ion of  the  English  Version"  (1885):  "Christ  and
Christianity"  (1885);  and  "Church  and  State  in
the  United  States,  or  the  American  Idea  of  Relig-
ious Libertv  and  its  Practical  Effects,  with  Official
Documents"  (New  York,  1888).  He  edited  the
Anglo-American  adaptation  of  Lange's  "Critical,
Theological,  and  Horailetical  Commentary  on  the
Bible  "  (begun  in  1864,  24  vols..  New  York  and  Edin-
burgh), and  the  "  International  Revision  Commen-
tary on  the  New  Testament "  (begun  in  1881).  Dr.
Schafif  founded  and  edited  the  "  Kirchenfreund,"
the  first  German  monthly  in  this  country,  and,  with


Prof.  Henry  B.  Smith,  he  edits  the  "Philosophical
and  Theological  Library,"  a  series  of  volumes  be-
gun in  1873  (New  York  and  London).  He  has  con-
tributed articles  to  American  and  foreign  reviews,
and  to  Herzog's,  Smith's,  and  various  other  en-
cvclopedic  works.

'  SCHANCK,  John  Stillwell,  educator,  b.  near
Freehold,  N.  J.,  24  Feb.,  1817.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1840,  and  at  the  medicAl  depart-
ment of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1843,
settled  in  Princeton,  and  followed  the  practice  of
his  profession  there  until  1865.  In  1^7  he  was
called  to  the  curatorship  of  the  college  museum
and  to  give  lectures  on  anatomy,  physiology,  and
zoology.  In  1855-'6  he  instructed  the  senior  class
in  chemistry,  and  in  1857  he  was  elected  to  suc-
ceed John  Torrey  in  the  professorship.  Under  his
direction  the  course  has  been  enlarged  and  ex-
tended, and  he  now  (1888)  lectures  on  anatomy,
physiology,  chemistry,  and  hygiene.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  various  scientific  societies,  and  in  1866  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Lafayette.

SCHANK,  John,  British  naval  officer,  b.  in  Fife-
shire,  Scotland,  in  1740;  d.  in  Dawlish,  England,
6  March,  1823.  He  entered  the  roval  navy  when
young,  was  a  lieutenant  in  1776,  and  was  employed
on  the  lakes  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  con-
structing in  less  than  six  weeks  the  "Inflexible,"
which  defeated  Gen.  Benedict  Arnold's  fleet  on
Lake  Champlain,  and  displaying  ability  as  a  sea-
man. His  talents  as  an  engineer  were  applied  in
Gen.  John  Burgoyne's  expedition  to  the  building
of  floating  bridges,  and  on  his  return  to  England
he  was  m&de  a  post-captain  for  his  services.  He
attained  the  rank  of  admiral  of  the  blue  in  1822.
He  devised  a  method  of  navigating  vessels  in  shal-
low water  by  means  of  sliding  keels,  besides  other
ingenious  inventions,  and  was  the  author  of  several
works  on  naval  architecture.

SCHARF,  John  Thomas,  author,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  1  May,  1843.  He  entered  the  counting-
house  of  his  father,  Thomas  G.  Scharf,  of  Balti-
more, when  sixteen  years  of  age.  In  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  joined  a  Confederate  battery,
was  engaged  in  the  battles  around  Richmond  in
1862,  was  wounded  at  Cedar  Mountain,  at  the  sec-
ond battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  again  at  Chancellors-
ville,  and  on  20  June,  1863,  was  appointed  a  mid-
shipman in  the  Confederate  navy.  In  January,
1864,  he  took  part  in  the  capture  of  the  steamer
"Underwriter,  near  New  Berne,  N.  C.  He  re-
joined the  army  after  all  the  ports  were  blockaded,
and  was  captured  in  Maryland  while  on  his  way  to
Canada  with  despatches.  After  the  war  he  en-
gaged in  mercantile  business,  then  in  journalism,
and  in  1874  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1878  hfe
was  a  member  of  the  legislature.  Since  1884  he
has  been  commissioner  of  the  land  office  of  Mary-
land. Georgetown  college  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1885.  He  has  been  editor  of  the  Balti-
more "  Telegram  "  and  "  Morning  Herald."  Be-
sides many  historical  addresses  and  magazine  arti-
cles, he  has  published  "  Chronicles  of  Baltimore  "
(Baltimore,  1874) ;  "  History  of  Maryland  "  (3  vols.,
1879) ;  "  History  of  Baltimore  Citv  and  County  "
(Philadelphia,  1881) ;  "  History  of  "Western  Mary-
land" (2  vols.,  1882) ;,"  History  of  St.  Louis"
(2  vols.,  1884) ;  "  History  of  Philadelphia  "  (8  vols.,
1884);  "History  of  Westchester  County,  N.  Y."
(2  vols.,  1886) ;  "  History  of  the  Confederate  States
Navy  from  the  Laying  of  the  First  Keel  to  the
Sinking  of  the  Last  Vessel "  (1887) ;  and  "  History
of  the  State  of  Delaware"  (1888).  He  is  now
(1888)  preparing  a  life  of  Jefferson  Davis  and  a
"  Biographical  Dictionarv  of  Maryland."


8CHAUFFLER


SCHENCK


417


SCHAl  PFLER,  William  Gottlieb,  mbwinn-
«ry.  b.  ill  Stuttpirt.  (JiTiimny,  22  Aim.,  ITliH;  «l.  in
New  York  city,  27  .Ian.,  lM8i{.  IK-  <'ini)jnittHl  to
OdesNH,  Kus>iM.  with  his  |ittn-nts  mnl  alK»ut  4(M)
othei>.  in  IWM.  an<l  a<l<>i>titl  his  father's  tnule,  that
of  n  maker  of  w<MHli-n  musical  instniincnts.  In
1820  tlie  preaching  of  I(;natius  hindl,  a  Roman
Catholic  priest  of  cvan^ulical  views,  tumetl  his
thouKiits  towanl  relijjion,  and  he  ri'solved  to  de-
vote Tiis  life  to  mission  work.  After  servinjf  as  an
indeju-ndent  missionary  in  Turkey  in  1M2(J  he  made
his  way  to  the  Unite*!  States,  with  no  iiro|»erty  but
his  clothes,  his  flute,  and  one  dollar  in  money,  and
enterwl  Andover  thw)lojfical  seminary,  where  he
8ui)|K>rtcHl  himself  for  a  time  by  turning  wooden
be«-i»osts.  He  was  ^niduatiMl  in  1k:{(),  ordained  on
14  Nov.,  18:^1.  and  returnwl  to  Turkey  under  the
auspices  of  the  American  Ijoard.  lie  marrie<l
an  American  lady  soon  afterward,  and  residetl
chiefly  in  Constantinople  during  his  missionary
service  of  forty-four  years,  laltoring  principally
among  the  Jews  and  Armenians.  In  1843  he  was
instrumental  in  persmuling  .Sir  Stmtford  Canning,
the  British  minister.to  interfere  in  Ix-half  of  mem-
U«rs  of  the  latter  rm-e  that  had  Ix-en  pei-sceuted  by
the  Armenian  patriarch.  For  his  efforts  in  behalf
of  the  German  colony  in  Constantinople  he  receivetl
a  decoration  from  the  king  of  Pnissia.  From  1839
till  1842  he  resided  in  Vienna  engaged  in  translat-
ing the  .Scriptures  into  Ilebrew-Sjmnish.  The  work
was  published  in  that  city  in  two  (juarto  volumes.
He  ma«Ie  a  visit  to  this  country  in  18o7-'8,  and
from  1877.  three  years  after  his  retirement  from
active  work,  resideil  here  till  his  death.  The  Uni-
versity of  Halle  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1867.  and  Princeton  that  of  LL.  I),  in  1879.  Dr.
Schaufller  was  a  scholar  of  fine  attainments,  being
"able  to  s{)cak  ten  languages  and  read  as  many
more."  Besides  the  work  mentioned  above,  he  was
the  author  of  a  translation  of  the  Bible  into  Turk-
ish, which  received  high  pmise.  His  English  pub-
lications include,  Ix-sides  single  sermons,  "  Essay  on
the  Kight  Use  of  Property"  (Boston,  1832),  "and
"  Meditations  on  the  iMst  t)ays  of  Christ "  (1837  :
new  eds.,  18.')3  and  18.'>8).  See  his  "Autobiogra-
phy," edited  by  his  sons,  with  an  introduction  by
Pn>f.  E<lwai-ds"A.  Park  (New  York,  1887).

SCHEBOSH.  John  Joseph,  missionary,  b.  at
SkipiMick,  Pa.,  27  May.  1721  ;  d.  in  Ohio,  4  Sept.,
1788.  He  united  with  the  Moravian  church  in  1742,
and  for  forty-five  years  served  in  the  Indian  mis-
sion. His  real  name  was  Joseph  Bull,  and  he  was
of  (Quaker  jjarentage,  but  he  was  universally  called
SehelKish  (running  water),  the  nauje  that  was  given
him  by  the  Indians.  His  wife  was  a  convert  from
the  Sopus  Indians,  who,  after  a  union  of  forty-one
years.  die<l  in  1787,  leaving  issue.

SCHELL,  AiigrnstiiH,  politician,  b.  in  Rhine-
beck.  N.  Y.,  1  Aug.,  1812  :  d.  in  New  York  city,
27  March.  1884.  lie  was  graduated  at  Union  in
1830,  studied  at  Litchfield  law-scho<5l.  was  admit-
te<l  to  the  l)ar,  and  so<in  gained  a  lucrative  practice
in  New  York  city.  He  was  made  chairman  of  the
Tammany  hall  general  committee  in  18.52,  and  was
at  the  hea<I  of  the  Den^K-ratic  state  committee  in
18o3-'<J.  During  the  administration  of  President
Buchanan  he  was  collec-tor  of  the  port  of  New  York.
He  was  chairman  of  the  National  committee  of  the
wing  of  the  Deraix-ratic  jMirty  that  sup[K)rted  John
C.  Breckinridge  for  the  presidency  in  1860.  and  in
1872  held  the  same  office  during  the  Gri'eley  can-
vass. In  1867  he  was  an  active  memlwr  of  the  con-
vention to  revise  the  state  constitution.  After  the
trial  of  William  M.  Tweetl  and  his  asso<>iates  Mr.
Scheli  lalx)red  for  the  purification  and  rehabilita-
voL.  v.— 27


tion  of  the  Tammany  society,  and  in  1878  was  its
unsuccessful  candidate  for  mayor.  He  was  a  di-
n>ctor  in  nmny  railroad  and  financial  cor]>oration8,
ami  was  active  in  the  management  of  philanthropic
institutions.  Several  of  Mr.  Schell's  hmthers  havo
been  well-known  busine>s  uu-u  of  New  York  citv.

SCHEM,  Alexander  Jacob,  author,  b.  in  Wie-
denbrUck,  Prussia,  16  March.  1826;  d.  in  Weftt
Holjoken,  N.  J.,  21  May,  1881.  He  studied  the-
ology and  philology  in  Ik)nn  and  Tubingen,  ami
came  to  the  United  .States  in  1851.  In  1854  he  be-
came professor  of  ancient  and  m<Mlem  languages  in
I)ickins<m  college,  but  he  resigned  in  18<J0to  «levote
himself  to  literature.  He  was  a  writer  for  the  New
York  "  Tribune  "  till  1869,  when  he  underUwk  the
editorship  of  the  "Deutwh-amerikanisches  Con-
versations-Lexicon "  (11  vols.,  New  York,  1869-'74).
From  1874  till  his  death  he  held  the  office  of  as-
sistant suiierintendent  of  the  public  schools  in  New
York  city.  He  was  a  contributor  to  other  cyclo-
jMinlias  of  statistical,  geographical,  and  religious
articles.  He  was  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Meth-
(Klist"  and  of  the  "  Methtnlist  (Quarterly  Review."
He  prei)ared,  with  Rev.  George  B.  Crooks,  a  "  I^atin-
English  Dictionary  "(Philadelphia,  1857).  and  pub-
lished several  editions  of  "  Schem's  Statistics  oi  the
World  " ;  the  "American  Ecclesiastical  Year-Book  "
(New  York,  1860);  the  "  Ek?clesiastical  Almanac"
(1868  and  1809);  and,  with  Henry  Kiddle,  a  "Cy-
clopavlia  of  Education  "  (1877),  which  was  followed
by  two  annual  su|)i)lements  called  the  "  Year-Book
of  Education"  (18*8  and  1879).

SCHENCK,  James  Fiiidla)',  naval  officer,  b.
in  Franklin,  Ohio,  11  June,  1807;  d.  in  Dayton,
Ohio,  21  Dec,  1882.  His  ancestor,  Roelof  Martense
Schenck,  emigratetl  from  Holland  to  New  Amster-
dam in  1()50.  He  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1822.  but  resigneil  in  1824.  and  en-
tered the  navy  as  midshipman,  1  March,  1825.  He
became  passed  mi<lshipman,  4  June,  IK^l,  and  lieu-
tenant, 22  Dec..  18li5,  and  in  August,  1845,  joined  the
"Congre.ss,"  in  which  he  served  as  chief  military
aide  to  Com.  Robert  F.  Stockton  at  the  capture  of
Los  Angeles.  Santa  Barbara,  and  San  Peiiro,  Cal.
He  also  [mrticipated  in  the  capture  of  Guaymas
and  Mazatlan,  Mexico,  and  in  October,  1848,  re-
turned home  as  bearer  of  despatches.  He  was  com-
mended for  efficient  services  in  the  Mexican  war.
Lieut.  Schenck  then  entered  the  service  of  the  Pa-
cific mail  steamship  company  and  commanded  the
steamer  "Ohio"  and  other  steamers  l»etween  New
York  and  Aspinwall  in  1849-'52.  He  was  commis-
sioned commander,  14  Sept,  1855,  and  assigned  to
the  frigate  "  St.  I^awrence,"  19  March;  1862,  on  the
West  Gulf  blockade.  On  7  Oct.,  1864,  he  was  or-
dered to  command  the  "  Powhatan  "  in  the  North
Atlantic  squadron,  and  he  also  i-eceived  notification
of  his  promotion  to  commodore  to  date  from  2
Jan.,  18651  He  le<l  the  3d  division  of  the  s<|uad-
ron  in  the  two  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  was
highly  commendetl  for  his  services.  Com.  Schenck
had  charge  of  the  naval  station  at  Mound  City.  III.,
in  186.5-'6,  was  promoted  to  rear-admiral,  21  Sept.,
1868,  and  retired  by  law,  11  June,  1869.--His
brother,  Robert  Cinnming.  diitlomatist,  b.  in
Franklin.  Ohio,  4  Oct.,  1809:  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C.,  23  March.  1890.  He  was  grailuattnl  at  Miami
university  in  1827,  was  a  tutor  for  three  years  longer,
then  studied  law  with  Thomas  Corwin.  was  admit-
tetl  to  the  bar,  and  establishe<l  himself  in  practice
at  Dayton,  Ohio.  He  was  a  meml)er  of  the  legisla-
ture in  1841-'2.  displaying  practical  knowledge  and
pungent  wit  in  the  del»ates.  and  was  then  elected
as  a  Whig  to  congress,  and  thrice  re-elected,  serving
from  4  Dec,  1843,  till  3  March.  1851. He  was  a


418


SCHENCK


SCHERESCHEWSKY


member  of  important  committees,  and  during  his
third  term  was  the  chairman  of  that  on  romls  and
canals.  On  12  March,  1851,  he  was  commissioned
as  minister  to  Brazil.  In  1852,  with  John  S.  Pen-
dleton, who  was  accredited  to  the  Arjyjentine  Re-
public as  charge  d'aflfaires,  he  arrangeil  a  treaty
of  friendship  and  commerce  with  the  government

of  that  country
and  one  fur  the
free  navigation  of
the  river  Ija  Plata
and  its  great  trib-
utaries. They  also
negotiated  trea-
ties with  the  gov-
ernments of  Uru-
guay and  Para-
fuay.  He  left  Rio
aneiro  on  8  Oct.,

"^i^^HML^ '^^H)  1853, and after

his  return  to  Ohio

engaged in the

railrojwl  business.

He  offered  his  ser-

P  vices  to  the  gov-

/i^  PA^ A P  J eniment  when  the

^/(>ti'^rv2P.  (i60<Kje/t^-^^C eivil  war began,

and  was  one  of
the  first  brigadier-generals  appointed  by  President
Lincoln,  his  commission  bearing  the  date  of  17
May,  18(51.  He  was  attached  to  the  military  de-
partment of  Washington,  and  on  17  June  moved
forward  by  railroad  with  a  regiment  to  dislodge
the  Confederates  at  Vienna,  but  was  surprised  by
a  masked  battery,  and  forced  to  retreat.  On  meet-
ing re-enforcements,  he  changed  front,  and  the
enemy  retired.  His  brigade  formed  a  jiart  of  Gen.
l)aniel  Tyler's  division  at  the  first  IJull  Run  battle,
and  was  on  the  point  of  crossing  the  Stone  Bridge
to  make  secure  tlie  occupation  of  the  plateau,  when
the  arrival  of  Confederate  re-enforcements  turned
the  tide  of  battle.  He  next  served  in  West  Vir-
ginia under  Gen.  William  S.  Rosecrans,  and  was
ordered  to  the  Shenandoah  valley  with  the  force
that  was  sent  to  oppose  Gen.  Thomas  J.  Jackson.
I'ushing  forward  by  a  forced  march  to  the  relief  of
Gen.  Robert  H.  Milroy,  he  had  a  sharp  and  brill-
iant engagement  with  the  enemy  at  McDowell.  At
Cross  Keys  he  led  the  Ohio  troops  in  a  charge  on
the  righti  and  maintained  the  ground  that  he  won
until  he  was  ordered  to  retire.  Gen.  John  C.  Fre-
mont then  intrusted  him  with  the  command  of  a
division.  At  the  second  l^attle  of  Bull  Run  he  led
the  first  division  of  Gen.  Franz  Sigel's  corns.  He
was  wounded  in  that  action  by  a  musket-ball,  which
shattered  his  right  arna,  incapacitating  him  for
active  service  till  1(3  Dec,  1862,  when  he  took  com-
mand of  the  middle  department  and  eighth  corps
at  Baltimore,  having  been  promoted  major-general
on  18  Sept.  After  performing  effective  services  in
the  Gettysburg  campaign,  he  resigned  his  commis-
sion on  3  Dec,  18()3,  in  order  to  take  his  place  in
the  house  of  representatives,  in  whieli  he  served
»^  chairman  of  the  committee  on  military  affairs.
He  was  re-elected  in  1864,  and  was  placed  at  the
head  of  the  same  committee,  where  he  procured
the  establishment  of  the  National  military  and
naval  asylum.  In  1865  he  was  president  of  the
board  of  visitors  to  the  U.  S.  military  jicadeniy,
and  was  one  of  the  committee  of  congress  on  the
death  of  President  Lincoln,  serving  also  on  the
committee  on  retrenchment.  In  1H()6  he  attended
the  Loyalists'  convention  at  Philadelphia  and  the
soldiers'  convention  at  Pittsburg,  Pa.  He  was
re-elected  to  congress  in  1866  and  in  1868,  when


his  opponent  was  Clement  L.  Vallandigham,  serv-
ing as  chairman  of  the  committee  of  ways  and
means  and  of  the  ordnance  committee.  On  22
Dec,  1870,  he  received  the  ap{x)intment  of  minister
to  Great  Britain.  In  1871  he  was  one  of  the  *' Ala-
banni"  commission.  He  resigned  his  post  in  1876
in  conse(juence  of  the  failure  of  the  Emma  silver-
mine  company,  in  which  he  had  permitted  him-
self to  Ix!  chosen  a  director,  and  resumed  the  prac-
tice of  law  in  Washington,  I).  C.

SCHENCK,  Noah  Hunt,  clereyman,  b.  in  Pen-
nington, Mercer  co.,  N.  J.,  30  June,  1825;  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  V.,  4  Jan.,  1885.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1844,  studied  law  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1847,  and  practised
there  till  1848,  when  he  removed  to  Cincinnati,
Ohio.  In  1851  he  abandoned  his  profession  for  the
ministry,  and  after  graduation  at  the  theological
seminary  in  Gambier,  Ohio,  in  1853,  took  orders
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  After  having
charge  of  parishes  in  Ohio,  Chicago,  III.,  and
Baltimore,  Md.,  he  was  called  in  1869  to  St.  Ann's,
Brooklyn,  N.  Y..  where  he  remained  till  his  death.
The  new  church  building,  6ne  of  the  finest  in
Brooklyn,  was  erected  early  in  Dr.  Schenck's  rec-
torship, and  in  1879  he  succeeded  in  freeing  it
from  debt.  Dr.  Schenck  was  active  in  the  mission-
ary work  of  his  church,  sat  for  many  years  in  its
general  convention,  and  in  1871  went  to  St.  Peters-
burg as  one  of  a  delegation  of  three  from  the
p]vangelical  alliance  to  memorialize  the  czar  in
favor  of  Russian  dissenters.  Princeton  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1865.  Dr.  Schenck  founded
and  edited  "  The  Western  Churchman  "  during  his
pastorate  in  Chicago,  and  in  1867  became  co-editor
of  "The  Protestant  Churchman"  in  New  York.
He  was  the  author  of  numerous  published  sermons
and  addresses,  of  which  a  collection  has  appeared
in  book-form  (New  York,  1885).  A  memorial  of
him  was  issued  by  the  wardens  and  vestry  of  St.
Ann's  church,  including  an  address  by  Bishop
Littlejohn  (Brooklyn,  1885).

SCHENCK,  WiUiam  Edward,  clergyman,  b.
in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  29  March,  1819.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1838,  and  at  the  theological
seminary  in  1841,  after  taking  up  and  abandoning
the  study  of  law.  After  doing  missionary  work  in
the  Pennsylvania  coal  region,  he  was  onlained  in
1843,  and  until  1852  held  pastorates  successively  in
Manchester,  N.  J.,  New  York  city,  and  Princeton.
He  was  then  superintendent  of  church  extension
in  the  presbjlery  of  Philadelphia  till  1854,  when
he  became  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Presby-
terian board  of  publication.  He  was  also  its  editor
in  1862-'70,  and  in  the  same  years  served  as  per-,
manent  clerk  of  the  general  assembly  of  the  old-
school  branch  of  his  denomination,  s'ince  1866  he
has  been  a  director  of  Princeton  theological  semi-
nary. Jefferson  college.  Pa.,  gave  him  the  degree
of  t).  D.  in  1861.  Dr.  Schenck  has  published  "  His-
torical Account  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church
of  Princeton,  N.  J."  (Princeton,  1851) ;  "  Aunt
Fannv's  Home"  (Philadelphia,  1865);  "Children
in  Heaven"  (1866);  "Ncaring  Home"  (1867);  and
sermons  and  tracts  in  English  and  German.  He
has  also  prepared  a  "  General  Catalogue  of  Prince-
ton Theological  Seminaty"  (Trenton,  1881),  and
its  necrological  reports  since  1875.

SCHERESCHEWSKY,  Samuel  Isaac  Joseph,
P.  E.  bishoji,  b.  in  Tanroggen.  Russian  Lithuania,
6  May,  1831.  He  was  educated  i>artiy  in  his  ria-
tive  town  and  partlv  at  the  Rabbinical  college.
Zhitomeer.  Russia.  "He  also  sjR>nt  two  years  in
the  University  of  Bi-eslau,  Germany.  On  his  ar-
rival in  the  Cnited  States,  he  went  first  to  West-


SCHERZER


SCniMMELPFENNlO


419


ern  Prosbytcrum  thwlojfical  seminary,  PitUburg,
Pa.,  but  not  long  nftiTward  entontl  the  Kj)i$<copal
general  thi>oIo(;icul  senjinar)",  Now  York  city,  lie
was  not  graduated,  but  waM  DnluintMl  deacon  in
St  George's  church.  New  York,  7  July,  1859,  by
Bishop  mtone,  of  Amov,  China,  and  priest,  in  the
mission  ehai>cl,  Shangliai,  2S  Oct.,  1800,  liy  the
same  bishop.  11  i»  flcld  of  labor  was  from  the  (te-
ginning  in  the  China  mission.  In  IHTS  he  was
elected  by  the  house  of  bisho|)8  to  In*  the  missionary
bishop  to  China,  but  declined  the  {K)st.  When  he
was  elected  again  in  1877  he  accepted.  He  r«-
ceivetl  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  Kenjon  college,
Ohio,  in  187(1,  and  that  of  S.  T.  I),  from  Columbia
in  1877.  He  was  consecrated  in  Grace  church.  New
York,  81  Oct.,  1877,  and  entered  at  once  ujwn  his
duties.  Bishop  Schereschewsky's  services  were
particularlv  valuable  in  the  work  of  translating
inira  the  Hebrew  the  entire  Old  Testament  scri|>-
tures  into  Mandarin  Chinese.  He  was  also  one  of
the  committee  for  translating  the  New  Testament
from  the  Greek  into  the  same  language.  In  con-
junction with  Bishop  Burdon,  of  the  English  mis-
sion, he  translated  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  into
Mandarin  Chinese.  He  also  translated  St.  Mark's
gospel  into  Mongolian,  and  has  in  preparation  a
"Dictionary  of  the  Mongolian  Language."  His
health  having  broken  down,  he  sent  in  his  resigna-
tion to  the  bishops,  and  it  was  accepted  in  188§.

SCHERZER,  Karl  von,  German  explorer,  b.
in  Vienna,  Austria,  1  May,  1821.  He  txKrame  a
printer,  but  was  left  an  independent  fortune,  and
travelled  extensively.  During  the  revolution  of
1848  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  discussion  of
social  and  economical  reforms,  and  in  18o0  he  was
exiled  to  Italy.  He  made  there  the  acquaintance
of  Dr.  Moritz  Wagner,  and  they  resolved  to  explore
North  America.  Ijanding  in  New  York  in  June,
1852,  they  visited  all  the  principal  states.  Central
America,  and  the  West  Indies.  On  returning  to
Vienna  toward  the  middle  of  1855,  he  was  appoint-
•ed,  through  the  influence  of  the  Archduke  Maxi-
milian, afterward  em|)eror  of  Mexico,  a  member  of
a  scientific  commission  that  was  destined  to  sail  on
the  frigate  "Novara"in  1857  for  a  voyage  round
the  world.  After  his  return  in  18.59  he  was  a
councillor  of  the  board  of  tratle,  held  an  office  in
the  bureau  of  foreign  relations,  and  was  intrusted
with  compiling  the  commercial  statistics  of  the
empire.  His  works  procured  hira  letters  of  nobil-
ity and  the  title  of  knight  of  the  empire  in  1866.
In  1869  he  was  placed  at  the  head  of  an  expedi-
tion to  explore  eastern  Asia,  and  he  was  afterward
Austrian  consul-general  in  various  jilaces,  but  re-
tire<l  toward  the  close  of  1886.  His  works  include
*' Reisen  in  Nordamerika"  (Leipsic,  1854);  "Die
Republik  Costa  Rica,"  with  Moritz  Wagner  (1854);
"  NVanderungen  durch  die  mittelamerik.  Freistaaten
Nicaragua,  Honduras,  und  Sj»n  Salvador"  (Bruns-
wick, 1857) ;  "  Las  historias  del  origen  de  los  Indios
de la provinciade Guatemala" (Vienna,  1857);  "Ite-
schreibendo  Theile  der  Keise  der  oesterreichischen
Fregatte  'Novara'  um  die  Krdo"  (3  vols.,  with
illustrations,  1801-'2) ;  "  Aus  dera  Natur-  und
V01kerlel)en  im  tropischen  Amerika "  (Leipsic,
1864);  "Statistisch  cominerzieller  Theil  der  No-
vara-^xpe<lition"  (2  vols.,  Vienna,  1864);  "Statis-
tist'h  commerzielle  F>gebnisse  einer  Reise  um  die
Erdo  "  (I^eipsic,  1867);  "  FachmUnnische  Berichte
Qber  die  (M'sterreichisch  -  ungarische  Expedition
nach  Siam,  China,  und  Japan"  (2  vols.,  Stuttgart,
1871-'2):  '•  Smyrna"  (Vieiiim,  IHTM);  and  "Das
wirthM-hiiftlichl;  Leiien  der  Volker"  (Leipsic,  1885).

SCHIEFFKLIN,  Samuel  Bradhiii^t  (shef-
lin),  author,  b.  in  New  York  city,  24  Feb.,  1811.


He  was  educated  in  private  schools,  and  early
turned  his  attention  to  business,  but  contribut^'d
larvely  to  the  religifnis  press.  His  works  include
"Message  to  Ruling  Elders,  their  Office  and  their
Duties''^ (New  York.  1859);  "The  Foundations  of
Historv:  a  .Series  of  First  Things"  (1863);  ".Milk
for  Balx's:  a  Bible  Catechism"  (1874);  "Chil-
dren's Breml :  a  Bible  Cate<hism  "  (1874);  "  Words
to  Christian  Teachers"  (1877);  "Music  in  our
Churches"  (1881);  "The  Church  in  Ephesiis  and
the  Presbyterian  and  Reforme«I  Churches"  (1884);
and  "People's  Hymn-IVx)k  "  (Philatlelphia,  1887).
—His  brother.  BradhurHt,  b.  in  New  York  city,
21  Sept.,  1824,  was  educated  in  his  native  city,  and
then  entered  the  house  that  hml  lN>en  founded  by
his  grandfather,  Jacob  Schieffelin.  He  subse-
quently became  one  of  the  firm  of  .Schieffelin
Brothers,  and  retired  from  wtive  business  on  the
formation  of  the  present  firm.  Mr.  Schieffelin
has  been  largely  interested  in  political  affairs,  and
has  connected  himself  with  the  People's  party,
whose  platform  is  the  product  of  his  |)en.  He  be-
lieves that  no  republic  can  exist  where  wealth  is
allowed  to  accumulate  in  the  hands  of  a  small  mi-
nority, and  favors  a  law  limiting  inheritance.  In
188Ji  lie  was  nominated  by  his  party  for  state  sena-
tor from  the  l()th  district  of  New  York  city,  but
failed  of  election.

SCHIMMELIN,  Alexander  Oliver,  styled  also
Oeskmelin  and  Esquenieling,  and  generally  known
under  the  French  form  of  Oexmelix,  Dutch  histo-
rian, b.  in  Flanders  about  1(M5 ;  d.  in  France  in
1707.  He  studied  medicine,  but  on  2  Mav,  1666,
embarked  as  a  contract  lalx)rer  on  a  vessel  l)elong-
ing  to  the  French  coni|)any  of  the  West  Indies,  and
was  sold  for  thirty  crowns  to  M.  de  Ija  V^ie,  agent
of  the  company  in  Tortugas.  After  serving  his
master  for  tnree  years,  he  was  freed,  and  enlisted
with  the  buccaneers,  with  whom  he  remained  till
1674,  when  he  returned  to  Euro|ie  on  a  Dutch  ves-
sel. Later  he  made  three  voyages  to  South  Amer-
ica as  surgeon  on  Iward  Dutch  and  Spanish  vessels.
The  narrative  of  his  adventures,  written  originally
not  in  Dutch,  as  it  is  claimed,  but  in  French,
fell  into  the  hands  of  Baron  de  Front ignieres,
who  published  them  with  the  title  "  Histoire  des
aventuriers  flibustiers  qui  se  sont  signales  dans  les
Indes,  contenant  ce  qu'ils  ont  fait  de  remar<|uable,
leurs  mcBurs,  leurs  entreprises,  avec  la  vie,  les
raoeurs  et  les  coutumes  des  habitants  de  Saint
Domingiie  et  de  I'ile  de  la  Tortue :  une  descrip-
tion exacte  de  ces  lieux,  ainsi  que  I'histoire  de  la
chambre  des  comjites  des  Indes  Ocoidentales "  (2
vols.,  Paris,  1(584).  The  first  volume  contains  also  a
monograph  on  the  flora  and  fauna  of  South  Amer-
ica. An  enlarged  edition  (4  vols.,  Trevoux.  1775)
contains  the  "  Relation  du  voyage  fait  &  la  mer  du
Sud  avec  les  flibustiers  en  1685-'7."  by  Raveneau
de  Lussan,  and  a  "  Histoire  des  pirates  Anglais."
The  Dutch  edition,  which  is  claimed  bv  some  to  be
the  original,  "  Geschichte  van  de  VreYiuyters  van
America  "  (Amsterdam,  1700).  is  asserte<l  by  others
to  l)e  only  a  translation  from  the  French.

StHI.HMELPFENNHi,  Alexander,  soldier,
b.  in  Prussia  in  1824;  d.  in  Miners ville.  Pa.,  7
Sept.,  1865.  He  served  as  an  officer  of  the  Prus-
sian army  in  Schleswig-IIolstein  in  1848,  and  soon
afterward  came  to  the  I'nited  States.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  elected  colonel
of  a  Pennsylvania  ri'giment,  which  he  cominan<le<l
during  Gen.  John  Po|)e's  camiwign  in  Virginia.
For  his  services  at  Bull  Run  he  was  nominate<l
brigadier-general.  The  appointment  was  at  first
rejected,  but,  on  being  presente<l  again,  was  con-
flrmed  in  March,  1863,  the  commission  dating  from


420


SCHLAGINTWEIT


SCHMIDEL


29  Nov.,  1862.  At  ('haneellorsville  he  coinmamled
ft  bripwle  in  Gen.  Curl  St'hurz's  corps,  and  st-rved
witli  credit  at  Gettysburg.  In  February,  1804,  he
was  sent  to  St.  John's  island,  near  Charleston,  and
thence  crossed  to  James  island.  When  Charles-
ton was  evacuated  on  the  approach  of  Gen.  Will-
iam T.  Sherman's  army.  Gen.  Schimmelpfennig
entered  and  took  possession,  18  Feb.,  18(55.  He
remained  in  command  of  the  city  for  some  time,
but  was  finally  relieved  on  account  of  sickness,  the
result  of  exiK)sure,  which  in  a  short  time  terminated
in  his  death.  He  was  the  author  of  "The  War  be-
tween Russia  and  Turkev"  (Philadelphia.  1854).

SCHLAWINTWEIT/Robert  Ton  (shlah  -gint-
vite),  German  explorer,  b.  in  Munich,  liavaria,  27
Oct.,  183JJ;  d.  in  Giessen,  Hesse-Darmstadt,  6  June,
1885.  He  assisted  his  brothers,  Hermann  and
Adolf,  in  the  geological  exploration  of  India  in
1854-'7,  prepared  the  work  entitled  "Resultsjof  a
Scientific  Mission  to  India  and  High-Asia"  (4  vols.,
Leipsic,  18G0-'6),  and  filled  the  chair  of  geography
in  the  University  of  Giessen.  In  1867-  70  he
lectured  in  German  and  English  throughout  the
United  States,  Ix'ginning  at  the  Lowell  institute,
Boston,  and  while  in  Uie  countrv  exT)lored  the
Pacific  coast.  He  published  "  Die  facinceisenbah-
nen  in  Nordamerika"  (New  York,  1870),  and
"California"  (1871).

SCHLATTER,  Michael,  clergyman,  b.  in  St.
Gall,  Switzerland.  14  July,  1716;  d.  on  Chestnut
Hill,  now  a  part  of  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  November,
1790.  He  was  educated  at  the  gymnasium  of  his
native  town  and  at  the  University  of  Helmstedt,
Brunswick,  taught  for  several  years  in  Holland,
entered  the  German  Reformed  ministry,  officiated
for  a  few  months  in  Switzerland,  and  then  went  to
Amsterdam  and  volunteered  his  services  as  a  mis-
sionary to  the  destitute  congregations  of  Pennsyl-
vania. He  arrived  in  Philadelphia  on  6  Aug.,

1746,  and  on  1  Jan.,  1747,  was  installed  as  pastor
of  the  united  churches  of  Germantown  and  Phila-
delphia. For  a  great  part  of  the  time  he  was
absent  on  missionary  tours  among  the  German
Reformed  settlers  of  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,
New  Jersey,  and  New  York.  He  organized  a
synod, which  met  in Philadelphia  on  29  Sejjt.,

1747.  Rev.  John  C.  Steiner  in  1750  drew  away
more  than  one  half  of  his  hearers,  which  prompted
him  in  1751  to  visit  Europe  for  the  purpose  of
making  a  complaint  before  the  synods  of  South
and  North  Holland.  In  Amsterdam  he  published
(1751)  a  journal  of  his  experiences  and  transactions
in  America,  with  an  account  of  the  Reformed  con-
gregations and  their  dearth  of  pastors.  Of  this
book  he  made  a  German  translation  (Frankfort,
1752),  and  afterward  it  wjis  rendered  into  English
by  Rev.  David  Thomson,  of  Amsterdam,  and  dis-
tributed throughout  Great  Britain.  He  returned
to  Pennsylvania  in  March,  1752,  bringing  with  him
six  young  ministers  and  substantial  aid  in  money.
As  a  result  of  his  appeal,  a  fund  of  more  than
£20,000  was  collected  m  England  and  Holland  for
the  maintenance  of  free  schools  among  the  Ger-
mans in  America.  Schlatter  withdrew  from  the
active  duties  of  the  pastorate  in  1755,  and  devoted
himself  to  the  establishment  of  these  schools,
which  met  with  strong  opposition  among  the  Ger-
mans, because  the  scheme  included  the  teaching
of  the  English  language.  The  project  rendered
him  unpopular,  and  in  1757  he  abandoned  it
and  accepted  a  chaplaincy  in  the  Royal  American
regiment  that  was  tendered  him  by  Lord  Loudoun.
He  accompanied  the  Pennsylvania  troops  in  the
exj)edition  against  Louisburg.  and  remained  with
the  army  till  1759. After  his  return  from  Nova


Scotia  he  preached  at  Chestnut  Hill,  where  he  re-
sided, and  in  neighboring  places,  but  held  no  fur-
ther relations  with  the  authorities  of  the  church.
When  the  Itevolutionary  war  began  he  still  held
the  appointment  of  chaplain  in  the  royal  army,
and  onifiated  as  such  for  a  short  time.  But  his
svmpathies  were  with  the  patriots,  and  when  Eng-
lish troops  inva<ied  Germantown  in  September,
1777,  he  refused  to  oijey  orders,  and  was  imprisoned,
while  his  house  was  plundertKi.  See  his  "  Life,"  by
Rev,  Ilenrv  Harbaugh  (Philadelphia,  1857).

SCHLEY,  William,  governor  of  Georgia,  b.  in
Frederick,  Md.,  15  Dec,  1786;  d.  in  Augusta,  Ga.,
20  Nov.,  1858.  He  was  educated  at  the  academies
of  Louisville  and  Augusta,  Ga.,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1812,  and  practised  in  Au-
gusta. In  1825-'8  he  was  a  judge  of  the  superior
court.  In  1830  he  entered  the  legislature,  and  in
1832  he  was  electe<l  as  a  Democrat  to  congress.
When  his  term  ended  he  was  chosen  governor  of
the  state  for  the  two  years  ending  with  October,
18J37.  He  was  an  ardent  Democrat  and  strict  con-
stnictionist.  The  building  of  the  first  railroati  in
Georgia  was  undertaken  on  his  recommendation.
He  also  advocated  the  establishment  of  a  lunatic
asylum  and  a  geological  survey  of  the  state.  Gov.
Schley  published  a  "  Digest  of  the  English  Statutes
in  Force  in  Georgia"  (Philadelphia,  1826),

SCHLEY,  Winfleld  Scott,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Frederick  county,  Md.,  9  Oct.,  1839.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1860,
served  on  board  the  frigate  "Niagara"  in  18(K>-'1,
was  attached  to  the  frigate  "  Potomac  "  of  the  West-
em  Gulf  squadron  in  1861-'2,  and  subsequently
took  part,  on  board  the  gun-boat  "  Winona  "  and
the  sloops  "  Monongahela  and  "  Richmond,"  in  all
the  engagements  that  led  to  the  capture  of  Port
Hudson,  being  promoted  lieutenant  on  16  July,
1862.  He  served  on  the  "  Wateree"  in  the  Pacific
in  1864-'6,  quelling  an  insurrection  of  Chinese  cool-
ies on  the  Middle  Chincha  islands  in  1865,  and  later
in  the  same  year  landing  at  La  Union,  San  Salvador,
to  protect  American  interests  during  a  revolution.
He  was  instructor  at  the  naval  academy  in  1866-'9,
served  on  the  Asiatic  station  in  1869-'72,  taking
part  in  the  capture  of  the  Corean  forts  on  Salee
river,  after  two  days  of  fighting,  in  June,  1871,
and  was  again  at  the  naval  academy  in  1874-'6,
being  promoted  commander  in  June,  1874.  In
187C^'9  he  was  on  the  Brazil  station,  and  during
the  cruise  sailed  in  the  "  Essex  "  to  the  vicinity
of  the  South  Shetland  islands  in  search  of  a  miss-
ing sealer,  and  rescued  a  shipwrecked  crew  on  the
islands  of  Tristan  d'Acunha.  In  1884  he  com-
manded the  relief  expedition  that  rescued  Lieut.,
Adolphus  W.  Greely  and  six  of  his  companions
at  Cape  Sabine  in  Grinnell  Land,  passing  through
1,400  miles  of  ice  during  the  voyage.  He  was
commissioned  chief  of  the  bureau  of  equipment
and  recruiting  at  the  navy  department  in  1885,  and
promoted  captain  in  March,  1888.  He  published,
jointly  with  James  Russell  Soley,  a  book  entitled
"  The  Rescue  of  Greelv  "  (New  York,  1886).

SCHMIDEL,  I'lricli  (shmee-del),  German  his-
torian, b.  in  Straubingen,  Bavaria,  about  1511 ;  d.
there  about  1570.  He  was  the  son  of  a  wealthy
merchant,  and  received  a  good  education,  but  en-
tered the  military  service,  and  enlisted  in  tlfe  ex-
iK'dition  of  Pedro  de  Mendoza  as  an  arquebusier.
He  also  accompanied  Juan  de  Ayolas  on  his  first
trip  in  quest  of  provisions,  and  afterward  went
with  Ayolas  in  his  expedition  up  Paraguay  river,
and  was  one  of  the  soluiers  that  were  left  with  Dt>-
mingo  Irala  (o.  v.)  in  charge  of  the  vessels  in  the
port  of  Canuelaria. When  Cabeza  de  Vaca  was


SCHMIDT


SCIIMUCKER


421


deposed  in  April.  1544,  Schinidfl  sustained  InUi^
who  WA8  the  iii'w  );nvi>nior.  and  in  1540  a<>compft«
nied  him  in  his  «>x|MHlttion  to  IVru  as  far  as  the
foot  of  the  Amh's,  where  he  was  despatched  with
Nuflo (Ic  ( 'haves to  President  La  Oasca. lie  accoin-

imniiMl  Inda  on  his  last  unfortunate  ex|KH]ition  of
550,  and,  h(>aring  in  1552  of  the  death  of  his  elder
bn>ther.  to  whose  estate  he  was  to  succe«'d,  he  ob-
taine<l  his  dischargi>.  In  Seville  he  presi-ntwl  to
the  council  of  the  Indies  letters  from  Irala  with
the  rejxjrt  of  his  discoveries,  and  arriveil  toward
the  close  of  1554  in  Straul)in>fen,  where  he  after-
ward resided.  He  hail  ke|)t  a  <Iiary  during  his
wanderinjiTs,  and  wrote  an  interesting  narrative  of
hts  a<lventures  under  the  title  of  "  Wahn'  (Je-
echichte  einer  merkwQrdiifen  Keise.  gemacht  durch
Ulrich  Schmidel  von  Straubingen.  in  America
Oder  der  Neuen  Welt,  von  1584  bis  1554,  wo  man
findet  alle  seine  Ijeiden  in  19  Jahren,  und  die  Be-
echreibung  der  Ijfinder  und  merkwOrdigen  V'J^ker
die  er  gesehen,  von  ihm  sellwt  geschriel)en  "  (Frank-
fort, 1557),  of  which  a  Latin  version  appeared  in
Nuremlx'rg  in  151)9  as  "  Vera  historia,"  etc,  Henry
Ternaux  -  Conjpans  has  also  published  a  transla-
tion of  the  work  in  his  '*  Voyages,  relations  et  m6-
moires,"  and  Barcia  in  his  "  Historiatlores  primiti-
Tos  de  Indias."  Schmidel  is  certainly  tne  first
historian  of  the  Argentine,  and  his  narrative  is
valuable,  as  it  gives  the  names  and  tells  of  the
habits  and  manner  of  living  of  many  Indian  na-
tions that  were  extinct  a  century  later.

SCHMIDT,  Frederick  Angnstns,  clergyman,
b.  in  liCutenWrg,  Germany,  3  Jan..  18^^7.  In  1841
he  came  to  the  United  States  with  his  widowed
mother  to  settle  in  Missouri  with  relatives  that  had
emigrated  in  1839  with  the  Saxon  colony  under
the  leadership  of  Martin  Stephan.  He  was  gradu-
ate<l  at  Concordia  college  in  1853.  and  at  the  theo-
logical seminary  at  St.  Louis  in  1857.  In  the  same
vear  he  was  ortlained  to  the  ministry  at  Eden,
terie  CO.,  N.  Y.  He  served  as  pastor  tliere  and  in
Baltimore,  Md. ;  was  professor  in  the  Norwegian
Luther  college,  at  Decorah.  Iowa,  in  18(U-'71 ;  in
Conconlia  theological  seminary,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in
1871-'6  ;  in  the  Norwegian  Lutfier  seminary,  Madi-
son. Wis.,  in  1876-'86;  and  in  Norwegian  Lutheran
divinity-school,  Northflcld,  Minn.,  since  1886.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1884  from  Capi-
tol university,  Columbus.  Ohio.  He  has  for  years
been  a  lernler  among  the  Norwegian  Lutherans.  In
1873  he  was  sent  as  delegate  from  the  Norwegian
synod  to  the  general  assembly  of  the  Norwegian
mission  society  at  Christiana,  Norway.  He  was
editor  of  the  "Lutheran  Watchman"  in  Decorah,
Iowa,  in  1864-'5  ;  "  Altes  und  Neues  "  in  Madison,
Wis.,  in  1880-'6;  and  *•  Lutherske  Vidnesbyrd  "  in
Madison,  Wis.  (now  Northfield,  Minn.),  in  i882-'7:
and  co-editor  of  "  Kirketiden<le,"  at  Decorah,  Iowa,
in  1865-'71,  and  "  Ix'hre  und  Wehre  "  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  in  1872-'6.  He  has  published  "  Intuitu  Fi-
dei,"  a  collection  of  testimonies  from  Lutheran
authors  on  the  question  of  predestination,  the
controversy  on  which  point  among  Lutherans  in
America  and  Euro{>e  was  started  by  the  publica-
tion of  '•  .Vltes  und  Neues"  in  1880.'

SCHMIDT.  Henry  Immaniiel.  clergyman,  b.
in  Nazareth,  Pa..  21  Dec,  1800;  d.  in  New  York
city,  11  Feb..  1881>.  He  received  his  training  in  the
Moravian  wademy  at  his  native  place,  and  in  1826
l)ecame  a  candidate  for  the  ministry,  but  in  1829
8evere<l  his  connection  with  the  Moravian  cluirch,
and  was  licensed  as  a  Lutheran  clergyman.  He
was  pastor  of  a  congregation  in  Bergen  county,
N.  J.,  in  1831-'3,  assistant  professor  in  Hartwic'k
seminary, N.  Y.,  in 18;J3-  6,  pastor in Boston,


,  in  18.3fl-'S,  professftr  of  Oennan  and  Frencb
in  Pennsylvania  college,  (icttysburg.  Pa.,  in
188B-'9,  and  of  (Jerman  in  the  theological  semi-
nary there  in  183»-'43.  pastor  at  Palatine,  N.  J.,  in
1848-'5.  princifNil  of  Hart  wick  seminary,  N.  Y.,  in
1845-'8,  and  professor  of  the(ferman  Iniiguage  and
literature  in  Columbia  in  184H-'«0.  On  1  Nov.,
1880.  he  was  comiH'llifl  by  failing  health  to  resign
the  last-nameil  post,  and  was  retin**!  as  profesNor
emeritus.  In  1850  Pennsylvania  college,  CJettyiu
burg.  Pa.,  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  D.D.
He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  "  Evangeli-
cal Keview  "  (Oettysburg,  Pa.)  and  to  other  |iertodi-
cals.  and  published  *•  History  of  I-^liication,"  in-
cluding part  i.,  "History  ni  E<lucation.  Ancient
and  Modern,"  and  jwrt  ii.,  "  Plan  of  Culture  and
Instructitm  Imsed  on  Christian  Principles"  (1842):
"Inaugural  Address,"  delivered  in  the  chaf>el  of
Columbia  college  (New  York,  1848);  "Scriptural
(Character  of  the  Lutheran  Doctrijie  of  the  Ijonl's
Sup|)er"  (1852);  and  "Course  of  Ancient  Geog-
raphy "  (1860).

SCHMUCKER.  John  George,  clergyman,  b.
in  Michaelstadt,  Darmstaclt.  Germany,  18  Aug..
1771 ;  d.  in  Williamsburg,  Pa.,  7  Oct.,  1854.  His
parents  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1785,  and,
after  a  residence  of  two  years  in  Peiuisylvania,
settled  near  Wo<Hlstock,  Va.  In  1789  he  l>egan  to
study  for  the  ministry,  a  vear  later  he  went  to
Philadelphia  to  contiinie  his  studies,  and  in  1792
he  was  ordained.  After  holding  several  (tastorates
he  was  called,  in  1809,  to  York,  Pa.,  where  he  re-
mained till  failing  health  compelled  him  to  retire
in  1852.  He  then  removed  to  Williamsburg,  Pa.,
where  several  of  his  children  residetl,  and  there  he
remained  during  the  rest  of  his  life.  In  1825  he
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University
of  Pennsylvania.  Dr.  Schmucker  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  general  synod  of  the  Lutheran
church  in  the  United  States,  in  1821,  an  active
supfHirter  of  the  tJieological  seminary  at  Gettys-
burg. Pa.,  and  for  many  years  president  of  'it«
board  of  directors.  He  was  also  active  in  the  es-
tablishment of  Pennsylvania  college,  and  for  more
than  twenty-one  years  was  one  of  its  trustees.  For
more  than  thirty  years  he  was  one  of  the  leaders  of
the  Lutheran  cfiurch  in  this  countrj',  and  actively
engaged  in  all  its  important  o{)erations.  He  was
a  frequent  contributor  to  i)eriodicals,  and  a  poet
of  merit.  Among  his  works  are  "  Vornehmste
Weissagungen  der  Heiligen  .Schrift  "  (Hagerstown,
Md.,  1807);  "  Reformalions-Geschichte  zur  Jiibel-
feier  der  Reformation "  (York,  Pa.,  1817);  "Pro-
phetic History  of  the  Christian  Religion,  or  Ex-
Itlanation  of  the  Revelation  of  St.  John  "  (2  vols.,
Baltimore,  1817);  "  Schwarmergeist  unserer  Tage
entlarvt,  zur  Wanning  erweckten  Seelen  "  (York,
Pa.,  1827);  "Liwler-Anhang.  zuin  Evang.  Gesang-
buch  der  General-.SyncKle  "  (l^W);  and  "  WSchter-
stimme  an  Zion's  Kinder  "  (Gettysburg.  Pa.,  lf<iH).
—His  son,  Samuel  Simon,  theologian,  b.  in  Ha-
gerstown, Md.,  28  Feb.,  1799;  d.  in  Gettysburg,
ra.,  26  July,  1873,  8^>ent  two  years  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania,  and  then  taught  in  York
in  1816.  He  betcHn  tlieoloeic«l  studies  under
the  direction  of  his  father,  but  in  181H  entered
Princeton  seminary,  where  he  wa.s  gniduated  in
1820.  Among  his  fellow-students  at  Princeton
were  Bishops  Mcllvaine  and  Johns,  and  Dr.  Rob-
ert Baird.  After  being  licensed,  he  was  his  father's
assistant  for  a  few  months,  and  then  followe<l  a
call  to  New  Market,  Va.  He  was  onlained  at
FrtMlerick,  Md.,  5  Sei>t..  1821.  and  serve<l  his  first
charge  in  1820-'6.  He  interested  himself  at  once
in  the  preparation  of  young  men  for  the  ministry.


422


SCIIMUCKER


SCIINECK


took  an  active  part  in  the  orwinization  of  the  gen-
eral syncxl  in  1821,  and  was  througiiout  his  life  dhc
of  the  leaders  of  that  Ixidy.  He  was  the  author  of
the  formula  for  the  government  and  discipline  of
the  Evangelical  Lutnerau  church,  which,  a<l()j)t-

ed  by  the  general
synod  in  1H27.
has  iMJCome  the
ground  -  plan  of
the  organization
of  that  Ixjdy.  From
its  establishment
in  1820  till  his  res-
ignation in  18()4
he  was  chairman
of  the  faculty  of
the  theological
seminary  at  Get-
tysburg, Pa.,  and
for  four  years  he
was  the  only  in-
structor. The  de-
gree of  D.  D.  was
conferred  on  him
in 1830  bv  Rut-


ty. kJ  .  Ky  Cfinvuucyrbi


Ce/K.


gel's  and  the  Uni-
vorsitv  of Penn-


sylvania. In  184fi  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  es-
tablishment of  an  ecclesijistical  connection  between
the  Lutheran  church  in  Europe  and  America,  and
was  a  delegate  to  the  Evangelical  alliance  which
met  in  London  during  that  year.  He  aided  much
in  preparing  the  way  for  the  latter  by  his  "  Frater-
nal Appeal  '  to  the  American  churches,  with  a  plan
for  union  (1838),  which  was  circulated  extensively
in  England  and  the  United  States.  His  published
works  number  more  than  one  hundred.  Among
them  are  "  Biblical  Theology  of  Storr  and  Flott,"
translated  from  the  German  (3  vols..  Andover.  182G ;
reprinted  in  England,  1845);  "Elements  of  Popu-
lar Theologj'"  (1834);  "Kurzgefasste  Geschicnte
der  C'hristlichen  Kirche,  auf  der  Grundlage  der
Busch'en  Werke  "  (Gettysburg,  Pa.,  1834) ;  "  Frater-
nal Appeal  to  the  American  Churches  on  Christian
Union  (Andover,  18.38);  "  Portraiture  of  Luther-
anism"  (Baltimore,  1840);  "Retrospect  of  Luther-
anism'"  (1841);  "  Psychology,  or  Elements  of  Men-
tal Philosophv  "  (New  York.  1842) ;  "  Dissertation  on
Capital  Punishment"  (Philadelphia,  1845);  "The
American  Lutheran  Church,  IHstorically,  Doctrin-
ally,  and  Practically  Delineated"  (1851);  "Luther-
an Manual  "  (1855):  "American  Lutheran  ism  Vin-
dicated "  (Baltimore,  1856) :  "  Appeal  on  Behalf  of
the  Christian  Sabbath"  (Philadeli>hia,  1857) ; "  Evan-
gelical Lutheran  Catechism"  (Baltimore.  1859);
"The  Church  of  the  Redeemer"  (18(57) ;  " The  Uni-
ty of  Christ's  Church"  (New  York,  1870);  and  a
large  number  of  discourses  and  addresses,  and  arti-
cles in  the  "  Evangelical  Review  "  and  other  peri-
odicals.— Samuel  Simon's  son,  Sainnel  Mosheim,
author,  b.  in  New  Market,  Shenandoah  co.,  Va..  12
Jan.,  1823;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa..  12  May,  1863,
wrote  his  name  Smucker.  He  was  graduated  at
Washington  college.  Pa.,  in  1840.  After  studying
theology  and  being  licensed  to  preach,  he  accepted
a  call  from  the  Lutheran  church  at  Lewiston,
Pa,  In  1845  he  became  pastor  of  the  1st  church
in  Gerraantown,  Pa.,  but  ih  October,  1848,  re-
ceived an  honorable  dismissal  from  his  svnod,
and  studied  law  at  the  Philadelphia  law-aca(iemy,
where  he  served  as  secretary.  In  January,  1850,  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  at  once  began  prac-
tice. In  March,  1853,  he  remove<l  to  New  York
city,  but  after  two  years  returned  to  Philadelphia,
and  thenceforth  employed  himself  chiefly  in  writ-


ing, nis  publications  include  "  Errors  of  M(xlem
Infidelity''  (Philadelphia,  1848);  "Election  of
Judges  by  the  People  "  and  "  Constitutionality  of
the  Maine  Liquor  Law"  (1852);  "The  Spanish
Wife,  a  Play,  with  Memoir  of  Edwin  P'orrest "
(New  York,  1854);  "Court  and  Reign  of  Cather-
ine II.,  Empress  of  Russia"  (1855);  "Life  and
Reign  of  Nicholas  I.  of  Russia,"  "  Life  of  John  C.
Fremont,  with  his  Explorations,"  and  "Life  and
Times  of  Alexander  Hamilton "  (Philadelphia,
1856) ;  "  Historv  of  the  Mormons,  Edited  and  En-
larged "  (New  York,  1856) ;  "  Life  and  Times  of
Thomas  Jefferson "  and  "  The  Yankee  Slave-
Driver"  (Philadelphia,  1857);  "Memorable  Scenes
in  French  History  "and  "Arctic  Explorations  and
Discoveries"  (New  York,  1857);  "  Life  of  Dr.  Elisha
Kent  Kane  and  Other  American  Explorers"  and
"History  of  Napoleon  III."  (Philadelphia,  1858);
"History  of  the  Four  Georges"  and  "History  of
All  Religions"  (New  York,  1859);  "Life,  Speeches,
and  Memorials  of  Daniel  Webster"  (Philadelphia,
1859) ;  "  Life  and  Times  of  Henry  Clay,"  "  Life  of
Washington,"  "  Blue  Laws  of  Connecticut,"  and
"History  of  the  Modern  Jews"  (1860);  and  pub-
lished vol.  i.  of  "  A  History  of  the  Civil  War  in  the
United  States"  (1863). — Another  son  of  Samuel
Simon,  Beale  Melanchthon,  clergyman,  b.  in
Gettysburg,  Pa.,  26  Aug.,  1827;  d.  in  Pottstown,
Pa.,  18  Oct.,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Pennsyl-
vania college  in  1844,  studied  at  Gettysburg  theo-
logical seminary,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1847,
and  in  1849  ordained  to  the  Lutheran  ministry  by
the  synod  of  Virginia.  In  1870  he  received'  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Pennsylva-
nia. He  was  pastor  at  Martinsburg,  Va.,  Allen-
town,  Easton,  and  Reading,  Pa.,  and  since  1880  at
Pottstown,  Pa.,  and  held  many  offices  in  connec-
tion with  his  denomination.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  general  council  in  1867,  a  delegate
to  every  convention  since  its  organization,  and
uninterruptedly  a  member  of  its  most  important
committees.  Dr.  Schmucker  was  a  fine  liturgical
scholar,  and  performed  more  than  any  other  man
for  the  liturgical  and  hymnological  development
of  the  Lutheran  church.  He  was  co-editor  of  the
"  Hallesche  Nachrichten "  (AUentown,  Pa.,  and
Halle,  Germany,  vol.  i.,  1884 ;  English  ed.,  Reading,
Pa.,  vol.  i.,  1882),  which  is  the  primary  source  of
information  concerning  the  early  historv  of  the
Lutheran  church  in  this  country.  Dr.  Schmucker
also  edited  "  Liturgy  of  the  Ministerium  of  Penn-
sylvania" (Philadelphia,  1860);  "Collection  of
Hymns  of  the  Ministerium  of  Pennsylvania''  (1865) ;
"  Church-Book  of  the  General  Council "  (1868) ;  and
"  Ministerial  Acts  of  the  General  Council  "  (1887). '
He  published  numerous  articles  on  doctrinal,  his-
torical, and  liturgical  subjects,  of  which  many  have
been  republished  separately  in  pamphlet-form.

SCHNECK,  Benjamin  Shroder,  clergyman,  b.
in  Upper  Bern,  BerKs  co.,  Pa.,  14  March,  1806 ;  d.
in  Cnambersburg,  Pa.,  19  April,  1874.  He  was
educated  by  his  father,  a  German  school-ma.ster  of
Reading,  studied  theology,  and  was  ordained  to  the
ministry  of  the  German  Reformed  church  on  5
Sept.,  1826.  He  was  pastor  of  congregations  in
Centre  county.  Pa.,  till  1834,  preaching  in  both
English  and  trerman.  and^  then  in  Gettysburg  for
one  year.  He  took  charge  in  1835  of  the  "  Weekly
Messenger"  at  Chambersburg,  and  in  1840  of  the
"  Reformirte  Kirehenzeitung,"  the  German  organ
of  his  church.  He  still  continued  editor  of  the
"Weekly  Messenger,"  with  an  assistant,  till  1844.
when  he  resigned,  resuming  charge  again  in  1847.
and  giving  it  up  finally  in  1852.  He  retired  from
the  editorship  of  the  Uerman  paper  in  1864,  when


SCHNEIDER


SCHOPP


428


ft  was  romovoil  to  Philwlolphia.  From  1855  till
his  (Ifutti  III-  ofllciate<l  as  iHistor  of  n  cotifrrffnttion
in  ChainlHTHbiirfj.  The  iU>>jn>o  of  I).  I),  was  jjiven
him  ill  1X45  liy  Marshall  follfffc.  IU«  tiuhlislu'd
"  |)if  (U'litscho  Kanzfl."  a  colltH-tion  of  (terman
Boriiioiis  (Chnmlu'rshiirjr.  1H4.'»):  "  The  Hurniiit;  of
ChamlMTslnir};"  (I'liiladelphia,  IHO."*);  and  "  Mcr-
cersluir;;  Tlitolo^ry  "  (1HT4).

Sl'IINKIUER,  (i«'«rjfe.  banker,  b.  in  Pirma-
wns,  Uheiiish  Bavtiria,  lli  Dec,  1823.  He  was  eilu-
oatinl  in  the  sehools  of  his  native  plat-e.  I)eean>e  a
journalist  at  the  ape  of  twenty-one.  ami,  after  taking
an  «u-tive  part  in  revolutionary  movements,  came
to  this  oountrv  in  July.  184U.  He  established  the
"Neue  Zeit  "  in  St.  Ij<iuis,  Mo.,  and  afterward  re-
moved to  C'hieajfo,  where,  in  1801,  he  was  ap-
|)ointe<I  collector  of  internal  revenue.  He  was
sul)se<piently  president  of  the  .State  savings  insti-
tution till  1871,  when  he  l)ecame  presi<lent  of  the
National  bank  of  Hlinois.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  Hepublic^in  national  conventi<ms  of  1850  and
18<K),  presidential  elector  on  the  (Jarfield  ticket  in
1880,  anil  for  a  short  time  in  1870  served  as  United
States  minister  to  Switzerlaml.

SCHODDK,  (it'orjre  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in
Alleghany  City,  I*a.,  15  A|»ril,  1854.  lie  was  gradu-
ated at  Capitol  university,  Columbus,  Ohio,  in  1872,
and  at  its  theological  (lejmrtment  in  1874,  after-
ward studied  in  the  universities  of  Tftbingen  and
L«'i|>sic,  and  in  1870  took  at  the  latter  the  degree
of  I'h.  I>.  In  1877  he  was  ordained  to  the  Lutheran
ministry  in  Ohio,  and  was  pastor  at  Martin's  Ferry,
Ohio,  until  1  Jan.,  1880,  when  he  was  elected  pro-
fessor in  Capitol  university.  He  is  eminent  as  a
Semitic  scholar,  and  has  done  much  to  promote
the  study  of  Hebrew,  Arabic,  Syriac,  Ethionic,  and
other  languages.  He  has  for  several  years  oeen  an
instructor  of  Hebrew,  Arabic,  and  .Syriac  in  the
Summer  schools  of  Helirew  under  Prof.  William
R.  Har[>er,  of  Yale.  He  has  written  largely  for
periodicals,  and in  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra has

itublished  the  first  complete  tninslation  from  the
ithiopic  of  the  "  Book  of  Jubilees  "  (1885-'7).  His
other  works  are  "  The  Book  of  Enoch,  translated
from  the  Ethiopic,  with  Introduction  and  Notes"
(Andover,  1882),  and  *'  A  Day  in  Capernaum,"
translateti  from  the  German  of  Delitzsch  (New
York.  1887).

SCHOELCHER,  Victor  (shel-ker),  French
Btatesmaii.  b.  in  Paris,  21  July,  1804.  He  is  the
son  of  a  wealthy  merchant,  studied  at  the  College
Louis  le  Grand,  and  Ijecame  a  journalist,  bitterly
op{K)sing  the  government  of  Louis  Philippe  and
making  a  reputation  as  a  pamphleteer.  Alter  1820
he  devoted  himself  almost  exclusively  to  advo-
cacy of  the  al)olition  of  slavery  throughout  the
world,  contributing  a  part  of  his  large  f<»rtune  to
establish  and  promote  societies  for  the  benefit  of  the
negro  race.  In  182l>-'31  he  made  a  journey  to  the
United  .States.  Mexico,  and  Culm  to  study  slavery,
in  1840- "2  he  visited  for  the  same  purposethe  West
Indies,  and  in  1845-'7  Greece,  Egypt,  Turkey,  and
the  west  coast  of  Africa.  On  3  Alarch,  1848,  he  was
appointed  under-secretary  of  the  navy,  and  caused
adecree  to  be  issueil  by  the  provisional  government
which  acknowlwlged  the  principle  of  the  enfran-
chisement of  the  slaves  through  the  French  iM)sses-
sions.  As  president  of  a  commission,  Schoelcher  pre-
pareil  and  wrote  the  decree  of  27  April,  1848.  which
enfranchised  the  slaves  forever.  He  was  elected  to
the  legislative  assembly  in  1848  and  1849  for  Mar-
tinique, and  intHKlucetl  a  bill  for  the  abolition  of
the  death-penalty,  which  wa.s  to  be  discussed  on
the  day  on  which  Prince  Na|K>le<m  made  his  coup
iTHat. After  2  Dec.  he  emigrateil  to  Ix>ndon,  anu.


refusing  to  tnke  a^l vantage  of  the  amnesties  of  18.50
and  1809,  returned  to  France  «tnly  after  the  dtnla-
ratifin  of  war  with  Prussia  in  1870.  Organizing  a
legion  of  artillery,  he  took  part  in  the  defence  of
I'aris,  and  in  1871  he  was  returned  to  the  national
jussembly  for  Martiniipi*-.  In  1875  he  was  elected
senator  for  life.  His  works  include  "  De  I'escla-
vagedes  noirs  et  de  la  legislation  coloniale"  (Paris,
1833) :  "A»K>lition  de  IWIavage"  (1840);  "  I^s
colonies  fran^aises  de  rAmeri*^ue"  (1842);  "Lee
colonies  t'trangeres  dans  I'Amenque  et  Hayti"  (2
vols.,  1843):  "Histoire  do  I'esclavage  ftendant  les
deux  deniieres  ann('>e8  "  (2  vols.,  1847) ;  "  I^a  verite
aux  ouvriers  et  cultivateurs  de  la  Martininue "
(1850);  "  Protestation  des  citoyens  fran(;ais  negres
et  mulatres  contre  des  accusafions  calomnieuses"
(1K51) ;  *'  liC  prcK-es  de  la  colonic  de  .Marie-(ralante  "
(1851);  and  "  Jja  grande  conspiration  du  pillage  et
du  meurtre  i\  la  Martininue"  (1875).

SCHOEPF.  Albin  Francisco,  soldier,  b.  in
Potgusc-h,  Hungary,  1  March,  1822;  d.  in  Hvatts-
ville,  Md.,  15  Jan.,"  1880.  He  entered  the  military
acmlemy  at  Vienna  in  18^37,  l>ecame  a  lieutenant  of
artillery  in  1841,  and  wjis  promoted  captain  on  the
field  for  bravery.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Hun-
garian war  for  indei»en<lence  in  1848  he  left  the
Austrian  service,  enlisted  as  a  private  in  Louis
Kossuth's  army,  and  was  sf>on  made  captain,  and
afterward  major.  After  the  suppression  of  the
revolution  he  was  exiled  to  Turkey,  servetl  under
Gen.  Jozef  Bem  against  the  insurgents  at  Aleppo,
and  afterward  became  instructor  of  artillery  in  the
Ottoman  service,  with  the  rank  of  major.  In  W51
he  came  to  the  United  States,  and,  received  an  ap-
pointment in  the  U.  S.  coast  survey.  In  1858  he
became  an  assistant  examiner  in  the  patent-office.
He  was  ai)pointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
on  30  Sept.,  1801.  Gen.  Felix  K.  ZoUicofTer.  after
a  series  of  successes  against  the  Kentucky  home-
guards,  attacked  his  fortified  position,  called  Wild-
cat camp,  on  the  hills  of  Rock  Castle  county,  Ky.,
and  was  defeated;  but  the  prestige  thus  gained  tor
the  National  arms  was  sacrificed  by  Schoepfs  pre-
cipitate retreat,  by  order  of  his  superior  officer,  a
few  weeks  later  from  London  to  C'mb  Orchard,
which  the  Confederates  calle<l  the  "  Wild-Cat  stam-
pede." Gen.  George  B.  Crittenden,  thinking  to
crush  Schoepfs  force  at  Fishing  creek,  or  Mill
springs,  encountered  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas's  en-
tire army,  and  suffered  a  disa.strous  defeat.  Gen.
Schoepfs  brigade  led  in  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy
to  Monticello.  At  Perryville  he  commanded  a
division  under  Gen.  Charles  C.  Gilbert.  He  served
through  the  war,  and  was  mustered  out  on  15  Jan.,
1800.  Returning  to  Washington,  he  was  appointe<I
principal  examiner  in  the  patent-office,  which  post
ne  continued  to  fill  until  his  death.

SCHOFF,  Stephen  Alonzo,  engraver,  b.  in
Danville.  Vt.,  10  Jan.,  1818.  He  U'gan  engraving
under  the  direction  of  Oliver  Pelton,  of  lioston,
with  whom  he  remained  until  he  was  nearly  of  age,
subsequently  passing  a  short  time  with  Joseph  An-
drews, the  engraver,  in  whose  company  in  1840  he
visited  Europe.  There  he  spent  alK)ut  two  years  in
Paris,  studymg  drawing  a  part  of  the  time  at  the
school  of  Paul  Delaroche,  and  iK>rfecting  himself  in
his  art.  On  his  return  to  this  country  he  engaged
in  l)ank-note  work  in  New  York,  and  mhih  was  em-
ployed upon  his  first  im[>ortant  work.  "Caius  Ma-
riijs  on  tlie  Ruins  of  Carthage."  after  Vanderlyn.
This  plate  was  issued  aljout  1843,  and,  to  expetlite
its  publication  and  aid  the  young  artist,  the  niaster
American  engraver,  Asher  Br«)wn  Durand.  en-
graved the  head  and  gave  some  touches  to  the  fig-
ure. Other  imitortant  works  from  the  burin  of


424


SCHOFIELD


SCHOMBURGK


Mr.  Schoff  are  William  Penn,  eneravwl  for  the
Pennsylvania  historical  society,  a  folio  portrait  of
Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  from  a  drawing  ov  Rowsc,
and  "  The  liathers,"  after  William  M.  Hunt.  Mr.
Schoff's  work  is  executed  in  pure  line,  and  exhibits
much  delicacy  and  a  nice  appreciation  of  the  feel-
ing of  the  artist  he  is  reproducing.  Recently  he
has  turne<l  his  attention  to  etching,  producing
some  l)eautiful  plates.  Mr.  Schoff  has  at  different
times  made  Boston,  Washington,  and  New  York
his  home,  V)ut  at  present  (1888)  he  resides  at  Newton-
ville,  Mass..  in  the  active  exercise  of  his  profession.
SCHOFIELD,  John  McAlli-ster,  soldier,  b.  in
Chautauqua  county,  N.  Y.,  29  Sept.,  1831.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  ai-atlemy  in  1853,  in
the  same  class  with  Philip  H.  Sheridan,  James  B.
McPherson,  and  John  B.  Hood. He  was  assigned

to  the  1st  regi-
ment of  artil-
lery and  served
in  garrison  in
South  Carolina
and  Florida  in
1853-'5,  and  as
assistant  pro-
fessor of  natu-
ral philosophy
at  the  U.  S.
military  acade-
my in  1855-60,
being  commis-
sioned 1st  lieu-
tenant, 31  Aug.,
1855,  and  cap-
tain, 14  May,
1861.  On  his
departure  from
West  Point  in
1860  he  obtained  leave  of  absence  and  filled  the
chair  of  professor  of  physics  at  Washington  uni-
versity, St.  Louis,  Mo.,  until  April,  1861.  At  the
opening  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  volunteer
service  as  major  of  the  1st  Missouri  volunteers,  26
April.  1861,  and  was  appointed  chief  of  staff  to
Gen.  Nathaniel  Lvon.  with  whom  he  served  during
his  campaign  in  5lissouri,  including  the  battle  of
Wilson's  Creek,  in  which  Lyon  was  killed.  He  was
appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  21  Nov.,

1861,  and  a  few  days  later  brigadier-general  of  Mis-
souri militia,  and  \ie  was  in  command  of  the  latter
from  November,  1861,  till  November,  1862,  and  of
the  Army  of  the  Frontier  and  the  district  of  south-
west Missouri  from  that  date  to  April,  1863.  He
was  appointed  major-general  of  volunteers,  29  Nov.,

1862,  and  from  May,  1863,  till  February,  1864,  was  in
command  of  the  Department  of  the  Missouri.  He
was  then  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Depart-
ment and  Army  of  the  Ohio,  and  in  April,  1864,
joined  the  forces  that  were  collecting  near  Chatta-
nooga under  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  for  the  inva-
sion of  Georgia.  He  took  part  in  the  Atlanta  cam-
paign, being  engaged  at  the  battles  of  Resaca,  Dallas,
Kenesaw  Mountain,  and  Atlanta.  When  Sherman
left  Atlanta  on  his  march  to  the  sea.  Schofield,  with
the  23d  army  corps,  was  ordered  back  to  Tennes-
see to  form  part  of  the  army  that  was  then  being
organized  under  Gen.  George  H.  Thomas  to  resist
Hood's  invasion  of  Tennessee.  Schofield  retreated
skilfully  before  the  superior  forces  of  Howl,  in-
flicted a  severe  check  upon  him  in  a  shaq)  battle
at  Franklin,  30  Nov.,  1864,  and  joined  Thomas  at
Nashville,  1  Dec.,  1864.  For  his  services  at  the  bat-
tle of  Franklin  he  was  made  brigadier-general  and
brevet  mapor-general  in  the  regular  army.  He
took  part  m  the  battle  of  Nashville  and  the  subse-


quent pursuit  of  Hood's  army.  In  January,  1865,
he  was  detached  from  Thoma.s's  command  and  sent
with  the  23d  army  corps  by  rail  to  Washington,
and  thence  by  transports  to  the  mouth  of  Cape
Fear  river,  the  entire  movement  of  15,000  men  with
their  artillery  and  bageage  over  a  distance  of  1,800
miles  l»eing  accomplished  in  seventeen  days.  He
was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Department
of  North  Carolina  on  9  Feb.,  1865,  captured  Wil-
mington on  22  Feb.,  was  en^ged  in  tne  Imttle  of
Kinston,  8-10  March,  and  jomed  Sherman  at  Golds-
Iwro'  on  22  March.  He  was  present  at  the  .surrender
of  Johnston's  army  on  26  April,  and  was  charged
with  the  execution  of  the  uetails  of  the  capitula-
tion. In  June,  1865,  he  was  sent  to  Europe  on  a  spe-
cial mission  from  the  state  department  in  regard
to  the  French  intervention  in  Mexico,  and  he  re-
mained until  May,  1866.  In  August  he  was  as-
signed to  the  command  of  the  Department  of  the
Potomac,  with  headquarters  at  Richmond.  He  was
in  charge  of  the  1st  military  district  (the  .state  of
Virginia)  from  March,  1867,  till  May,  1868.  Gen.
Schofield  succeeded  Edwin  M.  Stanton  as  secretary
of  war,  2  June,  1868,  and  remained  in  that  office  un-
til the  close  of  Johnson's  administration,  and  under
Grant  until  12  March,  1869,  when  he  was  appointed
major-general  in  the  U.  S.  army  and  ordereu  to  the
Department  of  the  Missouri.  He  was  in  command
of  the  Division  of  the  Pacific  from  1870  till  1876
and  again  in  1882  and  1883,  superintendent  of  the
U.  S.  military  academy  from  1876  till  1881,  and  in
command  of  the  Division  of  the  Missouri  from  1883
till  1886,  when  he  took  charge  of  the  Division  of
the  Atlantic.  He  is  at  present  (1888)  the  senior
major-general  of  the  U.  S.  army,  and,  under  exist-
ing laws,  will  be  retired,  on  reaching  the  age  of  six-
ty-four, in  1895.  He  was  president  of  the  board
that  adopted  the  present  tactics  for  the  army  (1870),
went  on  a  special  mission  to  the  Hawaiian  islands
in  1873,  and  was  president  of  the  board  of  inquiry
on  the  case  of  Fitz-John  Porter  in  1878.

SCHOMBURGK,  Robert  Herman,  German
explorer,  b.  in  Freiburg  on  the  Unstruth,  Prussia,
4  June,  1804;  d.  in  Schoneberg,  near  Berlin,  11
March,  1865.  He  entered  commercial  life,  and  in
1826  came  to  the  United  States,  where,  after  work-
ing as  a  clerk  in  Boston  and  Philadelphia,  he  be-
came a  partner  in  1828  in  a  tobacco-man ufactorj'
at  Richmond,  Va.  The  factory  was  burned,  anil
Schomburgk  was  ruined.  After  imusccessful  ven-
tures in  the  West  Indies  and  Central  America,  he
went  to  the  island  of  Anegada,  one  of  the  Virgin
group,  where  he  undertook  to  make  a  survey  of
the  coast.  Although  he  did  not  possess  the  special
knowledge  that  is  required  for  such  a  work,  he
performed  it  well,  and  his  reports  procured  him  in
1834,  from  the  Geographical  society  of  London  and
some  botanist.s,  means  to  explore  the  interior  of
British  Guiana,  which  was  then  entirely  unknown.
After  a  thorough  exploration  during  1833-'9  he
went  to  London  in  the  summer  of  1839  with
valuable  collections  of  animals  and  plants,  mostly
new  species,  among  them  the  magnificent  water-
lilies  Known  now  as  the  Victoria  regia  and  the
Elisabetha  regia.  and  many  new  species  of  orchids,
one  of  which  has  since  lipen  named  for  him  the
Sehomburgkia  orchida.  Schomburgk  sailed  again
from  London  for  Georgetown  in  December,  1840,  as
president  of  a  commission  to  determine  the  bound-
ary-line between  British  Guiana  and  Brazil,  and  to
make  further  geographical  and  ethnological  obser-
vations. He  was  joined  there  by  his  brother,  Jloritz
Richard.  On  their  return  to  London  in  June,  1844,
Schomburgk  presented  a  report  of  his  journey  to
the  Geographical society,  for  which  the  queen


SCHOOLCRAFT


SCHOOLCRAFT


425


knifrhte<l  him  in  1S45.  After  a  few  months'  rest,
he  was  ffiven  an  a|)|M)intment  in  the  colonial  do-
tiartment,  antl  sent  to  make  restearfhes  upon  the
idioms  of  the  aliorieines  of  South  America.  In
1848  he  rend  liefore  tne  British  association  a  pafwr
in  which  he  j»ro|)osed  an  alphalwtical  system  for
the  Indian  «lialect.H.  That  same  year  he  was  np-
pointed  consul-jfcneral  and  charjfc  d'affaires  in  the
I>ominican  republic,  signed  in  1850  an  advanta-
geous commercial  treaty  for  (Jn-at  Hritain,  and
also  securetl  a  truce  fmm  Soulouquo  in  ln'half  of
the  Dominican  afovemment.  During  the  following
years  he  contributed  to  the  jounial  of  the  Geo-
graphical society  valuable  jjapers  u|)on  the  physi-
cal geography  oi  the  island.  He  was  promote<l  in
1857  consul-geneml  at  Itan^kok,  Siam,  an<l  resided
there  till  18G4,  when  declining  health  comiHjlled
him  to  resign.  Schomburgk  was  a  meml)er  of  va-
rious Euroiwan,  American,  and  Asiatic  learned  so-
cieties, anil  was  a  knight  of  the  Ijegion  of  honor,
and  of  the  Prussian  order  of  the  Red  Ragle.  His
works  include  "  Voyage  in  Guiana  and  upon  the
Shores  of  the  Orinoco  during  the  Years  183,5-'39"
(London,  1840;  translated  into  German  by  his  broth-
er Otto,  under  the  title  "  Reisen  in  (hiiana  und  am
Orinoco  in  den  Jahren  1835-'39,"  Leipsic,  1841,
with  a  preface  by  Alexander  von  Humlx)ldt);
"Researches  in  Guiana,  1837-39"  (1840);  "De-
scription of  British  Guiana,  Geographical  and  Sta-
tistical "  (1840) ;  "  Views  in  the  Interior  of  Guiana  "
(1840) ;  "  Baubacenia  Alexandrinte  et  Alexandra  im-
peratris"  (Brunswick,  1845);  "  Rapatea  Frederici
August!  et  Saxo- Frederici  regalis  "  (1845),  being
monographs  of  plants  discovered  by  the  author
in  British  Guiana ;  "  History  of  Barbadoes  "  (Lon-
don, 1847);  and  "The  Discovery  of  the  Enipire  of
Guiana  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh'"  (1848).— Schom-
burgk's  brother,  Moritz  Richard,  published  an  ac-
count of  the  expedition  in  1840-'4,  under  the  title
"  Reisen  in  British  Guiana  in  den  Jahren  1840-'44"
(3  vols..  Leipsic,  1847-'H).

SCHOOLCRAFT,  Lawrence,  soldier,  b.  in  Al-
bany county,  N,  Y.,  in  1700;  d.  in  Verona,  Oneida
CO.,  N.  Y.,  7  June,  1840.  His  grandfather,  James,
came  from  England  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne,
settled  in  AUiany  county  as  a  surveyor,  and  in
later  life  was  a  teacher,  and  adopted  the  name  of
"Schoolcraft"  in  the  place  of  his  original  family
name  of  Calcraft.  Tne  grandson  served  during
the  Revolutionary  war,  and  as  a  colonel  in  the  sec-
ond war  with  Great  Britain.  He  was  the  su|)erin-
tendent  of  a  large  glass-factory  ten  miles  west  of
Albany. — His  son.  Henry  Rowe,  ethnologist,  b.  in
Albany  county,  N.  Y.,  28  March,  1793;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C.,"l0  Dec.,  18G4,  was  educated  at  Mid-
dlebury  college,  Vt.,  and  at  Union,  where  he  pur-
sued the  studies  of  chemistry  and  mineralogy,
learned  the  art  of  glass-making,  and  began  a  trea-
tise on  the  subject  entitled  "  Vitreology,"  the  first
part  of  which  was  published  (Utica,'  1817).  In
1817-'18  he  travellea  in  Missouri  and  Arkansas,
and  returned  with  a  large  collection  of  geological
and  mineralogical  specimens.  In  1830  he  was  ap-
pointed geol<^ist  to  Gen.  Ijcwis  Cass's  exploring
exj:tedition  to  Lake  Superior  and  the  head-waters  of
Mississippi  river.  He  was  secretar)-  of  a  commis-
sion to  treat  with  the  Ihdians  at  Chicago,  and,  after
a  journey  through  Illinois  and  along  VValMish  and
Miami  rivers,  was  in  1822  apjMiinted  Imlian  agent
for  the  trilH's  of  the  lake  region,  establishing  him-
self at  Sjiult  Sainte  Marie,  and  afterwanl  at  >IjK'ki-
naw,  wheR*.  in  182<'i.  he  marrie<l  Jane  Johnston,
granddaughter  of  Wal)oojeeg.  a  noted  Oiibway
chief,  who  had  receive*!  her  education  in  Europe.
In  1828  he  founded  the  Michigan  historical  society,


a  tour  through  western  Vireinia,  Ohio,  and
ia. He  was  appointed  by  the  New  York  legi.s-


and  ill  1881  the  Algic  society.  From  1828  till
1882  he  was  a  memlM«r  <»f  the  territorial  legislature
of  Michii^an.  In  1883  he  led  a  government  expe-
dition, which  fol-
lowed the  Missis-
sippi river  un  to
its  source  in  Itas-
ca lake.  In  \KVS
he  negotiatiHl  a
treaty  with  the
Indians  on  the
upper  lakes  for
the  cession  to  the
United  States  of
16,000,000  acres
of  their  lands.
He  was  then  ap-
pointwl  acting  su-
i)erint»'ndent  of
Indianafrairs,and
in  1839  chief  dis-
bursing agent  for
the  northern  de-
partment. On  his
return  from  Eu-
rope in  1842  he
made
Canada.

lature  in  1845  a  commissioner  to  take  the  census  of
the  Indians  in  the  state,  and  collect  information  con-
cerning the  Six  Nations.  After  the  iwrformance  of
this  task,  congress  authorized  him.  on  3  March,  1847,
to  obtain  through  the  Indian  bureau  reports  relat-
ing to  all  the  Indian  tril)es  of  the  country,  and  to
collate  and  edit  the  information.  In  this  work  he
spent  the  remaining  years  of  his  life.  Through  his
influence  many  laws  were  enacted  for  the  protection
and  l^enefit  of  the  Indians.  Numerous  scientific
societies  in  the  Unite<l  States  and  P'uroiw  elected
him  to  membership,  and  the  University  of  Geneva
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1846.  He  was
the  author  of  numerous  poems,  lectures,  and  re-
ports on  Indian  subjects,  besides  thirty-one  larger
works.  Two  of  his  lectures  Ijefore  the  Algic  so-
ciety at  Detroit  on  the  "Grammatical  Construction
of  the  Indian  Languages"  were  translated  into
French  by  Peter  S.  Duponceau,  and  gained  for
their  author  a  ^old  medal  from  the  French  insti-
tute. His  publications  include  "A  View  of  the
Lead-Mines  of  Missouri,  including  Observations  on
the  Mineralogy  and  Geology  of  ^lissouri  and  Ar-
kansas" (New  York,  1819);  "aj)oein  called  "Trans-
allegania,  or  the  Groans  of  Missouri"  (1820);
"Journal  of  a  Tour  in  the  Interior  of  Missouri  and
Arkansas"  (1820);  "Travels  from  Detroit  to  the
Sources  of  the  Mississippi  with  an  Expedition  un-
der Lewis  Cass"  (Albany,  1821);  "Travels  in  the
Central  Portions  of  Mississippi  Valley"  (New  York,
1825);  "The  Ri^  of  the  West,  or  a  Prospect  of  the
Mississippi  Valley,"  a  poem  (Detroit,  1827);  "In-
dian Melodies,"  a  noem  (1830);  "The  Man  of
Bronze"  (18^34);  "Narrative  of  an  Expedition
through  the  Upper  Mississippi  to  Itasca  Lake"
(New  York,  1834);  "  Iosco,  or  the  Vale  of  Norma"
(Detroit,  1834);  "Algic  Researches,"  a  book  of
Indian  allegories  and  legen«ls  (New  York,  1839);
"  Cyclopjedia  indianensis.  of  which  only  a  single
number  was  issued  (1842);  "Alhalla,  or  the  Land
of  Talladega,"  a  poem  publishe<l  under  the  pen-
name  "Henry  Rowe  Colcraft "  (1843);  "Oneota,
or  Characteristics  of  the  WnA  Race  of  America"
(1844-'5),  which  was  republished  under  the  title  of
"The  Indian  and  his  Wigwam"  (1848);  "Report
on  Aboriginal  Names  and  the  Ge«igraphical  Ter-
minology of  New  York  "  (1845) :  "  PUn  for  Investi'


426


SCHOONMAKER


SCHOTT


giiting  American  Ethnology"  (184C);  "Notes  on
the  Iroquois,"  conttiining  his  report  on  the  Six
Nations  (Albany,  1840;  enlarged  editions,  New
York,  1847  and  1848) ;  "  The  Red  Itace  of  Ameri-
ca" (1847);  "Notices  of  Antitjue  Earthen  Vessels
from  Florida "(1847);  "Address  on  Early  Ameri-
can History"  (New  York,  1847);  "Outlines  of  the
Life  and  Character  of  Gen.  Lewis  Cass"  (Albany,
1848) :  "  Bibliographical  Catalogue  of  Books,  Trans-
lations of  the  Scriptures,  and  other  Publications  in
the  Indian  Tongues  of  the  United  States"  (Wash-
ington, 1849) ;  "  American  Indians,  their  History,
Condition,  and  Prospects  "  (Auburn,  1850);  "Per-
s(mal  Memoirs  of  a  Residence  of  Thirty  Years  with
the  Indian  Tribes  on  the  American  Frontiers,  1813
to  1843"  (Philadelphia,  1851);  "Historical  and
Statistical  Information  respecting  the  History,
Condition,  and  Prosnects  of  the  Indian  Tribes  of
the  United  States,  with  illustrations  by  Capt.
Seth  Eastman,  published  by  authority  of  congress,
which  appropriated  nearly  $yO,000  a  volume  for
the  purpose  (5  vols.,  185i-'5);  "Scenes  and  Ad-
ventures in  the  Semi-Alpine  Region  of  the  Ozark
Mountains  of  Missouri  and  Arkansas,"  a  revised
edition  of  his  first  book  of  travel  (1853);  "Sum-
mary Narrative  of  an  Exploratory  Expedition  to  the
Sources  of  the  Mississippi  River  in  1820,  resumed
and  completed  by  the  l)iscovery  of  its  Origin  in
Itasca  Lake  in  1832"  (1854);  "  Helderbergia,  or  the
Apotheosis  of  the  Heroes  of  the  Anti-Rent  War,"
an  anonymous  poem  (Albany,  1855);  and  "The
Myth  of  Hiawatha,  and  other  Oral  Legends"
(1856).  "The  Indian  Fairy-Book,  from  Original
Legends"  (New  York,  1855).  was  compiled  from
notes  that  he  furnished  to  the  editor,  Cornelius
Mathews.  To  the  five  volumes  of  Indian  re-
searches com[»ilod  under  the  direction  of  the  war
department  he  added  a  sixth,  containing  the  post-
Columbian  history  of  the  Indians  and  of  their  re-
lations with  Europeans  (Philadelphia,  1857).  He
had  collected  material  for  two  additional  volumes,
but  the  government  suddenly  suspended  the  publi-
cation of  the  work.— His  wife,  Mary  Honard,  b.
in  Beaufort,  S.  C,  was  his  assistant  in  the  prepara-
tion of  his  later  works,  when  he  was  confined  to
his  chair  by  paralysis  and  unable  to  iise  his  hands.
They  were  married  in  1847,  five  years  after  the
death  of  his  first  wife.  Mrs.  Schoolcraft  was  the
author  of  "  The  Black  Gauntlet,  a  Tale  of  Planta-
ti(m  Life  in  South  Carolina"  (Philadelphia,  18G0).

SCHOONMAKER,  Auffustus,  lawyer,  b.  in
Rochester,  Ulster  co.,  N.  Y.,  2  March, 'l828.  He
was  educated  in  common  schools  and  by  private
study,  worked  on  his  father's  farm  till  he  was
twenty  years  old.  taught  for  several  years,  studied
law.  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1853,  and  practised
in  Kingston,  N.  Y.  He  was  town  superintendent
of  common  schools  for  several  years,  and  county
judge  of  Ulster  county  from  \8Gi  till  1872.  In
187(i-'7  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  and
in  1878-'9  he  was  attorney-general  of  New  York.
From  1883  till  1887  he  served  as  a  civil  service
commissioner  of  the  state,  and  on  the  constitution
of  the  inter-state  commerce  commission  in  1887
he  was  ap|)ointed  one  of  its  members.

SCHOONMAKER,  Cornelius,  member  of  con-
gress, b.  in  Rochester,  Ulster  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  June,
1745;  d.  in  Shawangunk,  Ulster  co.,  in  February
or  March,  1796.  lie  sat  in  the  state  assembly
from  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  in  1777  till
1790,  was  a  memlier  of  the  convention  that  adopt-
ed the  Federal  constitution  in  1788,  and  served
in  congress  from  24  Oct..  1791.  till  3  March,  1793.
— His  grandson,  Mariiis,  memljer  of  congress,
b.  in  Kingston,  N.  Y.,  24  April,  1811,  was  gradu-


ated at  Yale  in  1830,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  IUSS,  and  has  practised  in  Kingston.
He  was  a  meml)er  of  the  state  senate  in  1850-'l,
and,  as  chairman  of  a  special  committee  on  the  code
drew  up  amendments  that  constituted  a  thorough
revision  of  the  act.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Whig,  and  served  from  1  Dec,  1851,  till  3  March,
1853.  In  1854  he  was  auditor  of  the  canal  depart-
ment, and  in  1855-'0  he  served  as  sunerintendent  of
the  bank  department  of  the  state  of  New  York.  He
was  president  of  the  Kingston  board  of  education
fi-om  its  establishment  in  1863  till  1872,  and  in
1867  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention. He  has  published  speeches  in  congress
on  "  Public  Lands  (Washington,  1852),  and  "The
Slave  Question  "  (1852),  and  Ls  the  author  of  a
"History  of  Kingston  from  its  First  Settlement
to  1820, which  is  now  (1888)  ready  for  publication.

SCHOONMAKER,  Martiiius,  clergyman,  b.  in
Rochester,  Ulster  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1737 ;  il.  in  Flat-
bush,  N.  Y.,  in  1824.
He was licensed to  '-r^*"  ^

preach  in  1765,  was
pastor  of  the  Dutch
Reformed  church  at
Gravesend  for  several
years,  and  then  of  the
one  at  Harlem  till
1784,  when  he  fixed  his
residence  at  Flatbush,
and  assumed  charge
of  the  six  congrega-
tions in  Kings  county.
During  the  Revolution
he  was  an  earnest  and
influential  Whig.  He
was  the  last  of  the  min-
isters that  preached  ^
only  in  Dutch  till  the

end  of  their  lives.  The  church,  six-sided  and  with
a  funnel-roof,  in  which  he  ministered  at  New
Utrecht,  is  shown  in  the  illustration.

SCHOTT,  Charles  Anthony,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Mannheim,  Germany,  7  Aug.,  1826.  He  studied
at  the  Lyceum  in  Mannheim,  and  then  was  gradu-
ated as  a  civil  engineer  in  1847*  at  the  Polytechnic
school  in  Carlsruhe.  In  1848  he  came  to  the  United
States  and  entered  the  service  of  the  coast  survey.
He  was  advanced  to  the  gratle  of  assistant  in  1856,
and  still  (1888)  holds  that  place.  Mr.  Schott  is  a
member  of  the  Philosophical  societies  of  Philadel-
phia and  Washington,  and  a  fellow  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  in
1872  was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sci-
ence. His  writings  include  numerous  memoirs  of
special  investigations  on  hydrography,  geodesy,
and  particularly  on  terrestrial  magnetism,  which
have  appeared  in  the  annual  reports  of  the  U.  S.
coast  and  geodetic  survey  since  1854.  In  addition
to  these,  he  has  published,  through  the  medium  of
the  Smithsonian  institution,  "  Magnet  ical  Observa-
tions in  the  Arctic  Seas,"  reduced  and  discussed
from  material  collected  bj'  Elisha  K.  Kane  (1858);
"Meteorological  Observations  in  the  Arctic  Seas,"
likewise  collected  by  Elisha  K.  Kane  during  the
second  Grinnell  expeditipn  (1859) ;  "  Astronomical
Observations  in  the  Arctic  Seas."  from  data  col-
lected by  Elisha  K.  Kane  (1860);  "Tidal  Observa-
tions in  the  Arctic  Seas"  (1860);  "Meteorological
Observations  in  the  Arctic  Seas,"  from  results
made  on  board  the  arctic  searching  yacht  "  Fox  "
in  Baffin  bay  and  Prince  Regent's  inlet  in  1857-'9
(1862) :  "  Physical  Observations  in  the  Arctic  Seas,"
from  data  collected  by  Isaac  I.  Hayes  (1867);  "  Re
suits of Meteorological Obser\-ations made "


at


bCUOULER


SCHRIVER


427


Brunswick,  Mp.,  Vn'twoen  1H07  and  IMO"  (1867):
"  K4'sults  «»f  Mi't<M)n)li>gical  OlistTvatidiis  madu  at
MariotUi,  Ohio.  lH*twi>t>n  lH2(i  and  IHT)]),  Inclu-
sive" (1M68);  "Tahlesantl  Uesult.sof  the  Precipita-
tion in  Unin  and  Snow  in  the  I'nitod  States,  and  at
Some  Stations  in  Adjacent  I'artM  of  North  Ameri-
ca, and  in  Central  and  South  Anu-rica"  (1872:  a
second  e«lition,  1881):  "Tal>le.s,  I>i;<triliution,  and
Variations  of  the  AtnKispheric  TemtH>rature  in  the
United  States  an<i  S«ime  Adjacent  Parts  of  Ameri-
ca" (187(5):  and  "  Majjuetic  Charts  of  the  United
States,"  showing  the  distribution  of  the  declina-
tion, the  dip  and  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  force
(1882  anil  1885).

SCIIOrLER.  »'illiam  (skool'-er),  journalist,  b.
in  Kiliiurchan,  Sc-otlantl.  HI  Dec.  1814;  d.  in  West
Roxbury.  Mass..  24  Oct.,  18?2.  He  was  brought  to
this  country  in  1815.  received  a  common-school
education,  and  enpi^ed  in  calico  printing.  He
was  the  jmiprietor  and  editor  of  the  Lowell  "Cou-
rier "  in  1841-7.  in  1847-'53  joint  projjrietor  and
editor  of  the  Boston  "  Daily  Atlas,"  in  1858-'0
one  of  the  editors  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Gazette."  in
1856-'8  e«litor  of  the  "  Ohio  .State  Journal."  and  in
1858  of  the  Boston  "  Atlas  and  Bee."  He  was  four
times  electetl  to  the  Massachiisetts  house  of  repre-
sentatives and  once  to  the  senate.  In  1853  he  was
a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  constitutional  con-
vention, and  was  chosen  clerk  of  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives. In  1857  he  was  adjutant-general  of
Ohio,  and  from  1800  till  18()G  held  the  same  office
in  Massachusetts.  He  wiis  the  author  of  •*  History
of  Massachusetts  in  the  Civil  War"  (2  vols..  Bos-
ton, 18tt8-'71). — His  stm,  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  West
Cambridge  (now  Arlington),  Mass.,  20  March.  1839,
was  gratluated  at  Harvard  in  1859,  studied  law,
and  began  to  nnictise  in  Boston.  In  August,  1862,
he  joined  the  N^ationa!  army,  and  served  for  nearly
a  year  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  signal  service.  Since
1884  he  has  l)een  a  lecturer  in  the  Boston  univer-
sity law-school  and  in  the  National  law  university,
Washington.  D.  C.  He  has  published  legal  trea-
tises "On  Domestic  Relations"  (Boston,  1870);
"On  Personal  Property"  (2  vols..  1873-'6):  "On
Bailments,  including  Carriers"  (1880);  "On  Hus-
band and  Wife  "(1882);  "  On  Executors  and  Ad-
ministrators" (1883):  and  "On  Wills  "(1887):  also
a  "  History  of  the  United  States  under  the  Consti-
tution," of  which  three  volumes  have  l)een  issued
(Washington,  1880-'5),  and  two  others,  bringing
the  narrative  down  to  18(51,  are  now  (1888)  ready
for  the  press,  and  soon  to  be  issued.

8CH0UTEN,  WUleiu  Cornells  (shoo -ten).
Dutch  navigator,  b.  in  Hoorn  in  1567;  d.  in  An-
tongil  bay,  Madagascar,  in  1625.  He  ha<l  iKjen  for
years  in  the  employ  of  the  Dutch  VMni  India  com-
pany, when  he  quarrelled  with  one  of  the  directors
and  resigned  in  1610.  Prom  that  time  he  resolved
to  And  a  new  route  to  the  Indies,  eluding  the  char-
ter of  the  East  India  company.  He  interested  in
his  scheme  Hoorn's  richest  citizen.  Isaac  Lemaire.
and  thev  formed  a  company  with  a  ca|>ital  of
2(X),000  florins,  one  half  IxMng  furnished  by  Isaac
I^emaire  and  an  eighth  by  Schouten.  The  expe-
dition left  the  Texel.  14  June,  1615,  Schouten  being
the  comman«ler,  and  a  son  of  Isaac,  James  Le-
maire, acting  as  his  deputy  and  director-general.
The  details  of  the  discoveries  ntv  to  Im'  found  in
the  article  Lk.maire,  Jamks.  The  navigators  were
arrested  in  Batavia  by  George  Spiel5x?rgen  for  in-
fringing upt)n  the  privileges  of  the  East  India
company,  but,  on  Schouten's  arrival  in  Holland,  he
seeunnl  an  acquit U»l,  and  even  comiiellwl  the  com-
pany to  pay  hun  heavy  damages.  He  resumwl  the
exercise  of  his  profession,  and  was  returning  to


Europe  after  a  successful  voyage  to  the  Indict,
when  stress  of  weather  forced  iiim  to  enter  the  Bajr
of  Antongil,  and  he  die<l  there.  A  narrative  of
Schouten's  ex|H'dition  was  written  by  Aris  Clas-
sen, the  clerk  of  the  admiral,  and  publishi^l  under
the  title  "S<rheeps-JnurnHl  en  liesehriiving  van  de
Ix'wonderensvminlige  Keis  gemaakt  iKK)r  Willem
Conielis  Schouten.  gelKjren  te  II<K)rn,  ttn-n  hy  heeft
outdekt  ten  Zuiden  van  de  ze<>-engte  van  Magellan
een  nieuwe  doorgang  in  de  gnntte  Zuidzee '  (Am-
stenlam.  1617).  It  was  translated  into  French
(Amstenlam,  1617),  into  (Jerman  (Arnheim,  1618),
and  into  I^atin  (Amstenlam,  1619).  The  name  of
Schouten  has  lH>en  given  to  an  island  that  he  dis-
covered on  the  northenj  coast  of  New  (iuinea

SCHREIUKR,  Collini^woud,  Canadian  engi-
neer, b.  in  Colchester,  Essex,  England.  14  Dw.,
1831.  He  came  to  Canada  in  1852,  and  was  en-
gaged on  the  engineering  staff  of  the  Hamilton
and  Toronto  railway  till  its  completion  in  1856.
He  then  engaged  in  private  engineering  in  Toronto
till  18(50,  when  he  entered  the  service  of  the  North-
ern railway  of  Canada.  In  1863  he  was  engaged  by
the  government  of  Nova  Scotia  as  division  engineer
on  the  Pictou  railway,  and  he  continued  in  this
service  till  1867,  when  the  works  were  completed.
In  18(58  the  Dominion  government  appointed  him
to  take  charge  of  the  surveys  in  connection  with
the  Intercolonial  railway,  of  the  route  by  the  way
of  liakeTemiscouata;  and  in  1869.  as  superintend-
ing engineer,  he  wjis  placed  in  charge  of  the  East'
em  extension  railway.  In  1871  he  was  appointed
superintending  engineer  and  commissioners  agent
for  the  entire  length  of  the  Intercohmial  railway,
which  post  he  held  till  1873,  when  he  was  made
chief  engineer  of  government  railways  in  opera-
tion, in  which  capacity  he  still  acts.  He  is  also
chief  engineer  of  that  part  of  the  Canadian  Pa-
cific that  is  now  undergoing  construction  by  the
government.  He  was  royal  commissioner  of  the
court  of  railwav  claims  in  1886.

SCHRIVER,  Edmund,  soldier,  b.  in  York.  Pa,
16  Sept.,  1812.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  18Ji3,  and  assigned  to  the  2<i  artil-
lery. On  1  Nov.,  1836,  he  became  1st  lieutenant,  and
on  7  July,  1838,  captain  on  the  staff  and  assistant
to  the  adjutant -general,  serving  in  the  Florida  war
of  1839.  He  held  the  rank  of  captain  in  the  2d
artillery  from  17  Aug.,  1842,  till  18  June,  1846,  re-
signed his  commission  on  31  July,  184(5,  and  was
treasurer  of  the  Saratoga  and  Washington  railroad
company,  N.  Y.,  from  1847  till  1852.  of  the  Sara-
toga and  Schenectady  railroad  from  1847  till  1861,
and  of  the  Rensselaer  and  Saratoga  railroad  from
1847  till  1861,  Ixnng  president  of  the  last  n»ad  from
ia51  till  1861.  He  re-entered  the  army  on  14  May,
1861,  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  11th  infantr)*,  be-
came aide-de-camp  to  Gov.  Edwin  I).  Morgan,  of
New  York,  recruited,  organized,  and  instructetl  his
regiment  at  Fort  Independence.  Mass..  and  became
colonel  on  the  staff  and  additional  aide-de-camp
on  18  May,  1862,  havmg  Ix'cn  made  chief  of  staff
of  the  1st  corps  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He
served  in  the  Shenandoah  and  the  northern  Vir-
ginia campaigns,  and  was  appointe<l  colonel  on  the
staff  and  ins|)ector-general,  l .  S.  army,  on  13  March,
186^3.  after  wrving  us  acting  insjiector-geiu'ral  from
January  till  MaR-h.  18(53,  He  was  at  Chancellors-
ville  and  Gettysburg,  and  afterwanl  bore  thirty-
one  battle-flags  and  other  trophies  to  the  war  de-
partment. He  particiftated  in  the  Richmond  cam-
paign from  the  lianidan  to  Petersburg,  was  on
special  duty  under  tne  onlers  of  the  secretary  of
war  fnim  22  March  till  23  June.  18(55,  and  was
brevetted  brigadier-general.  U.  S.  army,  for  faithful


428


SCHROEDER


SCHURZ


and  meritorious  services  in  the  field  on  1  Aus.,

1864,  and  major-general,  U.  S.  army,  on  13  March,

1865.  From  10  Dec,  186.5,  till  15  April,  1871,  he
was  on  sj»ecial  duty  in  the  secretary  of  war's  office
and  in  charge  of  the  inspection  ^bureau,  and  in
1866-'71  was  inspector  of  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy, was  on  a  tour  of  inspection  in  Texas.  New
Mexico,  and  Kansas,  and  of  the  recruiting  service
in  1872-'3.  prepared  reports  in  Washington,  D.  C,

Earticularly  upon  the  affairs  of  the  Freedmen's
ureau  in  1873.  was  on  duty  in  the  war  depart-
ment in  187;i-'6.  and  was  made  inspector  of  the
division  of  the  Pacific  on  29  May,  1876,  From  16
Nov.  to  15  Dec.,  1877,  he  was  a  member  of  the  re-
tiring Ixiard  in  San  Francisco,  and  of  the  board
to  examine  the  case  of  Dr.  Williiiiu  A.  Hammond
(q.  r.).  U.  S.  army.  He  was  retired  in  January,  1881.
SCHROEDEiR,  John  Frederick,  clergjman,
b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  8  April.  1800 ;  d.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  26  Feb.,  1857.  After  graduation  at
Princeton  with  the  highest  honor  in  1819,  he
studied  Hebrew,  entered  the  general  theological
seminary  of  the  Episcopal  church,  then  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  and  was  admitted  to  holy  orders  in
Baltimore  in  1823.  He  was  an  assistant  minister
at  Trinity  church,  New  York  city,  from  1824  till
•1838,  when  he  travelled  in  Europe.  On  his  return
in  1839  he  resigned  his  charge  at  Trinity  church,
and  established  in  Flushing,  L.  I.,  a  school  for
girls,  which  he  called  St.  Ann's  hall,  and  which  he
removed  to  New  York  in  1846,  when  he  was  made
rector  of  the  Church  of  the  Crucifixion,  and  to
Brooklyn,  when  he  was  called  to  St.  Thomas's
church  in  1852,  which  charge  he  resigned  shortly
before  his  death.  He  delivered  many  lectures,  was
a  member  of  the  New  England  historic  genealogical
society,  active  in  public  charities,  and  rendered
much  service  durmg  the  cholera  epidemics  of
1832-'4.  Princeton  and  Yale  gave  him  the  degree
of  A.  M.  in  1823  and  Washington  (now  Trinity)
college  that  of  S.  T.  D.  in  1836.  He  edited  a  vol-
ume of  original  essays  and  dissertations  on  biblical
literature  by  a  society  of  clergymen,  to  which  he
contributed  treatises  translated  from  the  German,
on  "  The  Authenticity  and  Canonical  Authority  of
the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament "  and  the
"  Use  of  the  Syriac  Language."  Dr.  Schroeder
published  a  "  Discourse  before  the  New  York  His-
torical Society  "  (New  York,  1828) ;  "  A  Useful  Chart
of  the  Diocese  of  New  York  from  1830  to  1850 " ;
"  Memoir  of  Mrs.  Mary  Anna  Boardman  "  (New
Haven,  1849);  and  "Maxims  of  Washington"
(New  York,  1855);  and  several  other  books.  He
left  unfinished  "  The  Life  and  Times  of  Washing-
ton," which  was  completed  by  others  (1857-'61).

SCHUETTE,  Conrad  Herman  Louis,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Varrel,  Hanover,  Germany,  17  June,
1843.  He  was  graduated  at  Capitol  university,
Columbus,  Ohio,  in  1863,  and  at  the  theological
department  in  1865,  and  was  ordained  to  the  minis-
try in  the  latter  year.  He  was  pastor  at  Delaware,
Ohio,  in  1865-'72,  has  been  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  natural  science  in  Capitol  university
since  1872,  and  since  1881  also  professor  of  ethics,
symbolics,  and  homiletics  in  the  theological  depart-
ment. He  is  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  religious
press,  has  been  editor-in-chief  of  the  "Columbus
Theological  Magazine  "  since  1886,  and  has  pub-
lished "  The  Church  Member's  Manual "  (Colum-
bus, 1870),  and  "  The  State,  the  Church,  and  the
School "  (1883).

SCHULTZ,  John  Christian,  Canadian  senator,
b.  in  Amherstburg,  Ont.,  1  Jan.,  1840.  He  was
educated  at  Oberlin  college,  Ohio,  in  medicine  at
Queen's  university,  Kingston,  and  Victoria  uni-


versity, Cobourg,  and  was  graduated  as  a  physician
in  ]8(k).  The  same  year  he  went  to  the  northwest
and  practised  his  profession  at  Fort  Garry  (now
Winnipeg).  He  also  engaged  in  the  fur-tnule,
wrote  for  the  "  Nor' wester,"  and  studied  the
fauna,  flora,  soil,  and  climate  of  the  country.  Dr.
Schultz  was  leader  of  the  Canadian  party  at  the
time  of  the  first  Riel  rel)ellion  in  1869-70,  and  was
captured,  imprisoned,  and  sentenced  to  death  by
Louis  Riel.  After  suffering  great  hardships  he
escaped  and  reached  Duluth,  Minn.,  whence  he
made  his  way  to  Canada.  He  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  Northwest  council  in  December,
1872,  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament  in
March,  1871,  for  Lisgar,  Manitoba,  and  represented
that  constituency  till  the  general  election  of  1882,
when  he  was  defeated.  He  became  a  member  of
the  Canadian  senate,  22  Sept.,  1882.  Dr.  Schultz
is  a  member  of  the  Dominion  board  of  health  for
Manitoba  and  the  Northwest  territories,  is  presi-
dent of  the  Northwest  trading  company,  and  a
director  of  the  Manitoba  Southwestern  Coloniza-
tion railway.  He  was  actively  engaged  in  organ-
izing these  enterprises,  and  also  the  Great  north-
western telegraph  company  and  other  undertakings
of  a  similar  character.

8CHUREMAN,  James,  patriot,  b.  in  New  Jer-
sey in  1757;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  23  Jan.,
1824.  After  graduation  at  Queen's  (now  Rutgers)
college  in  1775,  he  served  in  the  Revolutionary
army  as  captain  of  a  volunteer  company,  partici-
pated in  the  battle  of  Long  Island,  and  during  the
war  was  captured  and  imprisoned  in  the  New  York
sugar-house,  where  he  suffered  many  hardships.
With  a  single  companion  he  escaped  and  joined
the  American  army  at  Morristown,  N.  J.  He  was
a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  from  New
Jersey  in  1786-'7,  and  was  elected  to  the  1st  con-
gress as  a  Federalist,  serving  from  4  March,  1789,
till  3  March,  1791,  and  again  to  the  5th  congress,
serving  from  15  May,  1797,  till  3  March,  1799.  He
was  then  chosen  L.  S.  senator  in  place  of  John
Rutherford,  serving  from  3  Dec,  1799,  till  6  Feb.,
1801,  when  he  resigned.  Subsequently  he  became
mayor  of  the  city  of  New  Brunswick,  and  was
again  elected  to  congress,  serving  from  24  May,
1813,  till  2  March,  1815.

SCHURMAN,  Jacob  Gonld,  Canadian  edu-
cator, b.  in  Freetown,  Prince  Edward  island,  22
May,  1854.  He  won  the  Gilchrist  Dominion
scholarship  in  1875,  and  was  graduated  in  London
university  in  1877.  He  was  professor  of  philosophy
and  English  literature  in  Acadia  college,  Nova
Scotia,  in  1880-'2,  and  in  Dalhousie  college,  Hali-^
fax,  in  1882-'6,  was  elected  honorary  life  governor
of  University  college,  London,  in  1884,  and  became
professor  of  philosophy  at  Cornell  university,
which  chair  he  now  (1888)  fills.  He  has  published
"  Kantian  Ethics  and  the  Ethics  of  Evolution  "
(London,  1881);  "The  Ethical  Import  of  Darwin-
ism" (New  York,  1887);  and  "A  People's  Uni-
versity," the  founder's  day  address  (Ithaca,  1888).
He  is  a  regular  contributor  to  the  "Archiv  fUr
Geschichte  der  Philosophic  "  in  Berlin.

SCHURZ,  Carl,  statesman,  b.  in  Liblar,  near
Cologne,  Prussia,  2  Mareh.  1829.  After  studying
at  the  gymnasium  of  Cologne,  he  entered  the  Uni-
versity of  Bonn  in  1846.  At  the  beginning  of  the
revolution  of 1848  he  joined  Gottfried Kinkel,

f)rofessor  of  rhetoric  in  the  university,  in  the  pub-
ication  of  a  liberal  newspaper,  of  which  he  was
at  one  time  the  sole  conductor.  In  the  spring  of
1849,  in  consequence  of  an  attempt  to  promote  an
insurrection  at  Bonn,  he  fled  witli  Kinkel  to  the
Palatinate,  entered  the  revolutionary  army  as  ad-


St^HURZ


SCHUYLER


429


jutAiit,  ami  took  jwirt  in  the  ilofenoe  of  Rastmlt.
On  the  surrender  of  that  fortress  he  escji|»e<l  to
Switzerlantl.  In  1«50  ho  returnwl  weretly  to  (Jer-
many,  an<l  effected  the  escajM;  of  Kiiikel  from  the

fortress  <if  Sfmndaii.
In  thesjirinpof  IMl
he  WHS  in  Paris,  a«'t-
inp  as  corresiMJiident
for(ieriiian  ji>iiniHls,
and  he  afterward
spent  a  year  in  tem-h-
ing  in  London.  He
came  to  the  United
States  in  18.52,  re-
sided three  years
in  Philadelphia,  and
then  settled  in  \Va-
tertown.  Wis.  In
the  presidential  can-
vass of  IHoO  he  de-
livered sjjeeches  in
German  in  behalf  of
the  Republican  par-
ty, and  in  the  follow-
ing year  ho  was  an
unsuccessful  candi-
date for  lieutenant-governor  of  Wisconsin.  I>uring
the  contest  between  Stephen  A.  Douglas  and  Abra-
ham Lincoln  for  the  office  of  U.  S.  senator  from  Illi-
nois in  1858  he  delivered  his  first  speech  in  the  FJng-
lish  language,  which  was  widely  published.  Soon
afterward  he  removed  to  Milwaukee  and  lx»gan  the
practice  of  law.  In  18r)J)-'(}0  he  made  a  lecture-
tour  in  New  England,  and  aroused  attention  by  a
speech  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  against  the  idejis  and

E)licy  of  Mr.  Douglas.  Ho  was  a  member  of  the
epublican  national  convention  of  1860,  and  spoke
bt)th  in  English  and  German  during  the  canvass.
President  Lincoln  appointed  him  minister  to  Spain,
but  he  resigned  in  December,  1861,  in  order  to  en-
ter the  army.  In  April,  1863,  ho  was  commissioned
brigmlier-general  of  volunteers,  and  on  17  June  he
took  command  of  a  division  in  the  corps  of  Gen.
Franz  Sigel,  with  which  he  participated  in  the  sec-
ond battle  of  Bull  Run.  He  was  made  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  14  March,  1863,  and  at  the  battle
of  Chancellors ville  commanded  a  division  of  Gen.
Oliver  O.  Howard's  corps.  He  had  temporary  com-
mand of  this  corps  at  Gettysburg,  and  subsequent-
ly took  fwirt  in  the  battle  of  Chattanooga.  Dur-
ing the  summer  of  1865  he  visited  the  southern
states,  as  special  commissioner,  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Johnson,  for  the  purpose  of  examining  their
condition.  In  the  winter  of  1865-'6  he  was  the
Washington  corresp)ndent  of  the  New  York
"  Tribune,"  and  in  the  summer  of  1860  he  removed
to  Detroit,  where  he  founded  the  "  Post."  In
1867  he  became  editor  of  the  "  Westliche  Post,"  a
German  newspaper  published  in  St.  Louis.  He  was
teni[x>rary  chairman  of  the  Republican  national
convention  in  Chicago  in  1868,  where  he  move<i  an
amendment  to  the  platform,  which  was  adoptetl,
recommending  a  general  amnesty.  In  January,
1865».  he  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  from  Missouri,
for  the  term  ending  in  1875.  He  opposed  some  of
the  chief  measures  of  President  Grant's  adminis-
tration, and  in  1872  took  an  active  part  in  the  or-
ganization «»f  the  Lil>eral  party,  presiding  over  the
convention  in  Cincinnati  that  nominated  Horace
Greeley  for  tho  presidency.  After  the  election  of
1872  he  t(M)k  an  active  part  in  the  debates  of  the
senate  in  favor  of  the  restoration  of  specie  |)ayments
and  against  the  continuation  of  military  interfer-
ence in  the  south.  He  adv(x:ated  the  election  of
Rutberfonl  H.  Hayes  in  the  presidential  canvass


of  1876,  and  in  1877  Presi«lent  Hayes  ap|)ointe<I
him  secretary  of  the  interior.  He  ititnMluceil  com-
jietitive  examinations  for  ap[Hjintments  in  the  in-
terior department,  effectwl  various  refonns  in  the
Indian  service,  and  a<l<>i»ted  systematic  measures
for  the  protection  of  the  forests  on  the  public
lands.  After  the  expiration  of  the  term  of  Pri'si-
dent  Hayes  he  liecame  edit<»r  of  the  "  Evening
Post"  iri  New  York  city,  giving  up  that  place  in
January,  1884.  In  the  presidential  canvass  of  that
year  he  was  one  of  the  lemlers  of  the  "  Itidepend-
ent"  movement,  advocating  the  election  of  Grover
Cleveland.  He  remained  an  active  meml)er  of  the
civil  service  reform  league.  Among  his  more  cele-
brafetl  speeches  are  "The  Irrepressible  Conflict"
(18.58):  "The  Doom  of  Slavery"  (1860);  "The
Abolititm  of  Slavery  as  a  War  Measure"  (1862);
and  "  Eulogy  on  Charles  Sumner"  (1874).  Of  his
speeches  in  the  senate,  those  on  the  reconstniction
measures,  against  tho  annexation  of  Santo  Domin-
go, and  on  the  currency  and  the  national  banking
sjrsteiu  attracted  mucli  attention.  He  has  pul>-
lished  a  volume  of  speeches  (Philadelphia,  1865)
and  a  "  Life  of  Henry  Clav  "  (Boston,  1887).

SCHUSSELE,  Christian,  artist,  b.  in  Gueb-
villers,  Alsace,  16  April,  1824  ;  d.  in  Merchant-
ville.  N.  J.,  20  Aug.,  1879.  He  studied  under
Adolphe  Yvon  and  Paul  Delaroche  in  1842-8,  and
then  came  to  the  United  States.  Here,  for  some
time,  he  worked  at  chromf>-litliography.  which  he
had  also  followed  in  France,  but  later  he  devoted
himself  almost  entirely  to  painting.  H  is  best-known
works  are  "Clear  tho  Track"  (1851);  "Franklin
before  the  Lords  in  Council"  (18.56);  "Men  of
Progress  "  (1857),  in  Cooper  institute,  New  York ;
"  Zeisberger  preaching  to  the  Indians  "  (1859) ;
"The  Iron-WWker  and  King  Solomon"  (1860);
"  Washington  at  Valley  Forge  "  (1862) ;  and  "  Homo
on  Furlough  "  and  "  McClellan  at  Antietam  "(1863).
Al)r»ut  18653  he  was  attacked  by  palsy  in  the  right
hand,  and  in  1865  he  went  abroad,  undergoing  se-
vere t  reatment ,  wit  h
no  apparent  l>enefit.
On  his  return,  in
1868,  he  was  elected
to  fill  the  chair,  then
founded,  of  drawing
and  painting  in  tho
Pennsylvania  acad-
emy, which  ho  held
untilhisdeath.  Dur-
ing this  period  he
Eroduced  "  Queen
Isthor  denouncing
Hainan."  owneil  by
the  academy  (1869),
and  "The  Alsatian
Fair"  (1870).  Most
of  the  paintingsthat

have  l)een  named  became  widely  known  through  the
large  prints  bv  John  Sartain  and  other  engravers.
SCIirYLER,  Peter,  first  mavor  of  All>anv,  b.
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  17  Sept..  1657  ;'d.  there.  19  ^eb.,
1724.  He  was  the  second  sf>n  of  Philip  Schuyler,
the  first  of  the  family,  who  emigrattnl  fn>in  Am-
sterdam, and,  settling  in  AUwiiiy,  UK-ame  a  well-
known  merchant  in  that  t<»wn.  The  father  was
ambitious  to  U^come  a  landed  proprietor,  and  at
his  death  in  16KI  held  projx'rty  not  onlv  in  Al-
l)any.  but  in  New  York  city  and  ahtng  the  Hudson.
In  i(MJ7  he  was  made  captain  of  a  company  of  Al-
l)any  militia,  and  wjis  conspicuous  througfiout  his
life  for  his  friendship  with  the  Indians.  Peter  be-
gan his  public  career  in  March,  1685,  bv  receiving
an  appointment  as  lieutenant  in  the  militia  of  Al-


C.  yLA-ct^^^t^^.


430


SCHUYLER


SCHUYLER


bany,  from  which  ho  rose  to  the  rank  of  colonel,
the  highest  gnwle  conceded  to  a  native  of  New
York.  He  also  received  during  the  same  year  the
office  of  ju«lge  of  the  court  of  oyer  and  terminer,
and  in  October,  1(J85,  was  made  a  justice  of  the
peace.  On  22  July,  1688,  Albany  was  incorporated
as  a  city,  and  Peter  Schuyler  l)ecame  its  first
mayor.  He  was  also  chairman  of  the  board  of
commissioners  for  Indian  affairs,  and  knew  how
to  deal  with  the  savages  better  than  any  man  of  his
time.  During  the  difficulties  between  the  French
and  English  on  the  northern  boundary  he  con-
ducted all  negotiations  with  the  Five  Nations  and
other  Indians.  In  1691  he  had  command  of  the
army  that  was  sent  against  the  French  and  In-
dians, and  defeated  the  invading  force  from  Cana-
da. He  was  made  a  member  of  the  council  in  1692,
and  used  every  effort  to  relieve  the  sufferings  of
the  settlers  on  the  frontiers,  who  were  exposed  to
the  ravages  of  the  Indians.  In  the  expedition
against  Montreal  in  1709  he  was  second  in  com-
mand, and  led  one  of  the  New  York  regiments,
but,  from  lack  of  supplies  and  pronor  support,  the
French  were  allowed  to  retreat,  ana  the  expedition
proved  a  failure.  The  Five  Nations  were  waver-
ing in  their  allegiance,  looking  upon  the  French  as
formidable  enemies  and  the  English  as  incompe-
tent protectors,  and  accordingly  an  appeal  was
made  to  England  for  means  to  conquer  Canada.
Col.  Schuyler,  accompanied  by  five  chiefs,  sailed
for  England  in  Deceml>er,  1709.  and  was  absent  for
seven  months.  Queen  Anne  offered  to  confer  on
him  tlie  order  of  knighthood,  but  he  declined,  al-
though he  accepted  a  gold  snuff-box  and  some
pieces  of  silver  plate  as  well  as  a  diamond  brooch
and  ear-rings  for  his  wife.  In  July,  1719,  he  be-
came president  of  the  council,  acting  as  governor
until  the  arrival  of  Peter  Burnet  in  September,
1720.  He  continued  active  in  the  affairs  of  the
colony  thereafter  until  his  death. — His  nephew,
Peter,  soldier,  b.  probably  near  Newark,  N.  J  ,  in
1710;  d.  at  Peterborough,  his  farm  (now  Newark,
N.  J.),  7  March,  1762,  was  left  an  ample  estate  by
his  father.  Arent,  and,  becoming  interested  in  mili-
tary affairs,  qualified  himself  to  assume  command
of  troops  should  the  necessity  occur.  When  it  was
determined  to  invade  Canada,  he  was  authorized
to  recruit  men  in  New  Jersey,  and  was  commis-
sioned colonel  on  7  Sefit.,  1746,  commanding  a  regi-
ment that  became  known  as  the  "Jersey  Blues."
He  arrived  in  Albany  early  in  September,  and,  al-
though the  expedition  was  abandoned,  he  was  as-
signed to  Fort  Clinton,  in  Saratoga,  which  he  held
until  1747,  when  lack  of  provisions  compelled  its
abandonment.  The  peace  of  Aix  la  Chapelle  in
1748  terminated  the  war,  and  he  returned  to  his
home  in  New  Jersey.  In  1754  the  war  was  again
renewed,  and,  taking  the  field  at  the  head  of  his
regiment,  he  was  stationed  at  Oswego,  where,  in
1756,  he  and  one  half  of  his  regiment  were  cap-
tured by  Gen.  Montcalm.  He  was  taken  to  Mon-
treal and  then  to  Quebec,  where  he  remained  until
October,  1757,  when  he  was  released  on  parole.
While  a  prisoner,  he  spent  his  money  liberally  in
caring  for  his  fellow-captives,  buying  the  freedom
of  the  Indians,  and  providing  food  for  his  country-
men at  his  own  residence,  also  supplying  them
with  clothing.  He  was  received  with  great  enthu-
siasm on  his  return  home.  During  the  campaign
of  1759  he  served  with  his  regiment  under  Gen.
Jeffrey  Amherst,  and  participated  in  the  events
that  closed  with  the  conquest  of  Canada.  At  the
end  of  the  campaign  he  settled  on  his  esUite,  but
died  a  few  years  later. — Aaron,  a  descendant  of
Arent,  the  first  Peter's  brother,  educator,  b.  in  Sen-


eca county,  N.  Y.,  7  Feb.,  1828,  was  educated  at
Seneca  academy,  Ohio,  of  which  he  was  principal
from  1851  till  1862,  and  from  the  latter  year  until
1875  he  was  professor  of  mathematics  in  Jialdwin
university,  Ohio.  From  1875  till  1885  he  was
president  of  that  university,  and  he  is  now  (1883)
vice-president  and  professor  of  mathematics  and
astronomy  in  Kansas  Wesleyan  university,  .Salina,
Kan.  He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Ohio
Weslevan  university  in  1860,  and  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Otterbein  univei-sity  in  1875.  He  has  pub-
lished "Higher  Arithmetic"  (New  York,  1860);
"  Principles  of  Logic  "  (Cincinnati,  1869) ;  "  Com-
plete Algebra"  (1870);  "Surveving  and  Naviga^
tion"  (187a);  "Elements  of  Geometry"  (1876);
"Empirical  and  Rational  Psychology  "(1882);  and
has  written  "A  Treatise  on  Analytic  Geometry."
— Montg^oniery,  a  descendant  of  Arent,  the  first
Peter's  brother,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York  city,
9  Jan.,  1814,  entered  Geneva  (now  Hobart)  col-
lege in  1830,  and,  leaving  at  the  end  of  his  junior
year,  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1834.  He  then
studied  law,  and,  after  four  years  of  mercantile
life,  entered  the  ministry  of  tne  Protestant  Epis-
copal church.  He  became  rector  of  Trinity  church
in  Marshall,  Mich.,  in  June,  1841,  and  remained
until  1844,  when  he  was  called  to  Grace  church
in  Lyons,  N.  Y.  In  1845  he  took  charge  of  St.
John's  church  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  but  he  resigned
in  1854  to  accept  the  rectorship  of  Christ  church
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  where  he  has  since  remained.
The  degree,  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Ho-
bart in  1856.  He  has  been  president  of  the  stand-
ing committee  of  the  diocese  of  Missouri  since
1858.  and  frequently  a  delegate  to  the  general  con-
vention of  his  church,  besides  being  president  of
the  diocesan  conventions  that  elected  the  second
and  third  bishops  of  Missouri.  In  addition  to
many  sermons,  he  has  published  "  The  Church,  its
Ministry  and  Worship"  (Buffalo,  1853);  "The
Pioneer  Church  "  (Boston,  1867) ;  and  "  Historical
Discourse  of  Christ  Church,  St.  Louis  "  (St.  Louis,
1870). — Montgomery's  son,  Louis  Sandford,  cler-

fvman,  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  12  March,  1852 ;  d.  in
temphis,  Tenn.,  17  Sept.,  1878,  was  graduated  at
Hobart  in  1871,  and  entered  the  ministry  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1874-'6.  Soon  af-
terward he  joined  the  brotherhood  of  the  order  of
St.  John  the  Evangelist,  under  whose  direction  he
continued  his  ministry.  He  volunteered  to  go  to
Memphis,  Tenn.,  during  the  yellow-fever  epidemic
in  1878,  and  there  fell  a  victim  to  the  disease.  Ser-
vices in  his  memory  were  held  in  the  churches
throughout  the  United  States.  See  "  A  Memorial
of  Louis  Sandford  Schuyler,  Priest "  (New  York,-
1879). — Montgomery's  cousin,  Anthony,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y..  8  July,  1816,  was  graduated
at  Geneva  (now  Hobart)  college  in  1835.  after  which
he  studied  law  in  Ithaca,  where  he  practised  for
ten  years.  He  then  studied  for  the  ministry  and
was  ordained  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church
in  1850.  Two  years  later  he  was  chosen  rector  of
Christ  church  in  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  where  he  con-
tinued until  1862,  when  he  was  called  to  Christ
church  in  Rochester.  In  1868  he  accepted  charge
of  Grace  church  in  Orapge.  N.  J.,  where  he  has
since  remained.  He  has  been  chairman  of  the
standing  committee  on  the  constitution  and  canons
since  the  foundation  of  the  diocese  of  northern
New  Jersey  (now  Newark),  and  has  represented
that  diocese  in  the  general  conventions  of  his
church.  The  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  was  conferred  on
him  by  Hobart  in  1859,  and  he  has  published  ser-
mons and  addresses,  including  a  series  of  sermons
on  "Household Religion"  (New  York, 1887).—


SCHUYLKR


ScnUYLEE


431


Anthony's  mn,  Montgomery,  journnli«t,  h.  in
Ithaca,  yj.  v.,  19  Auk'..  1H4;J,  «>nt.'nMl  Mohart  col-
lege in  1^58,  hilt  was  >u»t  KriMl""'***'-  ''**  '•*'"
camo  c'onnoolwl  with  the  N«w  York  "  World  "in
1865,  anil  n-nmini'd  with  this  journal  until  1H8JJ,
whon  he  jointsl  tho  iMlitoriul  stnfT  of  the  New  York
"Timi»s."  Mr,  SfhuvU-r  has  jjiven  s|H>oial  ntuily
to  an-hitivt un\  ami  has  puhlished  critical  pafters
on  that  art  in  "Scribncr's  Mapizinc,"  "  HariRT's
Majfttziiif."  "  Tho  American  Architect,"  and  simi-
lar iM«ri(Hlical»,  as  well  as  (K-casional  p<.)ems.  In
conjunction  with  William  C.  Conant.  he  issued
"The  Un.oklyn  Hri.ljre "  (Xew  York,  IHHJi). —
George  WnMhinrton,  i;reat-gnindson  of  the  first
Peters  l»mther,  Philif).  state  official,  h.  in  Still-
water, N.  Y.,  2  Feb..  IHIO;  d.  in  Ithiwa,  N.  Y.,  1
Feb.,  1888,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  the
city  of  New  York  in  18J37,  and  at  first  studieil  the-
ology, but  then  engaged  in  business  in  Ithaca,  N.  Y.
In  i8(iJi-'5  he  was  treasurer  of  the  state,  after
which,  on  3  Jan.,  1866,  he  was  appointed  superin-
tendent of  the  iMinking  department  of  New  York,
and  serviMl  until  February,  1870.  He  was  elected
to  the  assembly  in  1875,  was  chairman  of  its  com-
mittee on  banks  and  Imnking,  and  during  his
meml)ei*ship  obtained  the  passage  of  the  general
sayinp-bank  law,  and  of  a  law  for  the  protection
of  railway  employes.  From  1  .Ian.,  1876,  till  May,
1880,  he  was  auditor  of  the  canal  de[)artment,  and
he  was  the  first  to  propose  making  the  canals  free
waterways  by  the  abolition  of  tolls,  which  was  sub-
sequently effected  by  constitutional  amendment.
Mr.  Schuyler  was  a  trustee  of  Cornell  university
from  its  foundation,  and  its  treasurer  in  1868-'74.
He  was  the  author  of  "  Colonial  New  York :  Philip
Schuyler  and  his  Family"  (2  vols.,  New  York,
1885)!— George  Washington's  son,  En^ene,  diplo-
matist, b.  in  Ithaca,  N.  Y..  26  Feb.,  1840 ;  d.  in
Cairo,  Egypt,  18  July,  18SK),  was  graduated  at  Yale
and  at  Columbia  law-school,  after  which  he  prac-
tised law,  and  devoted  his  leisure  to  literary  pur-
suits. He  entered  the  diplomatic  service  of  the
Uniteil  States  in  1866,  ami  was  consul  at  Moscow
in  1867-0,  and  at  Reval  in  186J)-'70,  and  secnMary
of  legation  at  St.  Petersburg  in  1870-'6.  While
holding  the  last  place  he  wa.s  on  seveml  occasions
acting  charge  d  affaires,  and  in  1873,  during  a
leave  of  al>sence.  made  a  journey  of  eight  months
through  Russian  Turkestan.  Khokan,aiul  Bokhara.
He  Infame  secrt'tary  of  legation  and  consul-gen-
eral in  Constantinople  in  1876,  during  the  summer
of  that  year  was  sent  to  investigate  the  Turkish
massacres  m  Bulgaria,  and  made  an  extended
rejHirt  to  his  government,  which  did  much  to  in-
fluence the  subseouent  history  of  that  part  of
Turkey.  In  1878  he  was  sent  to  Birmingliam  as
consul",  and  a  year  later  he  was  transferred  to
Rome  as  consul-general,  after  which,  in  1880.  he
iK-came  cliarge  <l'aCfaires  and  consul-general  in
Bucharest,  and  in  1881  was  authorized  by  the
Unite<l  States  to  conclude  and  sign  commercial  and
consular  treatit«  with  Ri^mmaniaaiid  Si'rvia.  From
\HS2  till  1S84  he  was  minister  resident  and  consul-
geneml  to  (Jreece.  Servia.  and  Rouinania,  and  he
then  returned  to  the  Cnited  States,  where  he  re-
.suMied  his  litei-ary  work,  and  also  lectured.  He
was  elected  a  corn»si»onding  member  of  the  Rou-
manian academy,  and  als«i  to  the  London,  Russian.
Italian,  and  Ameriwin  geographical  societies,  and
decorations  were  presented  to  him  by  the  govern-
ments of  Russia,  Greece,  Rouinania,  Servia.  and
Bulgaria.  The  degi-ee  of  LL.  I),  was  conferral  on
him  by  Williams  in  18S2,  and  by  Yale  in  1885.
In  addition  to  contributions  to  magazine^  and  re-
views m  the  United  States  and  Kngland,  he  edited


John  A.  Porter's  ••Selwlions  from  the  Kalevala"
(New  York,  1867);  tnuiHlated  Ivan  TurgeniefTs
"Fathers  and  .S>ns"  (I8«}7);  and  Le<»  ToNtoi's
"The  Cossacks,  a  tale  of  the  Caucasus"  (1878;;  and
was  the  author  of  "Turkestan:  Notes  of  a  Jour-
ney in  Russian  Turkestan,  Khokand,  liokhara,  and
Kuldja"  (1876);  "Peter  the  Great,  Kiniieror  of
Russia"  (2  vols..  1884);  and  "American  Diploma-
cy and  the  Furtherance  of  Commerce"  (1886).

8CHUYLER.  Philip  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  22  Nov.,  \T.i:^;  d.  there,  18  Nov.,  1804.
He  was  the  second  son  of  John,  nephew  of  Peter.
He  stutlied  at  scho<ils  in  Albany,  an<l  rweived  his
higher  education  in  New  R«H'helIe,  N.  Y.,  where
he  was  placeil  under  the  can-  of  a  Huguenot
minister.  In  1755,  at  the  opening  of  the  last
French  and  In-
dian war. he

was  authorized
by  James  De
Ijancey,  acting
governor  of  the
province,  to  re-
cruit a  company
for  the  army,
and  he  was  com-
missioned its
captain  on  14
June,  1755.  His
company  served
under  General
Phineas  Ly-
man, and  t(x)k
part  in  the  Ijat-
tle  of  Lake
George  on  8
Sept.,  1755.
Senuyler  spent
theensuingwin-
terat  Fort  Edward,  and  in  the  spring  of  1756  accom-
panied Col.  John  Bradstreet  to  Oswego  as  commis-
sary. In  an  attack  that  was  mtulc  on  the  colonial
force  on  their  return  by  a  suiK'rior  numl»er,  he
showed  unusual  ability  and  military  skill.  The  in-
capacity of  the  British  generals  and  apparent  in-
difference of  the  authorities  in  London  led  to  his
resigning  from  the  army  in  1757,  but  he  was  fre-
quently consulted  in  an  advisory  capacity  and  at
times  in  providing  supplies  for  the  army.  In
the  spring  of  1758,  at  tne  earnest  solicitation  of
Bradstreet,  he  joined  the  army  again  as  his  deputy
commissary,  with  the  rank  of  major,  and  .served
until  the  close  of  the  campaign.  Much  imi>ortant
business  w^as  transacted  directly  by  him,  owing  to
Bradstreet's  feeble  health,  and  in  1761  he  went  to
England,  as  the  latter's  agent,  to  settle  accounts
witn  the  home  government.  After  the  jK>ace  of
176ij  he  turned  to  the  management  of  his  private
business.  His  proiKTty  was  large,  and  his  estate  in
Saratoga  was  rich  in  timber,  which  he  transported
down  the  Hudson  on  his  own  vessels  to  New  York.
He  also  built  a  flax-mill,  the  first  of  its  kind  in  the
country,  for  which  he  received  a  meilal  from  the
StK'iety  ff»r  pnnnoting  arts.  In  17(»4  he  was  ajn
|K)inted  by  the  general  assembly  of  New  York  a
commissioner  to  manage  the  controversy  on  the
part  of  his  province  ivsjK'cting  the  lK>undary-line
oetween  that  colony  and  Massachusetts  Imy,  and
later  he  was  concerned  in  the  s«'ttlement  of  the
similar  difliculty  U'tween  New  York  and  the  New
Hampshire  grants.  He  was  ap|M)inted  colonel  of
a  new  regiment  of  militia  in  the  territory  lying
north  of  Albany,  and  in  1768  was  chosen  to  rtM)re-
sent  .-Mliany  in  the  colonial  ass«'mbly.  He  auvo-
cated  the  bold  measures  of  the  times  in  sup|x>rt  of


432


SCHUYLER


SCHUYLER


the  rights  of  the  colonists  in  spite  of  the  majority,
and  came  to  lie  the  acknowledged  lejvder  of  tlie
opposition.  He  inspired  hoi)e  and  courage  among
his  constituents,  and  it  was  on  his  nomination  in
1770  that  Edmund  Burke  became  agent  in  Eng-
land for  the  colony  of  New  York.  lie  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Continental  congress  that  convened  in
Philadelphia  in  May,  1775,  by  which  he  was  placed
on  a  committee  with  George  Washington  to  draw
up  rules  and  regulations  for  the  army.  On  the
ri'commendation  of  the  Provincial  congress  of  New
York  he  was  apjwinted  on  19  June  one  of  the  four
major-generals  that  were  named  by  congress.

He  accompanied  Washington  from  Philadel-
phia, and  was  assigned  by  him  to  the  command
of  the  northern  department  of  New  York.  Pro-
ceeding to  Albany,  he  at  once  engaged  in  the  diffi-
cult task  of  organizing  an  army  for  the  invasion  of
Canada.  Troops  were  collected,  but  lack  of  arms,
ammunition,  and  pay  delayed  any  movement.
There  w>is  also  considerable  ill  feeling  between  the
commanders  of  the  colonial  forces  as  to  qu&stions
of  relative  rank,  particularly  at  first  between  Ethan
Allen  and  Benedict  Arnold.  In  August  he  went
to  Ticonderoga  with  the  oViject  of  placing  that  fort
and  Crown  Point  in  a  state  of  defence.  Subse-
quently the  failure  of  Schuyler's  health  led  to
his  transferring  the  command  to  Gen.  Richard
Montgomery.  lie  then  returned  to  Albany,  where
he  continued  his  exertions  in  raising  troops  and
forwarding  supplies  to  the  army.  After  the  death
of  Montgomery  he  made  every  effort  to  re-enforce
the  American  army.  Early  in  1776  he  directed  an
expedition  to  Johnstown,  where  he  seized  the  mili-
tary stores  that  had  been  collected  by  Sir  John
Johnson.  Jealousy  existed  among  the  officers  at
the  front,  and  the  New  England  contingent,  es-
pecially, was  dissatisfied  with  its  leader,  in  conse-
quence of  which  Gen.  John  Thomas  was  directed
by  congress  to  take  command  of  the  army  in  the
field,  while  Schuyler  wjis  continued  in  Albany  ex-
ercising the  general  direction  of  affairs,  and  espe-
cially the  duties  of  quartermaster-general  and  com-
missary-general. During  the  early  part  of  1776  he
was  kept  continually  busy  by  the  movements  of
Sir  John  Johnson  and  other  'Tories  in  the  Mohawk
valley,  and  ho  was  also  considerably  embarrassed
by  complaints  that  were  sent  by  his  enemies  to
Gen.  Washington  and  congress.  Schuyler's  per-
fect knowledge  of  the  situation,  the  topography
of  the  country,  and  the  available  supplies,  led  him
to  doubt  the  expediency  of  continuing  the  Ameri-
can forces  in  Canada;  but,  in  opposition  to  his  rec-
ommendation, congress  persisted  in  its  action,  and
the  weak  army  under  Thomas,  suffering  with  small-
pox, oppressed  with  want,  and  lacking  in  discipline,
was  kept  on  the  frontier.  Meanwhile  a  strong  Brit-
ish force,  under  Gen.  John  Burgoyne,  had  arrived
in  Canada,  and  the  American  army  had  fallen  back
on  Crown  Point  greatly  reduced  in  numbers.  In
May,  Gen.  Horatio  Gates  was  ordered  to  the  com-
mand of  the  army  in  Canada,  which  had  been  made
vacant  by  the  death  from  small-pox  of  Gen.  Thom-
as. On  reaching  Albany,  Ijelieving  himself  in  com-
mand of  the  department,  he  issued  orders  that  con-
flicted with  those  of  Schuyler,  in  consequence  of
which  the  latter  agreed  to  co-operate  with  him,
and  meanwhile  submitted  the  question  of  prece-
dence to  congress,  through  Gen.  Washington.  That
body  recommended  that  the  officers  act  in  harmony
wltii  each  other.  Scrhuvler  occupied  himself  at  this
time  in  negotiations  with  the  Six  Nations,  in  virtue
of  his  office  of  Indian  commissioner,  and  in  fit-
ting out  a  fleet  for  operations  on  Lake  Champlain.
Gates  was  not  satisfied  with  the  action  of  congress,


and  began  to  intrigue  for  the  removal  of  Schuyler,
who,  on  14  Sept.,  1776,  formally  offered  his  resigna-
tion, but  congress  declared  that  it  could  not  dis-
{ tense  with  his  service,  and  its  president,  John
lancock,  requested  him  to  continue  in  command.
Great  credit  is  due  to  Stihuyler  for  conducting
the  affairs  of  this  department  under  peculiarly
adverse  conditions;  and  the  proffer  of  his  resigna-
tion was  the  result  of  persistent  neglect  on  the  part
of  congress  to  take  action  on  his  ap[)eals  for  sup-

Slies  and  men,  as  well  as  their  habit  of  conferring
irectly  with  Gates,  who  openly  use<l  his  influence
among  the  New  England  delegates  to  have  him-
self confirmed  as  commanding  general.  In  spite
of  chronic  illness,  Schuyler  acquiesced  in  the  ac-
tion of  congress,  and  co.ntinued  in  his  efforts  to  aid
Gates  and  in  preparing  defences  to  meet  Burgoyne,
whose  invasion  was  confidently  expected.  Early
in  1777  he  was  chosen  to  renresent  New  York  in
the  Continental  congress,  anu  was  appointed  chief
of  the  military  in  the  state  of  Pennsylvania.  He
then  made  his  appeal  to  congress  concerning  let-
ters of  censure  tliat  had  been  sent  to  him  from
that  body,  and  so  thoroughly  vindicated  himself
that  he  was  directed  to  proceed  to  the  Northern
department  and  take  command  there.  Closing
his  official  work  in  Pennsylvania,  where  he  had
rendered  excellent  service  in  organizing  the  mili-
tia. Schuyler  returned  to  Albany  early  in  June,
and  proceeded  with  his  preparations  for  an  attack
from  Canada.  The  advance  of  Burgoyne  forced
the  American  army  to  retreat  until  Ticonderoga
was  evacuated  by  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair  on  4  July,
his  force  being  wholly  inadequate  to  its  defence,
and  other  retrograde  movements  followed.  The
great  victory  at  Bennington,  however,  had  been  won
before  19  Aug.,  when  Gates  took  command  of  the
army  in  virtue  of  a  resolution  passed  by  congress
on  1  Aug.  When  this  action  was  taken  Gates  had
been  for  some  time  absent  from  the  army  in  Phila-
delphia, using  his  influence  to  injure  Schuyler,
whom  he  charged  with  neglect  of  duty  in  permit-
ting the  evacuation  of  Fort  Ticonderoga.  The  se-
lection of  Gates  to  the  command  was  made  by  con-
gress after  Washington  had  declined  to  act.  A
committee  of  investigation  was  authorized  by  con-
gress, and  in  October,  1778.  a  court-martial  was
convened,  which  declared  itself  unanimously  of
opinion  tliat  Schuyler  was  "  not  guilty  of  any  neg-
lect of  duty,"  and  acquitted  him  "  with  the  highest
honor,"  which  proceeding  congress  tardily  con-
firmed several  months  later.  Schuyler  continued
with  the  army  in  a  private  capacity  until  the  sur-
render of  Burgoyne.  He  nnally  succeeded  in
effecting  his  resignation  on  19  April,  1779.

Before  his  vindication  by  the  court-martial  he
was  chosen,  in  October,  1778,  by  the  New  York
legislature  a  representative  in  congress;  but  he
refused  to  take  his  seat  until  the  sentence  had  been
confirmed,  after  which  he  was  a  member  of  con-

fress  until  1781.  Meanwhile  he  continued  to  act  as
ndian  commissioner,  holding  councils  and  making
treaties  with  the  different  tribes  of  the  Six  Nations.
Although  unwilling  to  enter  active  military  ser-
vice again,  he  was  appointed  in  1779  to  confer  with
Washington  on  the  state  of  the  Southern  depart-
ment, and  divided  his  time  thenceforth  until  the
close  of  the  war  between  congress  and  Washington's
headquarters,  where  he  became  one  of  the  most  trust-
ed counsellors  of  the  commander-in-chief.  In  1780
he  was  elected  state  senator  from  the  western  dis-
trict of  New  York,  and  he  served  until  1784,  again
from  1786  till  1790,  and  finally  from  1792  till  1797.
Throughout  his  political  life  he  was  a  Federalist,
and  with  Alexander  Hamilton  and  John  Jav  shared


SCHUYLER


SCIIWATKA


438


tho  leadership  of  that  p&rtr.  II U  influence  was
strongly  exerti'd  in  favor  o^  the  formation  of  the
Union,  and  during  tho  administrations  of  Wash-
ington his  |M)Wt'r  was  very  groat.  Not  only  was  hn
chairman  of  tho  iMtard  of  commissionors  for  Indian
Affairs,  Ixit  in  1782  ho  was  made  siirveyor-gonoral
of  the  state,  and  also  a  memltor  of  tho  counoil  of
appointment  of  New  York.  In  DecomU'r.  178H.  he
and  Kiifus  King  were  ehown  the  first  senators  of
New  York,  and  lie  held  that  ofllce  froni  4  March,
1789,  till  8  March,  17U1.  Again,  sucw-eiling  Aaron
Burr,  ho  flllo»l  the  same  olTlce  from  lH  May,  1797,
till  3  Jan..  175»H.  when  a  severe  attjR-k  of  the
gout,  from  which  ho  had  been  a  life-long  sufferer,
compelletl  his  resignation.  For  Schuyler  mav  Ijo
claimed  the  paternity  of  the  canal  system  of  S'ew
York.  As  early  as  i776  he  made  a  calculation  of
the  actual  cost  of  a  canal  that  should  connect  Hud-
son river  with  Lake  Chamfilain.  Imtcr  he  was  a
strong  a<lvocate  of  the  building  of  the  canal  be-
tween tho  Ilutlson  and  Ijake  Erie.  He  was  one  of
the  principal  contributors  to  the  code  of  laws  that
was  adopted  by  the  state  of  New  York,  and  in  1784
was  one  of  the  sul>scribers  to  the  funds  for  the
building  of  Union  college.  His  residence  in  Al-
bany (shown  in  the  illustration)  for  more  than  forty
veafs  was  distinguished  by  its  generous  hospitality.
*rhere  liaron  Dieskau  became  convalescent  after
his  capture,  and  there  the  remains  of  Lord  Howe
were  conveyed  after  his  untimely  death  at  Ticon-
deroga. During  the  lievolutionary  war  the  con-

fressional commissioners to Canada — Benjamin
ranklin,  Samuel  Chase,  and  ('harles  Carroll — were
«ntertained  at  this  residence  in  April,  177G. Later,


0«n.  Burgorne  and  his  suite  made  it  their  home
while  in  Albany,  and  Lafayette  was  among  tlie
host  of  guests  that  partook  of  its  hospitality.  Gen.
Schuyler  was  buried  with  military  nonors  in  the
vault  of  Gen.  Abraham  Ten  Broeck,  but  finally  his
remains  wore  deposited  in  the  Albany  Rural  ceme-
tery, whore,  in  1871,  a  Doric  column  of  Quincy
CTanite,  thirty-six  feet  in  height,  was  erected  to
his  memory.  See  "The  Life  and  Times  of  Philip
Schuyler,"  by  Benson  J.  Lossing  (2  vols.,  New  York,
1860-'2;  enlarged  ed.,  18?2).— His  wife,  Cathe-
rine Tan  Rensselaer,  d.  in  Alliany.  7  March,
1803,  was  the  daughter  of  John  Van  Rensselaef,
the  great-grandson  of  Killian,  the  first  patrooh
of  Rcnsselacrwyck,  and  married  Gen.  Schuyler  on
17  Se|)t.,  nM.  She  was  the  mother  of  eleven
childr«Mi,  of  whom  Elizabeth  married  Alexander
Hamilton  ;  and  Margarita,  Stephen  Van  Rcnssohior,
the juitroon. — Philip's  grandson,  (jeorge  Lee,  b.
in  RhineUfk.  N.  Y„  9  June,  1811,  settled  in  New
York  city  and  married  successively  two  grand-
daughters of  Alexander  Hamilton.  Mr.  Schuyler
has  l)i>en  active  in  yachting  matters,  and  in  1882
the  "America's"  cup  was  returne<l  to  him,  as  its
aole  8ur>'iying  donor,  by  the  New  York  yacht  club.
He  at  once  prepared  a  new  deed  of  gift,  gave
TOL.  v.— 28


it  back  to  tho  club,  to  tx!  held  as  a  challenge*
cup,  and  in  1887  was  refon*  in  the  race  U'tween
tho  "  Thistle  "  and  "  Volunteer."  Mr.  .Schuyler  baa
taken  inton>st  in  gathering  memorials  of  his  an-
cestors, and  has  publishoil  "  ('i>rrospondenc(>  and
Remarks  u[>on  Bancroft's  'History  of  the  North-
em  Campaign  in  1877,'  and  the  Character  of  Major-
General  Philij)  S<huvler*'  (New  York,  1867).

SCHWARTZ,  Jacob,  librarian,  b.  in  New  York
city,  13  March,  184«.  In  18<W  he  entered  the  Ap-
prentices* library  of  New  York,  of  which  he  lK>came
chief  librarian  in  1871.  He  has  introductn]  in  the
institution  his  system  of  classification,  which  has
since  been  a<l<»pU*d  wholly  or  in  j>art  by  various
librarians.  This  system  is  a  cr>nibination  of  the
thriH?  fundamental  systems — the  classified,  the  al-
phal)etical,  and  the  numerical.  The  method  of
management  that  is  followed  there  was  also  de-
vised by  him.  Mr.  Schwartz  has  contributed  to
tho  "  Library  Journal  "  and  other  f)eri<Klical8.

SCHWAtKA,  Frederick,  exjjorer,  b.  in  Ga-
lena. III.,  29  Sept.,  1849.  After  graduation  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1871  he  was  ar>]>ointed
2d  lieutenant  in  the  3d  cavalry,  and  servetl  on  gar-
rison and  frontier  duty  until  1877.  He  also  stud-
ied law  and  medicine,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  Nebraska  in  1875,  and  received  his  medical  de-
gree at  Bellevue  hospital  meilical  college.  New
York,  in  1876.  On  hearing  the  storj*  of  Capt.  Thom-
as F.  Barry,  who,  while  on  a  whaling  exjx'dition  in
Repulse  l»ay  in  1871-'3,  was  visited  by  Es<|uimaux
who  described  strangers  that  had  travelled  through
that  region  several  years  before,  and  who  had  buried
papers  in  a  cavern,  where  silver  spoons  and  other
relics  had  been  found,  Lieut.  Sc-hwatka  determined
to  search  for  traces  of  Sir  John  Franklin's  party,
and,  obtaining  leave  of  al)sence.  fitted  out  an  expe-
dition. On  19  June,  1878,  accompanied  by  Will-
iam H.  Gilder  (q.  v.)  as  second  in  command,  he
sailed  in  the  "  P^othen  "  for  King  William's  I^nd.
The  party  returned  on  22  Sept.,  1880.  having  dis-
coveretl  and  buried  many  of  the  skeletons  of  Sir
John  Franklin's  iiarty.  and  removed  much  of  the
mystery  of  its  fate.  Lieut.  Schwatka  found  the
grave  of  Lieut.  John  Irving, 3d  officer  of  the  "Ter-
ror," and,  in  addition  to  many  interesting  relics,  a
paper  which  was  a  copy  of  the  Crozier  record  that
was  found  in  1859  by  Lieut.  William  R.  Holjson,  of
Sir  Leopold  McClintock's  expedition,  and  which
contained  two  records,  the  latter,  under  date  of  25
April,  1848,  stating  the  death  of  Sir  John  Frank-
lin on  7  June,  \S47.  This  expedition  was  also
Blarked  by  the  longest  sledge-journey  on  record —
3,251  statute  miles,  during  which  a  branch  of  Back's
river  was  discovered,  which  Lieut.  Schwatka  named
for  President  Hayes.  Afterward  he  exploreil  the
course  of  the  Yukon  river  in  Alaska,  and  rejoined
his  regiment  in  July,  1884.  In  August  of  that
year  he  resigned  the  commission  of  1st  lieutenant,
3d  cavalry,  to  which  he  had  l)een  appointed  in
Marc-h,  1^79.  He  commanded  the  New  York
"Times"  Al&skan  exploring  ex|>e<lition  of  1886.
Lieut.  Schwatka  has  received  the  Roquette  Arctic
medal  from  the  Geographical  s«K-ioty  of  Paris,  and
a  medal  from  the  ImiM'rial  geographical  society  of
Russia,  and  is  an  honorary  meml»er  of  tho  Geo-

fraphical  societies  of  Bremen,  Geneva,  and  Rome,
le  is  the  author  of  "  Along  Alaska's  Great  River  "
(New  York.  1885) ;  "  Nimrod  in  the  North  "  (1885);
and  "The  Children  of  the  Cold"  (1886).  See
"Schwatka's  Search,"  by  Col.  William  II.  Gilder
(New  York.  1881):  "The  Franklin  Search  under
Lieut.  Schwatka  "  (Edinburgh  and  Ixtiidon.  1881);
and  "  Als  Eskimo  unter  den  Eskimo,"  by  Henry
Klutschak  (Leipsic,  1881).


434


SCHWEINITZ


SCORESBY


SCHWEINITZ,  Lewis  Darld  von,  boUnist,  b.
in  liethlehem,  Pa..  V6  Feb.,  1780:  d.  there,  8  Feb.,
1834.  In  1798  he  went  to  Germany  and  was  edu-
cated in  the  Moravian  oolleee  and  theolojiical  semi-
nary, returning  in  1812.  lie  filled  imjx)rtant  ec-
clesiastical offices  at  Salem,  N.  C,  and  subsenuently
at  Bethlehem.  From  early  boyhood  he  uevoted
himself  to  the  study  of  botany.  By  his  own  re-
searches he  added  more  than  1,400  new  species  to
the  catalogue  of  American  flora,  more  than  1,200
being  fungi,  which  had  previously  been  but  little
studied.  He  was  a  member  of  various  learned  so-
cieties in  the  United  States,  Germany,  and  France.
The  University  of  Kiel,  in  Denmark,  conferred
upon  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  A  new  genus  of
plant  was  named  Schweinitzia  in  his  honor,  and
while  a  resident  of  Salem  he  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  University  of  North  Carolina,  which
honor  he  declined  because  it  involved  relinquish-
ing work  in  the  Moravian  church.  His  herbarium,
which  comprisod  at  the  time  of  his  death  the
largest  private  collection  of  plants  in  the  United
States,  he  bequeathed  to  the  Academy  of  natural
sciences  at  Philadelphia.  His  principal  works  are
"  Conspectus  Fungorum  Lusatiie  "  (Leipsic,  1805) ;
"  Synopsis  Fungorum  Carolinae  Superioris,"  edited
by  Dr.  Schwaegrichen  (1818);  "Specimen  Florae
AmericaB  Septentrionalis  CryptogamiesB  "  (Raleigh,
1821) ;  "  Monograph  of  the  Linna^an  Genus  Viola  "
(1821) ;  "  Catalogue  of  Plants  collected  in  the  N.  W.
Territory  by  Say"  (Philadelphia,  1824);  "Mono-
graph of  the  American  Species  of  the  Genus  Ca-
rex  (New York,  1825);  and  "Synopsis  Fungorum  in
America  Boreali  Media  Degentium  "  (Philadelphia,
1832).  See  a  "  Memoir  of  Lewis  David  von  Schwei-
nitz  "  (Philadelphia,  1835),  and  a  "Sketch  of  the
Life  and  Scientific  Work  of  L.  D.  von  Schweinitz,"
in  the  "  Journal  of  the  Elisha  Mitchell  Scientific
Society  of  tlie  University  of  North  Carolina  "
(Raleigh,  1886).— His  son,  Emil  Adolphns  (de
ScHWKiNiTZ),  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in  Salem,  N.  C,
26  Oct..  1816 ;  d.  there,  3  Nov.,  1879,  was  a  graduate
both  of  the  American  and  of  the  German  Moravian
theological  seminaries.  After  filling  various  eccle-
siastical offices  in  Pennsylvania  and  North  Caro-
lina, among  them  that  of  principal  of  the  Salem
female  academy,  he  was  appointed  president  of  the
governing  board  of  the  southern  district  of  the
Moravian  church,  and  consecrated  to  the  episco-
pacy in  1874.  He  attended  three  general  synods
in  succession,  at  Ilermhut,  Saxony,  in  1857,  1869,
and  1879.  and  on  the  last  two  occasions  was  consti-
tuted one  of  the  vice-presidents  of  that  body. —
Another  son,  Edmnnd  Alexander  (de  Schwei-
nitz), Moravian  bishop,  b.  in  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  20
March,  1825 ;  d.  there,  18  Dec,  1887,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  theological  seminary  in  his  native  place,
and  then  continued  his  studies  at  the  University
of  Berlin.  He  began  his  ministry  in  1850  and  had
charge  successively  of  churches  at  Lebanon,  Phila-
delphia, Lititz,  and  Bethlehem.  On  28  Aug.,  1870,
he  was  consecrated  to  the  episcopacy  at  Bethlehem,
and  at  his  death  he  was  the  presiding  bishop  of  the
northern  district  of  the  Moravian  church.  In  1871
Columbia  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.
He  was  appointed  a  delegate  to  the  general  synod
that  met  at  Herrnhut,  Saxony,  in  1857 ;  and  t  he  one
that  convened  at  the  same  place  in  1879,  at  which
he  was  present  in  his  official  capacity,  elected  him
its  president,  an  honor  that  was  never  before  con-
ferred upon  an  American  bishop.  He  originated
in  1856  and  for  ten  years  edited  "  The  Moravian,"
the  weekly  journal  of  his  church,  and  from  1867
till  1884  ne  was  president  of  the  theological  semi-
nary. Besides  various  sermons  and  essays  and


numerous  cyclopaedia  articles,  he  was  the  author  of
"The  Moravian  Manual"  (Philadelphia,  1859;  2d
enlarged  ed.,  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  1869) ;  -  The  Mora-
vian Episcopate  "  (Bethlehem,  1865 ;  2d  revised  ed.,
London.  1874);  "The  Life  and  Times  of  David
Zeisberger,  the  Western  Pioneer  and  Apostle  of
the  Inilians"  (Phila«lelphia,  1870);  "Some  of  the
Fathers  of  the  American  Moravian  Church  "(Beth-
lehem, 1881);  and  "The  History  of  the  Church
known  as  the  Unitas  Fratrum"  (1885),  on  the
second  series  of  which  work,  comprising  the  "  His-
tory of  the  Renewed  Unitas  Fratrum,  he  was  en-
gaged at  the  time  of  his  death.

SCOFIELD,  Glenn!  William,  jurist,  b.  in
Chautauqua  county,  N.  Y.,  11  March,  1817.  After
graduation  at  Hamilton  college  in  1840,  he  removed
to  Pennsylvania,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1843.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Penn-
sylvania assembly  in  1850-'l  and  of  the  state  sen-
ate in  1857-'9,  and  in  1861  was  appointed  president
judge  of  the  18th  judicial  district.  He  was  then
elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  and  served  from
7  Dec,  1863,  till  3  March,  1875.  He  took  an  active
part  in  the  reconstruction  measures,  and  served  on
important  committees,  being  chairman  of  that  on
naval  affairs.  On  28  March,  1878,  he  was  appoint-
ed register  of  the  treasury,  and  he  served  until
1881,  when  he  was  appointed  an  associate  justice
of  the  U.  S.  court  of  claims.  Hamilton  gave  him
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1884.

SCOLLARD,  Clinton,  poet,  b.  in  Clinton,
Oneida  co..  N.  Y.,  18  Sept.,  1861.  After  gradu-
ation at  Hamilton  college  in  1881  he  studied  for
two  years  in  Harvard,  and  travelled  in  Europe  in
1886-'7,  spending  several  months  in  Cambridge
university  before  visiting  Greece,  Egypt,  and  Pales-
tine. He  has  published  two  volumes  of  poems,
"  Pictures  in  Song  "  (New  York,  1884)  and  "  With
Reed  and  Lvre  "  (Boston,  1886).

SCORESbY,  William,  English  explorer,  b.  in
Cropton.  Yorkshire,  5  Oct.,  1790 ;  d.  in  Torquay,  21
March,  1857.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was  &
daring  and  successful  whale-fisher.  The  son  fol-
lowed the  sea,  and  in  1806  was  chief  mate  on  the
voyage  in  which  his  father  reached  the  highest
latitude  (81°  12'  42")  that  had  then  been  attained
on  sea.  During  the  intervals  between  voyages,
with  the  sanction  of  his  father,  he  devoted  himself
to  study,  and  two  of  his  winters  were  spent  at
Edinburgh  university.  During  his  voyages  he
made  many  observations  on  the  electric  phenomena
of  the  arctic  regions,  and  was  instrumental  in
inducing  Sir  Joseph  Banks  to  send  out  a  series  of
expeditions  for  the  discovery  of  the  north  pole.
Young  Scoresby  continued  in  the  whaling  ser^'ice
after  nis  father's  death,  and,  when  he  had  made
seventeen  voyages  to  Spitzbergen  or  Greenland,  he
published  "An  Account  of  the  Arctic  Regions,
with  a  History  and  Description  of  the  Northern
Whale  Fishery  "  (2  vols.,  1820).  This  work  added
largely  to  science  in  the  departments  of  physical
geography,  natural  history,  and  magnetic  observa-
tion. In  1822  he  made  an  exploring  voyage  along
the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  which  was  then  com-
paratively unknown,  and  published  the  results  in
a  "  Journal  of  a  Voyage  to  the  Northern  WhaJe
Fishery,  including  Researches  and  Discoveries  on
the  Eastern  Coast  of  West  Greenland,  made  in  the
Summer  of  1822.  in  the  Ship  'Baffin,'  of  Liver-
pool" (Edinburgh,  1823).  On  his  return  to  Liver-
pool he  received  the  intelligence  of  the  death  of
his  wife,  and  abandoned  his  seafaring  life.  In
1824  he  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society,
and  he  was  subsequently  made  corres[K)nding  mem-
ber of  the  Institute  of  France. When  about  forty


scorr


SCOTT


496


jmn  of  age,  he  deemed  it  his  (iiity  to  become  a  |
oleriCTiDan,  and  accordingly  entortMl hiinm.'lf at  |
Cambridge,  took  his  deicrw  of  U.  1),  in  1H34.  and
that  of  I).  I),  in  1H39. He  first  lalK.riMl  as  chaplain  ,
of  the  Mariners'  church  at  LiveriKK)l,  then  removed
to  Kxeter,  and  afterward  became  vicar  of  lirad-
fonl. After  several  years,  his  health  failing,  he
resigne*!  his  charge and  retired  to  Toniuay.  but
continued  his  philanthropic  efforts,  and  his  physi-  '
cal  rt'searches,  the  latter  mainly  in  n-gartl  to  ter-  I
restrial  magnetism  and  its  n*lat ion  to  navigation.  |
For  the  further  and  better  pros».'cution  of  these  j
researches,  in  1847  Dr  Scoresby  made  a  voyage  to  |
the  UnitiHl  States,  and  in  1853  to  Australia  in  the
"  Itoyal  Charter."  In  addition  to  the  works  already
named.  Dr.  Scoresby  wrote  "  Discourses  to  Sea-
men" (IWil);  *'  Miignctical  Observations"  (3  parts.
1839-52);  "American  Factories  and  their  Female
0|)eratives"  (1848);  "  Lectures  on  Zoistic  Magnet-  j
ism  "  (1849);  "  Sablwths  in  the  Arctic  Regions"  I
(1850);  "The  Franklin  Expedition  "  (1850);  "My
Father :  being  Records  of  the  Adventurous  Life
of  the  late  William  Scoresby,  Esq..  of  Whitby"
(1851);  and  "Voyage  to  Australia  and  Round  the
World  for  Magnetical  Research,"  edited  by  Archi-
bald Smith  (1859). His  life  has  been  written  by
R.  E.  Scoresby-Jackson.  M.  D.  (London.  1861).

SCOTT,  Andrew,  Scottish  poet,  b.  in  Bowdcn.
Roxburghshire,  in  1757;  d.  there,  22  May,  1839.
He  was  of  humble  parentage,  and,  after  being  em-
ployed as  a  cowherd,  enlisted  in  the  arm;'',  served
m  this  country  during  the  Revolution,  and  was
surrendered  with  Comwallis's  army  at  Yorktown,
While  he  was  encamped  on  Staten  island,  Scott
composed  his  "  Betsey  Roscoe,"  "  The  Oak-Tree,"
and  many  other  songs.  After  the  war  he  settled
in  his  native  parish  as  a  farm-laborer.  He  became
a  protege  of  several  well-known  literary  men,  and
published  "  Poems,  chiefly  in  the  Scottish  Dialect "
(Kelso,  1811);  a  second  volume  of  poems  (Jed-
burgh, 1821);  and  "Poems  on  Various  Subjects"
(Edinburgh,  1826).

SCOTT,  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  Cumberland
county,  Va.,  in  1733;  d.  22  Oct..  1813.  He  served
as  a  non-commissioned  officer  in  Braddock's  defeat
in  1755,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  struggle  for
independence  raised  and  commanded  the  first
company  south  of  James  river  for  the  Revolution-
ary army.  He  was  made  colonel  of  the  3d  Vir-
ginia battalion  on  12  Aug.,  1776,  served  with  great
credit  at  Trenton,  and  on  2  April,  1777,  was  pro-
moted brigadier  -  general.  During  the  next  two
campaigns  he  was  with  the  army  in  New  Jersey,
and  at  a  council  of  war  vote<l  with  a  minority  of
four  generals  to  attack  Philadelphia.  He  was  with
Gen.  Anthony  Wayne  at  Stony  Point  in  1779.  in
the  following  year  was  made  a  prisoner  at  Charles-
ton, and  was  not  exchange<l  until  near  the  end  of
the  war.  In  Lee's  retreat  at  Monmouth  he  was
the  last  to  leave  the  field.  Gen.  Scott  removed  to
Woodford  county,  Kv.,  in  1785,  and  served  as
brigadier-general  of  Kentucky  levies  in  Gen.  Ar-
thur St.  Clair's  defeat  in  1791.  Later  in  that  vear
he  commanded  in  a  successful  expedition  to  Wa-
bash river, and  in  several  actions  with  the  Indians.
In  1794  he  led  part  of  Gen.  Anthonv  Wayne's
army  in  the  battle  of  Fallen-timlwrs.  "From'1808
till  1812  he  was  governor  of  Kentucky,  and  a  town
and  county  in  that  state  were  named  in  his  honor.
Gen.  Scott  was  a  man  of  strong  natural  powers,
but  rough  and  eccentric  in  manner  and  somewhat
illiterate.— His  brother,  Joskph.  also  s«^rvcd  with
credit  in  the  Revolution,  rose  to  the  rank  of  major.
was  wounded  at  Germantown,  and  after  the  war
was  U.  S. marshal  for Virginia. — Joseph's  son.


EuwARi),  lawyer  (1774-1852).  became  a  well-known
lawyer  in  Tenn»*ss«««-,  hfrvi>«l  uh  judge  of  the  stnte
circuit  court  in  1815-'46,  and  i»ubli»he<l  "  I^ws  of
the  State  of  Tennessee"  (2  vols.,  Knoxville,  1821).
— hMward's  mm,  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  Knoxvilie,
Tenn.,  12  Nov.,  1811 :  d.  in  Jaclcs^m.  Miss.,  90  Mar,
1861,  studied  law,  and  l>egan  to  itractise  in  Nasn-
ville.  where  he  marriiHl,  but  he  afterward  removed
U»  Jackson.  Miss.,  and  fornunl  a  lutrtnership  with
George  S,  Yerger.  In  1852  he  wa.s  eh'ctj'd  chancel-
lor of  the  state.  His  dix.>ision  in  the  ca.**  of  John-
8t«m  vs.  the  State  of  Mississippi,  establishing  the
liability  of  the  state  for  the  nayment  of  the  Ix>nd8
of  the  Union  l)ank.  attra(;teu  much  attention.  In
1859  Judge  Scott  removed  to  Mcmjihis.  He  was
an  active  Freemason,  and  publishe<r  "Analogy  of
Ancient  Craft  MaMJiiry  to  Natural  and  Revealed
Religion  "  (Philadeli)hia.  1849). and  "The  Keystone
of  the  Masonic  Arch"  (Jackson.  1K56).

SCOTT.  l>red,  slave,  b.  in  Missouri  alKuit  1810;
d.  after  1857.  Ho  was  a  negro  slave,  and  about
1834  was  taken  by  his  master.  Dr.  Emerson,  an
army  surgeon,  from  Missouri  to  Rock  Island,  IIL,
and  then  to  Fort  Snelling,  in  what  was  then  Wis-
consin territory.  Here  he  married,  and  two  chil-
dren were  born  to  him.  On  his  return  to  Missouri
he  sued  in  a  local  court  in  St.  Louis  to  recover
his  freedom  and  that  of  his  family,  since  he  had
been  taken  by  his  master  to  live  in  a  free  state.
Scott  won  his  case,  but  his  master  now  apjK-aled
to  the  state  supreme  court,  which,  in  1852,  reversed
the  decision  of  the  lower  tribunal.  Shortly  after-
ward the  family  were  sold  to  a  citizen  of  New
York,  John  F.  A,  Sandford,  and,  as  this  afforded  a
ground  for  bringing  a  similar  action  in  a  Federal
court,  Scott  sued  again  for  freedom,  this  time  in  the
U.  S.  circuit  court  in  St.  Louis  in  Slay,  1854.  The
case  was  lost,  but  an  appeal  wa.«  made  to  the  U.  S.
supreme  court,  and,  the  importance  of  the  matter
being  realized  by  a  few  eminent  lawyers,  several
offered  to  take  part  in  the  argument.  Those  on
Scott's  side  were  Montgomery  Blair  and  George  T.
Curtis,  while  opposed  to  him  were  Reverdy  Jf)hn-
son  and  Henry  S.  Geyer.  None  of  these  asked  for
compensation.  The  case  was  tried  in  185<{,  and
the  judgment  of  the  lower  court  was  affirmed.  A
brief  opinion  was  prepared  by  Justice  Nelson,  but
before  its  public  announcement  it  was  decided  by
the  court  that,  in  view  of  the  importance  of  the
case  and  its  bearing  on  the  whole  slavery  question,
which  was  then  violently  agitating  the  country,
Chief-Justice  Taney  should  write  a  more  elalx>rate
one.  Taney's  opinion  was  read,  6  March,  1857,
two  days  after  the  inauguration  of  President  Bu-
chanan, and  excited  intense  interest  throughout
the  country  on  account  of  its  extreme  position  in
favor  of  slavery.  It  affirmed,  among  otlier  things,
that  the  act  of  congress  that  prohibited  slavery
north  of  latitude  36  30'  was  unconstitutional  and
void.  Thomas  H.  Benton  said  of  this  decision  that
it  made  a  new  departure  in  the  working  of  the

f government,  declaring  slavery  to  be  the  organic
aw  of  the  land,  while  freedom  was  the  exception.
The  passage  that  was  most  widely  quoted  and  most
unfavorably  eommentwl  uj)on,  was  that  in  which
Taney  described  the  condition  of  the  negroes  at
the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  saying:  "They
had  for  more  than  a  century  before  been  regarde<l
as  beings  of  an  inferior  order,  and  altogether  unfit
to  assfjciate  with  the  white  race,  either  in  social  or
political  relations;  and  so  far  inferior,  that  they
fiad  no  rights  which  the  white  man  was  lx>und  to
respect;  ami  that  the  negro  might  justly  and  law-
fully Ik?  reduced  to  slavery  for  his  benefit."  After-
ward Scott  and  his  family  passed  by  inheritance


436


SCOTT


SCOTT


to  the  family  of  Calvin  C.  Chaffee,  a  member  of
congress  from  Massachusetts,  and  on  26  May.  1857,
they  were  emancipated  in  St.  Louis  by  Taylor
Blow,  to  whom  Mr.  Chaffee  had  conveyed  them
for  that  purpose.  See  Benjamin  C.  Howard's
"  Report  of  tlie  Decision  of  the  Supreme  Court,
and  the  Opinions  of  the  Judfjes  thereof,  in  the
Case  of  Dred  Scott "  (Washington,  1857) ;  Thomas
H.  Benton's  "  Historical  and  Legal  Examination
of  the  Decision  in  the  Dred  Scott  Case"  (New
York,  18G0) ;  Joel  Parker's  "  Personal  Liberty
Laws  and  Slavery  in  the  Territories :  Case  of  Dred
Scott"  (Boston,  1861);  and  "Abraham  Lincoln,  a
History,"  by  John  Hay  and  John  G.  Nicolay.  A
portrait  of  Dred  Sc^ott,  probably  the  only  one  in
existence,  painted  from  an  old  photograph,  is  in
the  possession  of  the  Missouri  historical  society.

SCOTT,  (iriistavu!^,  lawyer,  b.  in  Prince  William
county,  Va. ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1801.  His
father.  Rev.  James  Scott,  a  Scotchman,  became  a
minister  of  the  Episcopal  church  and  came  to  this
country  about  1730.  Gustavus  was  educated  at
King's  college,  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  and  after  his
friend,  Sir  Robert  Eden,  was  made  governor  of
Maryland,  removed  to  that  province  and  practised
law  successfully  in  Somerset  county.  When  the
people  of  Maryland  decided  to  send  deputies  from
all  the  counties  to  a  convention  to  oe  held  in
Annapolis,  22  June,  1774,  he  was  sent  as  a  delegate
from  Somerset,  and  participated  in  all  its  subse-
quent delil)erations  d!own  to  the  adoption  of  the
first  constitution  and  the  organization  of  the  state
government  in  1777.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Association  of  the  freemen  of  Maryland,  which
decided  in  July.  1775,  to  throw  off  the  proprietary

Eower  and  assume  a  provisional  government,  and
is  signature  is  attached  to  the  original  pledge  that
now  (1888)  hangs  in  the  state-house  at  Annapolis.
He  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed
the  first  constitution  of  Maryland.  After  the  for-
mation of  the  state  government  he  removed  to
Dorchester  county,  and  represented  it.  in  the  as-
sembly in  1780  and  again  in  1784,  when  he  was
elected  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  and
served  till  1785.  He  was  one  of  the  originators
of  the  Potomac  canal  companv  in  1784,  and  one
of  the  committee  of  the  Maryland  legislature,  to
whom  was  referred  the  claim  of  James  Rumsey
{q.  v.),  for  the  exclusive  privilege  of  making  and
selling  his  boats  in  Maryland.  He  reported  in
favor  of  Rumsey's  claim,  and  the  bill  was  passed.
He  was  also  one  of  the  original  commissioners  ap-
pointed to  superintend  the  erection  of  the  capitol
buildings  at  Washington,  and  when  the  state  of
Maryland  lent  the  government  several  thousand
dollars  for  the  purpose,  the  credit  of  the  general

fovernment  was  so  low  that  the  state  required
cott  and  two  others  to  give  to  it  their  individual
bonds  as  security.

SCOTT,  (jiistarns  Hall,  naval  officer,  b,  in  Pair-
fax  county,  Va..  13  June,  1812;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  23  March,  1882.  He  entered  the  navy  as
midshipman,  1  Aug.,  1828,  became  passed  mid-
shipman, 14  June,  1834,  and  matle  two  cruises  in
the  West  Indies  in  the  "  Vandalia"  in  1835-'6  and
1839-'40.  in  which  he  participated  in  the  Seminole
war.  He  was  also  present  off  Charleston,  S.  C,
during  the  nullification  excitement.  He  was  com-
missioned lieutenant,  25  Feb.,  1841,  and  was  flag
lieutenant  of  the  Pacific  squadron  in  the  frigate
"St.  Lawrence"  in  1852-'3.  He  was  commissioned
commander,  27  Dec,  1856.  and  served  as  light-house
inspector  in  1858-'60.  When  the  civil  war  began
he  resisted  the  efforts  of  partisans  in  his  native
state  to  make  him join  the Confederates. In


June,  1861,  he  commanded  the  steamer  "  Keystone
State,"  went  in  pursuit  of  the  Confederate  "priva-
teer "Sumter,"  and  capturing  the  steamer  "Sal-
vor "  off  Tampico,  towed  her  to  Philadelphia.  He
commanded  tne  steamer  "Marantanza"  in  the
operations  with  the  army  in  James  river,  rendered
valuable  service  in  saving  stores  that  were  left  by
the  army  at  Acquia  creek,  was  on  the  blockade,
and  had  numerous  engagements  with  Confederate
batteries  in  the  sounds  of  North  Carolina  in
1862-'3. He  was  commissioned  captain,  4  Nov.,

1863,  and  commanded  the  steamer  "  De  Soto,"  in
which he  captured  several blockade  -  runners  in

1864.  Subsequently  he  took  charge  of  the  steam
sloop  "  Canandaigua "  on  the  blockade,  and  was
senior  officer  at  the  surrender  of  Charleston,  S.  C,
in  1865.  He  was  a  member  of  the  examining
board  for  the  admission  of  volunteer  officers  to  the
regular  navy  in  1868,served  as  light-house  inspector
in  1869-'71,  and  was  promoted  to  commodore,  10
Feb.,  1869,  and  to  rear-admiral,  14  Feb.,  1873.  He
was  then  commander-in-chief  of  the  North  Atlantic
squadron  until  13  June,  1874,  when  he  was  retired,
having  reached  the  age  of  sixty-two  years.

SCOTT,  Irving  Murray,  mechanical  engineer,
b.  in  Hebron  Mills,  Baltimore  co.,  Md.,  25  Dec.,
1837.  He  was  educated  at  Milton  academy,  Md.,
and  the  Baltimore  mechanics'  institute,  and  in
1854  entered  the  manufactory  of  Obed  Hussey,  the
inventor  of  reaping-machines,  where  he  made
rapid  progress  in  the  machinist's  art,  and  jierfccted
himself  in  the  different  methods  of  working  in
iron  and  wood.  In  1857  he  gained  admittance  to
the  iron-works  of  a  Baltimore  firm.  There  he  soon
became  an  expert  draughtsman,  and  was  placed  in
charge  of  the  construction  of  stationary  and  fire
engines.  He  also  devoted  all  his  leisure  moments
to  reading  and  study.  In  1858  he  was  engaged  as
draughtsman  at  the  Union  iron-works,  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.,  where  he  remained  until  1862.  About
that  time  the  construction  of  improved  quartz-
mining  machinery  became  one  of  the  most  im-
portant branches  of  mechanical  industry  in  that
state.  Desiring  to  become  practically  acquainted
with  it,  he  spent  a  year  at  the  Miners'  foundry  in
the  same  city,  returning  to  the  Union  works  in
1863,  when  he  was  made  superintendent.  In  1865
he  became  a  partner,  and  in  1875  the  business
was  reorganized  under  the  title  of  Prescott,  Scott
and  Co.  Soon  afterward  the  new  firm  erected  ex-
tensive works  at  Potrero.  These  were  constructed
under  the  immediate  supervision  of  Mr.  Scott,  and
he  designed  the  machinery  by  means  of  which  the
treasures  of  the  Comstock  mines  have  been  ex-
tracted, including  that  used  in  the  pumping,  mill-
ing, reducing,  and  refining  works,  in  connection
with  James  G.  Fair  and  William  H.  Patten,  a
mining  engineer.  He  has  also  invented  the  Scott
and  Eckart  and  Scott  and  O'Neil  cut-off  engines,  a
Union  heater,  a  safety-valve  chock,  and  an  air-valve
for  compressor.  Mr.  Scott  has  been  president  of  the
Mechanics'  institute  and  of  the  Art  association  of
San  Francisco  during  three  terms  each.  He  is  a
regent  of  the  University  of  California  and  a  trus-
tee of  the  Leland  Stanford,  Jr.,  university.

SCOTT,  James,  poet,  b.  in  Langside,  "Scotland,
in  1806 ;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  in  1857.  He  studied
at  Glasgow  and  Belfast,  emigrated  to  this  country
in  1832,  became  a  licentiate  in  1834,  and  was  pas-
tor at  (ierman  Vallev  and  Newark,  N.  J.  He  was
? riven  the  degree  oi  D.  D.  by  Lafayette  in  1844.
)r.  Scott  published  a  dissertation  on  the  genius  of
Robert  Pollok  in  his  "  Life  "  (New  York,  1848).  and
before  his  death  completed  a  narrative  poem  called
"  The  Guardian  Angel "  (1859).


SCOTT


SCOTT


437


SrOTT,  John,  clt'rjrynmn.  b.  In  Washinifton
county,  Ph.,  27  <»rt..  1820!  IId  was  iHlucnto«l  in  the
coniMiun  st'hcxilH  anil  under  prlvati*  tut«»i^,  enlcrt'd
the  Miinistrv  <»f  the  Methtnlist  I'rt>test«nt  church
in  1842,  ami  has  l)e<>n  a  nieniUT  of  almost  every
general  conference  of  that  «len<»niination  since
1854.  He  has  cdiUnl  the  "  MethcKlist  Heconler"  in
Pittsburjr.  Pa.,  in  lH(M-'70,  and  since  1879.  and
also  conducted  the  "Missionary  Sunday  -  School
Journal "  in  that  city  in  1852-'4,  and  the  "  Home
ComjMinion  "  in  Cincinnati.  At  the  same  time,  till
1884.  he  was  editor  of  the  Sunday-school  publica-
tions of  his  church.  Washington  college.  Pa.,  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  I),  in  1800.  Dr.-  Scott  is  the
author  of  "  Pulpit  Echoes"  (Cincinnati.  1873)  and
"  The  I>and  of  .Sojourn,  or  Sketches  of  Patriarchal
Life  and  Times"  (Pittsburg.  1880),  and  has  also
written  an  intrtnluction  to  liev.  Dr.  George  Brown's
♦* Recollections  of  an  Itinerant  Life"  (Cincinnati,
1866).  and  published  various  discourses.

SCOTT,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Alexandria,  Pa.,
14  Julv.  1824;  d.  in  Pittsburg.  Pa..  22  March,
1889.  "His  father  was  a  landholder  in  Huntingdon
county,  Pa.,  and  a  member  of  congress  in  1829-'31.
The  s<')n  received  a  common-school  education,  pur-
suetl  a  classical  course  with  private  tutors,  and  then
studied  law  in  Chambersburg,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1846,  and  practised  in  Huntingdon.  He  was
prosecuting  attorney  in  1846-'9,  and  a  meml>er  of
the  board  of  revenue  commissioners  in  1851.  served
in  the  legislature  in  1862.  and  from  1869  till  1875
sat  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Republican.  In  the  senate,  Mr.  Scott,  on  17  May,
1872.  moved  the  "  enforcement  bill,"  authorizing
the  president  to  susjwnd  the  habeas  corpus  act  in
states  where  "  Ku  -  klux  "  outrages  should  occur,
and  made  a  speech  in  its  favor.  On  the  expiration
of  his  senatorial  term  he  removed  to  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  and  l)ecame  general  counsel  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania company,  and  subsequently  he  was  made  gen-
eral solicitor  of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad  company
in  Philadelj)hia.

SCOTT,  John  Morin,  patriot,  b.  in  New  York
in  mO;  d.  there,  14  Sept.  1784.  His  grandfather.
John,  the  second  son  of  Sir  John  Scott,  bart.,  of
Ancrum,  Scotland,  came  to  this  country,  was  made
a  citizen  of  New  York  in  1702,  and  commanded
Fort  Hunter,  on  Mohawk  river, John  Morin  was

an  only  child.  He
was  graduated  at
Yale  m  1746.  stud-
ied law.  and  was  an
early  opponent  of
British  aggression,
with  voice  and  j)en.
lie  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the
Sons  of  Liberty,
and  his  bold  advo-
cacy of  extreme
measures  cost  him
an  election  to  the
Continental  con-
gress in  1774.  He
was  one  of  the  chief
members  of  the
New  York  general
committee  in  1775,
a  delegate  to  the
Provincial  congress  of  that  year,  and  on  9  June,
1776.  was  made  a  brigadier-general.  He  was  with
his  brigade  in  the  battle  of  I^ong  Island,  but  retired
from  military  service  in  March.  1777,  and  became
secretary  of  state  of  New  York,  which  office  he  held
till  1789. In  1780-'3  he  was  a  member  of  congress.


c::^//?zt/cirii^


— Ilisonlr  son.  Lewis  Allaire,  Hucccefle<l  him  in
the  secretaryship. — licwis  Allaire's  only  son.  John
Morin,  lawVer,  b.  in  New  York  city.  25  Oct.  1789;
«1.  in  PhiliMleiithia,  Pa..  W  April.  1858.  lost  his  father
early  in  life,  and  was  taken  by  his  mother  to  Phila-
delnhia.  He  was  graduatf^l  nt  Princeton  in  1805,
an<l.  after  pursuing  higher  stu<lies  there  for  a  vear
longer  under  the  nresident.  reatl  law  with  Wilfiam
Rawle,  and  wa.s  admitted  to  the  bar.  After  Irwing
his  moderate  fortune  in  a  mercantile  venture,  he
entere<I  into  active  practice,  and  bei-ame  a  success*
ful  lawyer.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812  as  1st
lieutenant  of  cavalry,  and  in  1815  was  chos<*n  to
the  legislature,  where  he  served  several  terms.  He
was  afterward  for  many  years  a  memln'r  of  the
Philadelphia  city  council.s,  a  delegate  to  the  State
constitutional  convention  of  1837.  and  in  1841-'4
served  as  mayor  of  the  city.  He  delivere<l  manv  ora-
tions and  addresses,  including  one  l)efore  the  Wash-
ington Ixjnevolent  societv  (Philadelphia,  1815).

SCOTT,  John  Rndolph,  actor,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, 17  Oct.,  1809;  d.  there.  2  March,  1K56.  He
made  his  d^bnt  at  the  New  York  Park  theatre  in
the  part  of  Malcolm  in  "  Madieth."  Thereafter,
playing  at  various  theatres,  he  gradually  rose  to
distinction  in  leading  tragic  roles.  As  a  robust
actor  he  almost  rivalletl  Kdwin  Forrest  for  a  time,
and  contended  with  him  for  popularity.  His  rep-
resentations of  King  Lear  and  Sir  Giles  Overreach
were  forcible  and  scholarly  performances.  In  1847
Scott  went  to  England,  playing  at  the  Princess
theatre  in  London  for  a  short  term,  where  he  o|)ened
as  Sir  Giles  Overreach.  Some  of  the  best  London
critics  were  delighted  with  his  efforts,  but  the  gen-
eral public  was  not  attrafftetl.  On  his  return  to
the  Lnited  States  he  became  a  member  of  the  New
York  Bowery  theatre,  and  later  joined  the  players
at  the  Chatham  street  National  theatre.  Diverting
his  attention  from  study  to  rote  performances  of
melodramatic  and  sensational  parts,  Scott  soon
became  careless  and  neglectful,  lapsing  into  the
condition  of  a  conventional  performer.  At  the
last  his  most  successful  roles  were  those  of  sail-
ors and  pirates;  William,  in  the  nautical  play  of
"  Black-Eved  Susan,"  was  one  of  his  favorite  parts.

SCOT'f,  Julian,  artist,  b.  in  Johnson.  Lamoille
CO.,  Vt.,  14  Feb..  1846,  At  the  opening  of  the  civil
war,  in  1861,  he  entered  the  National  army.  Some
of  his  sketches  in  a  military  hospital  having  at-
tracted attention,  he  became  a  student  at  the  Na-
tional academy.  New  York,  in  1863.  and  he  subse-
quently studied  under  Emmanuel  Leutze  until
18(58.  lie  first  exhibited  at  the  Academy  of  de-
sign in  1870,  and  was  electetl  an  associate  the  fol-
lowing year.  He  was  chosen  a  life-fellow  of  the
American  geographical  society  in  1873,  Among
his  works,  mostly  pictures  of  army  life,  are  "  Uear-
Guard  at  White  Oak  Swamp,"  owned  bv  the  Union
league  club  (1869-70);  "Battle  of  Cedar  Creek,"
in  the  state-house  at  Montj>elier,  Vt.  (1871-'2);
"  Battle  of  Golding's  Farm  "  (1871) ;  "  The  Recall "
(1872) ;  "  On  Board  the  '  Hartford ' "  (1874) ;  "  Old
Recortls"(1875);  "Duel  of  Burr  and  Hamilton"
(1876);  "Reserves  awaiting  Order*"  (1877);  "In
the  Cornfield  at  Antietam  "  (1879) ;  "  Charge  at
Petersburg"  (1882);  "The  War  is  Over"  (1885);
and  "  The  Blue  and  the  Gray  "  (1886).

SCOTT,  Levi,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  near  Odessa.  Del.,
11  Oct,  1802;  d.  there,  13  July,  1882.  In  April.
1826,  after  being  licensed  as  a  local  preacher,  he
became  a  member  of  the  Philadelphia  conference.
Without  much  early  etlucation,  he  was  a  diligent
student,  and  a  preacher  of  remarkable  clearness,
force,  and  thoroughness.  After  filling  several  pa»>
torates,  he  was  apfjointed  presiding  elder  in  1884.


438


SCOTT


SCOTT


^  e^ocrff^


This  office,  then  one  of  very  great  influence,  he
filled  for  two  years,  and  he  then  returned  to  the
pastorate.  From  1840  till  1842  he  was  principal
of  Dickinson  grammar-school.  In  1848  he  was
made  one  of  the  agents
of  the  Methodist  book
concern  in  New  York
city.  This  position  he
held  for  four  years,
when  at  the  general
conference  of  1852,  at
Boston,  Mass.,  he  was
elected  and  ordained
bishop.  The  degree
of  M.  A.  was  conferred
upon  him  by  Wesley-
an  university  in  1840,
and  that  of"  D.  D.  by
Delaware  college.  He
fixed  his  residence,  af-
ter he  was  elected  bish-
op, at  Odessa,  Del.
He  was  very  industri-
ous in  the  discharge
of  the  duties  of  his
office,  and  had  the  reputation  of  great  piety.  He
lived  to  foursfiore,  and  for  several  years  was  en-
feebled in  mind  and  body.

SCOTT,Martln,  soldier, b.  in  Bennington,  Vt.,17
Jan.,  1788 ;  d.  near  Molino  del  Rey,  Mexico,  8  Sept.,
1847.  He  was  appointed  a  lieutenant  in  the  army
in  April,  1814,  became  captain  in  the  5th  infantry
in  August,  1828,  was  brevetted  major  for  gallantry
at  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la  Palma,  9  Mav,  1846,
and  was  nromoted  major  on  29  June,  lie  was
brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  services  at  Monte-
rey, where  he  led  his  regiment,  and  he  was  killed
at' its  head  in  the  battle  of  Molino  del  Rey.  Col.
Scott  had  been  famous  as  a  marksman  from  early
youth,  and  it  is  of  him  that  the  well-known  inci-
dent is  related  of  the  coon  that  said :  "  You  need
not  firc^ril  come  down."

SCOTT,  Orange,  clergyman,  b.  in  Brookfleld,
Vt,  13  Feb.,  1800;  d.  in  "Newark,  N.  J.,  31  July,
1847.  His  parents  removed  to  Canada  in  his  early
childhood,  and  remained  there  about  six  years,  but
afterward  returned  to  Vermont.  The  son's  early
education  was  limited  to  thirteen  months'  school-
ing at  different  places.  He  entered  the  Methodist
muiistry  in  1822,  and  became  one  of  the  best-known
clergymen  of  his  denomination  in  New  England.
He  was  presiding  elder  of  the  Springfield  district,
Mass.,  in  1830-'4,  and  of  Providence  district,  R.  I.,
in  1834-'5.  Mr.  Scott  was  active  as  a  controver-
sialist. About  1833  he  became  an  earnest  anti-
slavery  worker,  and  his  zeal  in  this  cause  brought
much  unpopularity  upon  him.  His  bishop  pre-
ferred charges  against  him  in  1838,  before  the  New
England  conference,  but  they  were  not  sustained.
Finally,  with  others,  he  withdrew  from  the  church
in  1842,  and  on  31  May,  1843,  organized  the  Wes-
leyan  Methodist  church  in  a  general  convention  at
Utica,  N.  Y.,  of  which  Mr.  Scott  was  president.  Till
1844  he  conducted  •'  The  True  Wesleyan,"  in  advo-
cacy of  the  principles  of  the  new  church,  which
were  opposed  both  to  slavery  and  to  the  episcopal
form  of  church  government.  In  1846  failing  health
forced  him  to  retire  from  the  ministry.  Besides
many  contributions  to  the  press,  he  was  the  au-
thor of  "An  Appeal  to  the  Methodist  Episcopal
Church  "  (Boston,  1838).  See  his  life,  by  the  Rev.
Lucius  C.  Matlack  (New  York,  1847).

SCOTT,  Richard,  colonist,  b.  in  Glemsford,
Suffolk,  England,  in  1607;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,
about  1681. He  was  a  lineal  descendant  of  John


Baliol,  founder  of  Baliol  college,  Oxford.  Scott
came  to  Boston  in  1634,  married  Katharine  Mar-
bury,  sister  of  Mrs.  Anne  Hutchinson,  about  1637,
and  soon  afterward  joined  Roger  Williams.  He
was  co-proprietor  with  Williams  in  the  latter's
purchase  from  the  Indians,  and  a  signer  and  the
supposed  author  of  the  celebrated  covenant  that
was  made  among  the  settlers  of  Rhode  Island.  In
1657  he  became  a  Quaker,  and  his  wife  and  daugh-
ters were  whipped  and  imprisoned  in  Boston  for
their  faith,  lie  was  a  commissioner  to  Massachu-
setts in  1645  to  settle  the  controversy  with  that
colony  in  regard  to  Shawomet,  and  a  deputy  to  the
assembly  in  1666.

SCOtT,  Richard  WUHam.  Canadian  senator,
b.  in  Prescott,  Ontario,  24  Feb.,  1825.  He  was
educated  in  his  native  place,  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1848.  He  was  mayor  of
Ottawa  in  1852,  had  a  seat  in  the  Canadian  assem-
bly from  1857  till  1863,  and  in  the  Ontario  assem-
bly from  1867  till  November,  1873,  when  he  re-
signed. Mr.  Scott  was  elected  speaker  of  the
Ontario  assembly,  7  Dec,  1871,  but  resigned  on
being  appointed  a  member  of  the  executive  council
and  commissioner  of  crown  lands  for  that  prov-
ince on  the  21st  of  the  same  month.  He  retained
this  office  till  7  Nov.,  1873,  when  he  was  sworn  as
a  member  of  the  queen's  privy  council.  He  was
secretary  of  state  in  the  Mackenzie  administration
from  9  Jan.,  1874,  till  October,  1878,  when  he  went
out  of  power  with  his  colleagues  in  office.  He
acted  as  minister  of  finance  during  the  absence  of
Richard  J.  Cartright  in  England  in  1874,  as  minis-
ter of  inland  revenue  during  the  illness  of  Felix
Geoffrion  in  1875-'6,  and  as  minister  of  justice
during  the  absence  of  Edward  Blake  in  England
in  1876.  He  was  present  at  the  Centennial  exhibi-
tion at  Philadelphia  in  the  latter  year  in  an  offi-
cial capacity.  Mr.  Scott  was  principally  instru-
mental in  securing  the  passage  of  the  separate
school  law  of  the  province  of  Ontario,  and  the
Canada  temperance  act,  which  was  framed  by  him,
and  which  is  known  as  the  "  Scott  act."  fie  be-
came a  member  of  the  Dominion  senate,  13  March,
1874,  and  has  been  active  as  a  leader  of  the  Lib-
eral opposition  in  that  body.

SCOTT,  Robert  Kingston,  soldier,  b.  in  Arm-
strong county.  Pa.,  8  July,  1826.  His  grandfather
fought  in  the  Revolution,  and  his  father  in  the
war  of  1812-'15.  The  son  received  a  good  edu-
cation, studied  medicine,  and  began  practice  in
Henry  county,  Ohio.  In  October,  1861,  he  became
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  68th  Ohio  regiment,  of
which  he  was  made  colonel  in  1862.  He  served  .
at  Fort  Donelson,  Shiloh,  and  Corinth,  led  a  bri-
gade at  Hatchie  river,  Tenn.,  commanded  the  ad-
vance of  Gen.  John  A.  Logan's  division  on  the
march  into  Mississippi,  and  was  engaged  at  Port
Gibson,  Raymond,  and  Champion  Hills.  He  was
afterward  at  the  head  of  a  brigade  in  the  17th
corps,  was  made  prisoner  near  Atlanta,  but  was
excnanged  on  24  Sept.,  1864,  and  was  in  Sherman's
operations  before  that  city  and  in  the  march  to  the
sea.  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  12  Jan.,  1865,  and  also  received  the
brevets  of  brigadier-  and'  major-general  in  the
volunteer  army,  to  date  from  26  Jan.  and  2  Dec.,
1865,  respectively.  Gen.  Scott  was  assistant  com-
missioner of  the  t'reed men's  bureau  in  South  Caro-
lina in  1865-'8,  resigned  from  the  army  on  6  July
of  the  latter  year,  and  in  1868  became  the  first
governor  of  the  reconstructed  state,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Republican.  He  was  re-elected  in  1870
by  a  majority  of  33,534  in  a  total  vote  of  136,608.
In the  autumn  of  1871  the  governor  and  other


SCOTT


RTOTT


439


state  offloon*  were  o|)enly  elmrRod  with  a  frandu-
lent  (iviT-is-sue  of  slatf  b4»n(Ls.  Gov.  Scott  justified
his  course  in  a  iiK>ssa>fo  t«  the  le);i»lature,  and  a
reiw>luti<>n  uf  ini|R*Mchnient  was  defeated  in  that
|j<xly.  Much  excilenu'Ut  was  also  cuused  in  this
year  by  "  Ku-klux"  outrages,  luid  (Juv.  Scott's  ap-
peal ti)  the  president  lo  aid  in  suppressing  then),
which  wjis  «lone  by  the  uso  of  U.  S.  troops.  Gov.
Scott  afterward  reinovetl  to  NaiH)leon,  Ohio.  On
25  Dec..  1880,  he  shot  and  killed  Warriin  G.  Drury,
agi'tl  twenty-three  years.  Drury  and  a  son  of  Gen.
Scott  hml  been  drinking  together,  an<l  while  search-
ing for  the  boy  Gen,  Scott  met  the  former,  when
the  shooting  took  place. Ho  was  tfied,  and  ac-

auittcd  on  5  Nov.,  1881,  the  defence  l)eing  that  the
ischarge  of  the  pistol  was  accidental.
SCOTT,  Thomas,  Canadian  member  of  i>arlia-
ment,  b.  in  Lanark,  Ontario,  in  1841.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Perth  high-scluK)l,  became  a  iournalist,
and  published  and  managed  the  Perth  "  Kxpositor,"
in  the  Conservative  interest,  from  1861  till  1873,
when  he  removed  to  Manitoba.  He  was  elected
mayor  of  the  city  of  Winnioeg  in  1877,  and  a^ain
by  acclamation  m  1878,  ana  chosen  to  the  legisla-
ture of  Manitoba  in  1878  and  1879,  but  resigned  to
become  a  candidate  for  the  Canadian  parliament
for  Selkirk  in  1880.  He  was  elected,  and  was  re-
elected for  Winni|)eg  in  1882.  Mr.  Scott  has  been
for  many  years  in  the  volunteer  service,  held  a  com-
mand in  the  Ontario  rifles  in  the  Red  river  expe-
ditionary force  under  Col.  Garnet  (now  Lord)  Wolse-
ley  in  1870,  and  led  the  second  expedition  to  the
Red  river  in  1871  to  oppose  the  Fenians.  He  com-
manded the  95th  battalion  durin^^  the  campaign  of
1885  against  Louis  Riel,  and  received  a  medal.  He
was  elected  president  of  the  Liberal-Conservative
association  of  Manitoba  in  1886,  and  was  appointed
collector  of  customs  for  Winnipeg  in  1887.

SCOTT,  Thomas  Alexander,  railroad-manager,
b.  in  Loudon,  Franklin  co,,  Pa.,  28  Dec,  1824;  d.
in  Darby,  Pa.,  21  May,  1881.  His  father,  Thomas,
who  died  when  the  son  was  ten  vears  old,  kept  a
tavern  on  the  turnpike  between  Philadelphia  and
Pittsburg.  The  boy  worked  on  a  farm,  attended  a
village  school,  served  in  countrj'  stores,  and  be-
came, on  1  Aug.,  1841,  clerk  to  Maj.  James  Patton,
collector  of  tolls  on  the  state  road  at  Columbia,  Pa.
In  1847  he  was  made  chief  clerk  to  the  collector
of  tolls  at  Philadelphia,  and  in  1850  he  became
connected  with  the  {)artially  constructed  Pennsyl-
vania railroad,  was  appointed  its  general  super-
intendent in  1858.  and  in  1859  was  chosen  vice-
'  president.  He  soon  became  known  as  one  of  the
most  enterprising  railroad  men  in  the  country.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  on
the  staff  of  Gov.  Andrew  G.  Curtin,  and  was  very  en-
ergetic in  eouipping  volunteers  and  sending  them
forward  to  Washington.  On  27  April,  1861,  he  was
asked  by  the  secretarv  of  war  to  o|)en  a  new  line
from  Wjishington  to  Philadelphia,  which  he  did  by
way  of  Annapolis  and  Perrysville  with  surprising
quickiK'ss.  He  was  commissioned  colonel  of  vol-
unteers on  3  May,  and  on  23  May  was  given  charge
of  all  government  railways  and  telegraphs.  On  1
Aug,  he  WHS  ap[X)inted  assistant  secretary  of  war,
which  office  he  was  the  first  to  hold.  Col.  Scott
was  sent  in  January,  1862,  to  organize  transiK>rta-
tion  in  the  northwest,  and  in  March  to  jierform  the
same  duty  on  the  western  rivers.  On  1  June  he
resignod  lo  devote  himself  to  his  railway  aiTairs,
but  on  24  Sept.,  1863,  he  entered  the  government
service  again  for  a  time,  and  superintended  the
trans|M)rtation  of  two  army  corje  to  relieve  Gen.
William  S.  Rosecrans  at  Chattanooga.  This  he  did
with  remarkable  speed,  connecting  different  lines


by  improviso<l  tracks,  and  sending  out  trains  in
great  numbers  by  every  available  route.  Col.
Scott  was  instrumcnul  in  furthering  the  policy  by
which  the  Pennsvlvania  roa<l  m-cure*!  control  of  its
western  lines.  In  1871,  when  a  s«*[iurate  company
was  chartered to oi)erate these, he IxH.wme its

g resident,  lie  wjis  also  president  of  the  Union
acific  railroad  from  March,  1871,  till  March,  1872,
and  in  1874  succecdwl  to  the  presidency  of  the
Pennsylvania  road.  Failing  health  forced  him  to
travel  abroad  in  1878,  and  on  1  June,  1880,  he  re-
signed. To  the  energv,  alertness,  and  8«iund  busi-
ness principles  of  Col.  Scott  may  Ije  attributed
much  of  the  prosrwrity  that  has  Ijcen  attained  by
the  road  of  which  he  was  an  officer.  liesides  his
connection  with  the  Pennsylvania  system,  he  was
the  projector  of  the  Texas  Pacific  road,  and  for
many  years  its  president,

SCOTT,  Thomas  Fielding,  P,  K.  bishop,  b,  in
Iredell  county,  N.  C,  12  March,  1807 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  14  July,  1867.  He  was  {jraduated  at
Franklin  college,  Athens  (now  I  niversity  of
Georgia),  in  1829,  was  ordained  deacon  in  St,  Paul's
church,  Augusta,  Ga.,  12  March,  1843,  by  Bishop
Elliott,  and  priest  in  Christ  church,  Macon,  Ga.,
24  Feb.,  1844,  by  the  same  bishop.  He  became  at
this  date  rector  of  St,  James's  church.  Marietta,
Ga.,  and  not  long  afterward  of  Trinity  church,
Columbus,  Ga.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  the  University  of  Georgia  in  185J3.  He  was
elected  missionary  bishop  of  Oregon  and  Wash-
ington territories,  and  was  consecrated  in  Christ
church.  Savannah,  Ga.,  8  Jan.,  1854.  On  his  way
to  the  eastern  states.  Bishop  Scott  contracted  a
fever  in  crossing  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  and  he
died  a  few  days  after  landing  in  New  York.

SCOTT,  Walter,  religious  leader,  b.  in  Moffat,
Dumfries-shire,  Scotland,  31  Oct.,  1796;  d.  in  Mays-
lick,  Ky.,  23  April,  1861.  He  came  of  the  same
ancestry  as  the  novelist.  After  an  academic  train-
ing he  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Uni-
versity of  Edin-
burgh, and  after-
ward sailed  to
the  United  States,
where  he  arrived,
7  July,  1818.  He
pursued  his  stud-
ies and  taught  in
New  York  and
Pittsburg,  and  in
the  latter  city  in
1821  he  formed  an
acquaintance  with
Thomas  and  Alex-
ander Campbell,
which  soon  be-
came a  lasting
friendship.  The
three  engaged in

an  earnest  and  critical  examination  of  the  Bible
and  of  the  earlier  writers,  by  which  they  became
convinced  that  the  existing  forms  of  Christianity
were  in  wide  departure  from  the  simple  discipline
of  the  primitive  church.  In  1822  the  Campljclls
and  Scott  had  arrived  at  a  harmonious  agreement
concerning  a  plan  for  the  union  of  Christians;
and,  without  uesiring  to  form  another  sect,  they
endeavored  to  draw  men  together  into  the  origi-
nal denomination  ujjon  common  grounds  of  ortho-
dox religion.  In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  Alexander
Campl)ell  now  l)egan  the  publication  of  the  "Chris-
tian Baptist,"  which  obtained  a  large  circulation.
Scott  wrote  for  this  perioilical,  and  at  once  took


^^^k^!k^  <^e4H>(r


440


SCOTT


SCOTT


the  pulpit  and  proceeded  to  point  out  what  he
considered  the  glaring  defects  in  the  mi^ern  man-
ner of  preaching  the  gosi>el.  His  powers  of  ora-
tory were  remarkable,  and  he  lived  to  see  an  organ-
ized ministry  preaching  to  many  followers  lliose
views  of  Christianity  which  had  engaged  all  the
faculties  of  his  life.  Scott  was  deeply  concerned
at  the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  and  published
"  The  Union,"  a  painphlet  in  the  interest  of  peace
(Cincinnati,  1800).  The  illness  of  which  he  died
was  intensified  by  prief  at  hearing  of  the  attack  on
Fort  Sumter.  His  published  works  were  "The
Gospel  liestored"  (1854);  and  "The  Messiahship,
or  tne  Great  Demonstration  "  (1858),  besides  brief-
er contributions  to  the  press  explaining  his  re-
ligious views.  His  life  has  been  written  by  Will-
iam Baxter  (1874).

SCOTT,  William  Anderson,  clergyman,  b.  in
Rock  Creek,  Bedford  co.,  Tenn.,  31  Jan.,  1813 ;  d.  in
San  Francisco,  Cal.,  14  Jan.,  1885.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Cumberland  college,  Tenn.,  in  1833,  stud-
ied in  Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1833-'4,
and  in  1835  was  ordained  by  the  presbytery  of
Louisiana.  After  missionary  service  in  1835-'6
and  teaching  in  183(}-'40,  he  was  pastor  of  churches
in  Tuscaloosa,  Ala.,  New  Orleans,  La.,  and  San
Francisco,  Cal.,  after  which  he  went  to  England  in
1861  and  was  for  some  time  settled  over  a  congre-
gation in  Birmingham.  On  his  return  he  had
charge  of  a  church  in  New  York  city  in  1863-'70,
and  then  of  one  in  San  Francisco  till  his  death.
He  was  also  professor  of  mental  and  moral  phi-
losophy and  systematic  theolog:y  in  the  theological
school  of  the  latter  city  after  its  establishment  in
1871.  The  University  of  Alabama  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1844,  and  the  University  of  the
city  of  New  York  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1872.  Dr.
Scott  edited  the  New  Orleans  "  Presbyterian  "  for
three  years,  founded  the  "  Pacific  Expositor,"  and
was  the  author  of  "  Daniel,  a  Model  for  Young
Men  "(New  York,  1854);  "Achan  in  El  Dorado^'
(San  Francisco,  1855) ;  "  Trafle  and  Letters  "  (New
York,  1856);  "The  Giant  Judge "  (San  Francisco,
1858);  "The  Bible  and  Politics"  (1859);  "The
Church  in  the  Armv,  or  the  Four  Centurions  of
the  Gospels"  (New  Vork,  1862);  "The  Christ  of
the  Apostles'  Creed  "  (1867) ;  and  other  works. —
His  son,  Robert  Nicholson,  soldier,  b.  in  Win-
chester, Tenn.,  21  Jan.,  1838 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  5  March,  1887,  attended  school  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  and  New  Orleans,  La.,  and  studied  law  in
San  Francisco,  Cal.,  but  was  appointed  from  Cali-
fornia 2d  lieutenant  of  infantry,  21  Jan.,  1857,  and
served  on  the  Pacific  coast  till  the  civil  war,  com-
manding the  U.  S.  steamer  "  Massachusetts  "  dur-
ing the  San  Juan  difficulties  in  1859.  He  was  pro-
moted captain  in  September,  1861,  and  afterward
served  on  staff  duty  in  the  adjutant-general's  de-
partment. He  was  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
till  June,  1863,  receiving  a  major  s  brevet  for  gal-
lantry at  Gaines's  Mill,  where  he  was  wounded,
and  in  1863-'4  was  senior  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
Henry  W.  Halleck.  He  continued  to  serve  on  staff
duty  till  1870,  was  professor  of  military  science  in
a  school  at  Faribault,  Minn.,  in  1872-'3,  and  in
1873-'7  commanded  Fort  Ontario,  N.  Y.  From
1877  till  his  death  he  was  in  charge  of  the  publica-
tion of  war  records  in  Washington.  He  was  pro-
moted major  in  1879,  and  lieutenant-colonel  in
1885.  In  1878  he  served  as  military  secretary  to  a
congressional  committee  on  the  reorganization  of
the  army.  Col.  Scott  published  "  Digest  of  the
Military  Laws  of  the  United  States"  (1872).

SCOtX,  William  Cowper,  clergyman,  b.  in
Martiusburg,  Va.,  13  Jan.,  1817;  d.  in  Bethesda,


Va.,  28  Oct.,  1864.  His  father  and  grandfather
were  ministers  of  the  Presbyterian  church,  and  the
son,  after  graduation  at  Siouth  Hanover  college,
Ind.,  in  1837,  and  at  Union  theological  seminary,
Va.,  in  1840,  also  became  a  clergyman  of  that  de-
nomination. He  was  pastor  of  several  churches  in
his  native  state  till  his  death,  except  during  two
years,  when  feeble  health  compelled  him  to  desist
from  preaching,  and  he  was  occupied  in  teaching
and  writing  for  periodicals.  Mr.  Scott  was  the
author  of  a  work  on  "  Genius  and  Faith,  or  Poetry
and  Religion  in  their  Mutual  Relations,"  whicn
has  received  high  praise  for  its  depth  of  thought
and  its  correct  literary  taste  (New  York,  1853).

SCOTT,  Winfleld,  soldier,  b.  in  Dinwiddle  coun-
ty, near  Petersburg,  Va.,  13  June,  1786 ;  d.  at  West
?oint,  N.  Y..  29  May,  1866.  He  was  educated  at
William  and  Mary  college,  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1806,  and  in  1808  entered  the  array
as  a  captain  of  light  artillery.  While  stationed  at
Baton  Rouge,  La.,  in  1809,  he  was  court-martialled
for  remarks  on  the  conduct  of  his  superior  officer.
Gen.  Wilkinson,  and  was  suspended  for  one  year,
which  he  devoted  to  the  stucly  of  military  tactics.
In  July,  1812,  he  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  and
ordered  to  the  Canada  frontier.  Arriving  at  Lewis-
ton  while  the  affair  of  Queenstown  heights  was  in
progress,  he  crossed  the  river,  and  the  field  was  won
under  his  direction ;  but  it  was  afterward  lost  and
he  and  his  command  were  taken  prisoners  from  the
refusal  of  the  troops  at  Lewiston  to  cross  to  their
assistance.  In  January,  1813,  he  was  exchanged  and
joined  the  army  under  Gen.  Dearborn  as  adjutant-
general  with  the  rank  of  colonel.  In  the  attack
on  Fort  George,  27  May,  he  was  severely  hurt  by
the  explosion  of  a  powder-magazine,  fn  the  au-
tumn he  commanded  the  advance  in  Wilkinson's
descent  of  the  St.  Lawrence — an  operation  directed
against  Montreal,  but  which  was  abandoned.  In
March,  1814,  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general,  and
established  a  camp  of  instruction  at  Buffalo.  On
3  July,  Scott's  and  Ripley's  brigades,  with  Hind-
man's  artillery,  crossed  the  Niagara  river  and  took
Fort  Erie  and  a  part  of  its  garrison.  On  the  5th
was  fought  the  battle  of  Cnippewa,  resulting  in
the  defeat  of  the  enemy,  and  on  25  July  that  of
Lundy's  Lane,  or  Bridge  water,  near  Niagara  Falls,
in  which  Scott  had  two  horses  killed  under  him
and  was  twice  severely  wounded.  His  wound  of
the  left  shoulder  was  critical,  his  recover)'  painful
and  slow,  and  his  arm  was  left  partially  disabled.
At  the  close  of  the  war  Scott  was  offered  and  de-
clined a  seat  in  the  cabinet  as  secretary  of  war,  and
was  promoted  to  be  major-general,  with  the  thanks
of  congress  and  a  gold  medal  for  his  services.  He
assisted  in  the  reduction  of  the  army  to  a  peace  es-
tablishment, and  then  visited  Europe  in  a  military
and  diplomatic  capacity.  He  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1816,  and  in  1817  married  Miss
Mayo,  of  Richmond,  Va.  A  part  of  his  time  he
now  devoted  to  the  elaboration  of  a  manual  of  fire-
arms and  military  tactics.  In  18J32  he  set  out
from  Fort  Dearborn  (now  Chicago,  111.)  with  a  de-
tachment to  take  part  in  the  hostilities  against  the
Sacs  and  Foxes,  but  the  capture  of  Black  Hawk
ended  the  war  before  Scott's  arrival  on  the  field.
In  the  same  year  he  commartded  the  Federal  forces
in  Charleston  harbor  during  the  nullification
troubles,  and  his  tact,  discretion,  and  decision  did
much  to  prevent  the  threatened  civil  war.  In  1835
he  went  to  Florida  to  engage  in  the  war  with  the
Seminoles,  and  afterward  to  the  Creek  country.
He  was  recalled  in  1837  and  subjected  to  inquiry
for  the  failure  of  his  campaigns,  the  court  finding
in  his  favor. In  1838  he  was  efficient  in  promoting


»>


w/u  f-c^^ Jc<r/^


oOC^-'-ft^  <^  )iA<^" ^  ^


P  AfJTlefcc ^  '"o


SCOTT


SCOTT


441


A^x^i^^^A.^.^  yci^


the  DMOPf ul  remo^'al  of  the  CberokeM  from  Georgia
to  tneir  pn-sent  n-wrvHtion  beyond  the  Mi.<wuwippi.
The  thn'ati'n»'<l  ••ollision  with  (Jn-Mt  Hritnin.  jcrow*
inp  out  of  lh<*  (lisputoil  lN>iuMlnr>--liiie  between
Miiiiie  an<l  Ni<w  Uniiiiiwick,  whm  nvertetl  in  1889,
mniiily  through  the  piu-iflr  e(T<»rtj»  of  Scott,  and
the  <iiiestiori  wa.s  fliially  nettled  by  the  Wcb»ter-
Ashburton  tmily  of  1842.

By  the  death  of  (ien,  Mat-omb  in  1841  Seott  lie-
cain'e  commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of  the  I'nitetl

States.  In  1847
ho  watt  aligned
to  the  chief  cora-
mandof  thearmy
in  Mexico.  Draw-
ing a  iKjrtion  of
Taylor  9  troops
ojteratinff  from
the  Rio  (f  ramie,
and  assembling
his  force  at  Ijo-
bos  island,  on  9

March  he land-

-'>  '^^Pf^WS*  •' ed 12,000 men
1''  '  ' '*-t1Jt and invested

Vera  Cruz.  The
mortar  -  battery
opened  on  the
22<1.  and  the
siege  -  guns  two
days  later,  and
on  the  26th  the  city  and  the  castle  of  San  Juan
d'l'lloacapitulate«l.  after  nearly  7,000  missiles  had
been  fired.  The  garrison  of  5.000  men  grounded
arms  outside  of  the  city  on  the  29th.  On  8  April,
Scott  U'gan  his  march  toward  Jalapa,  and  on  the
17th  n-nched  the  Mexican  army  under  Santa-Anna,
which  occupied  the  strong  mountain-pass  of  Cerro
Gonlo.  in  a  defile  formed  by  the  Rio  del  Plan.  On
the  following  morning  at  sunrise  the  Americans,
8.500  stmng.  attacked  the  Mexican  armv  of  more
than  12,000.  and  at  2  p.  M.  ha<l  driven  the  enemy
from  every  jioint  of  his  line,  cjipturing  5  generals,
8.000  men.  4..">00  stand  of  arms,  and  48  cannon,
and  killing  and  wounding  more  than  1,000,  with  a
loss  of  less  than  500.  Paroling  his  prisoners  and
destroying  most  of  the  stores,  .Scott  a«lvance«l  on
the  next  day  to  Jalapa,  which  he  capture<l  on  19
April.  Perote  was  occupietl  on  the  22u.  and  Puebia
on  15  May.  Here  the  army  remained,  drilling  and
waiting  for  re-enforcements  till  7  Aug.  Gen.  Scott
had  vainly  asked  that  the  new  troops  should  be  dis-
ciplined and  instructed  in  the  United  .States  before
joining  the  army  in  Mexico,  and  the  failure  to  do
this  gave  Santa-Anna  an  op|K)rtunity  to  create  a
new  army  and  fortify  the  capital.  Scott  began  on
7  Au^.  to  advance  toward  tne  city  of  Mexico  by
the  National  road,  and,  while  diverting  the  atten-
tion of  the  enemy  by  a  feint  on  the  strong  fortress
of  El  Peflon  on  the  northwest,  made  a  detour  to
San  Augustin  on  the  south.  He  then  attacked  and
carrit'd  successively  Contreras  and  Churubusco.  and
could  have  taken  the  capital,  but  an  armistic-e  till  7
Sept.  was  agreed  upon  to  allow  the  peace  commis-
sioner, Nicholas  P.  Trist.  an  opportunity  to  nego-
tiate. At  its  close,  operations  were  resumed  on  the
southwest  of  the  city,  defended  by  14,000  Mexicans
occupying  Molino  del  Rev.  and  Gen.  Worth's  loss
was  in  storming  Molino  del  Rey  before  the  attack
on  tlje  wcxkUhI  and  stronglv  fortifleil  eminence  of
ChapulteiKH'.  On  8  Sept..  Oen.  Worth  with  ;i.500
men  attacked  Molino  del  Rey.  capturing  much  ma-
teriel and  more  than  800  prisoners,  but  losing  one
fourth  of  his  command,  nictuding  flfly-eight  offi-
cers. On  the  lyth  Chapultepec  wau  stormed  and


carried,  and  on  the  moming  of  the  14th  Scott's
army  marched  into  the  city  ami  occupiwl  the  na-
tioual  palace.  There  was  some  stnn-l -fighting  and
firing  u|M)n  the  tniops  from  the  buildings,  but  this
was  soon  suppreflseu,  order  was  eslabli>he<l.  and  a
contribution  levied  on  the  citjr  of  |150,()00.  two
thirds  of  which  Gen.  Scott  remitt«<l  to  the  L'nit«d
States  to  found  military  asylums.  Taxes  were  laid
for  the  supi>ort  of  the  army,  and  a  civil  organiza-
tion under  tne  prot^t-tion  of  the  tn>o|M  was  created.
The  treaty  of  (tua<lalu|>e  Hidalgo.  negotiate<l  br
Mr.  Trist  and  other  commissioners,  Judge  ('liJIonI,
afterward  of  the  supreme  court,  of  the  nnmlM-r,  was
8igne<l  on  2  Feb.,  1848,  and  »«x)n  after  Mexico  was
evacuated  by  the  U.  S.  troops.  A  court  of  inquiry
into  the  conduct  of  the  war  onlv  re<lounde(l  to  the
fame  of  Scott.  In  1852  he  was  tlfie  candidate  of  the
Whig  party  for  the  presidencv.  and  received  the
electoral  votes  of  Vermont.  Massac hus(>tt.s,  Ken-
tuckv,  and  Tennessee,  all  the  other  states  voting
for  the  Demot-ratic  candidate.  Gen.  Pierce,  In  IH.")?
Gen.  Scott  as  commissioner  successfully  settle<l  the
difficulty  arising  from  the  dispute<l  Ijoundank'-line
of  the  Lnited  States  and  British  America  through
the  Straits  of  Fuca.  Age  and  infirmity  prevented
him  from  taking  an  active  iiart  in  the  civil  war,  and
on  31  Oct.,  1861,  he  retireti  from  service,  retaining
his  rank,  pay,  and  allowances.  .Scnm  afterwanl  he
made  a  brief  visit  to  Euroiie,  and  he  pass^tl  most
of  the  remainder  of  his  Jays  at  West  Point,  re-
marking when  he  arrivetl  there  for  the  last  time:
"  I  have  come  here  to  die."  Two  weeks  he  lingered,
and  then  fell  for  a  short  time  into  a  stuf>or.  from
which  he  aroused,  retaining  entire  possession  of
his  mental  faculties  and  recognizing  his  family  and
attendants  to  the  last.  A  few  minutes  after  eleven
on  the  morning  of  29  May  he  passed  away  so  calm-
ly that  the  exact  moment  of  his  death  whs  not
known.  As  P>e<lerick  the  Great's  last  completely
conscious  utterance  was  in  reference  to  his  favorite
English  greyhound,  Scott's  was  in  reganl  to  his
magnificent  horse,  the  same  noble  animal  that  fol-


lowed in  his  funeral  procession  a  few  days  later.
Turning  to  his  servant,  the  old  veteran's  last  words
were :  "  James,  take  good  care  of  the  horse."  In
accortlance  with  his  expressed  wish,  he  was  buried
at  West  Point  on  1  June,  and  his  remains  were  ac-
companie<l  to  the  grave  by  many  of  the  most  illus-
trious men  of  the  land,  including  Gen.  Grant  and
Admiral  Farragut.

Gen.  Scott  was  a  man  of  true  courage.  |>ersonal-
ly,  morally,  and  religiously  brave.  He  was  in  man-
lier, association,  and  feeling,  courtiv  and  chival-
rous. He  was  always  egual  to  the  danger — great
on  great  occasions.  His  unswerving  loyalty  and
patriotism  were  ever  conspicuous  and  of  the  lofti-
est character.  All  who  appn*ciate<l  his  military
genius  regrette<l.  when  the  war  of  the  relx>llion  be-
gan, that  .Scott  was  not  as  he  had  l»e<»n  at  the  |ie-
rio<l  of  his  Mexican  victories.  He  ha<l  not  the
popularity  of  several  of  his  suwessors  among  the
soldiers.  He  was  too  stately  and  too  exacting  in
his  discipline — that  power  which  Camot  calls  "the
glory  of  the  soldier  and  the  strength  of  armies.**


442


SCOTT


SCREVEN


■rvrf^'"'


It  was  to  these  characteristics  that  Scott  owed  his
title  of  "  Fuss  and  Feathers,"  the  only  nickname
ever  applied  to  him.  Physically  he  was  "  framed
in  the  prodigality  of  nature."  Not  even  Washing-
ton jK)sses.sed  so  majestic  a  presence'.  As  Su-
warrow  was  the  smallest  and  pnysically  the  most
insignificant  lo<jking,  so  was  Scott  the  most  impos-
ing of  all  the  illustrious  soldiers  of  the  19th  cen-
tury, possibly  of  ail  the  centuries.  The  steel  en-
graving represents  him  at  upward  of  threescore

and  ten.  The  vig-
nette is  from  a
{tainting  by  Ing-
nam,  taken  at  the
age  of  thirty-seven.
A  portrait  by  Weir,
showing  Scott  as
he  was  at  t  he  close
of  the  Mexican  war,
is  in  the  U.S. mili-
tary academy.  The
statue  by  Henry  K.
Brown  stands  in
Scott  circle,  Wash-
ington. Gen.  Scott
was  the  author  of
a  pamphlet  against
the  useof  intoxicat-
ing liquors  (Phil-
adelphia, 1821) ;
"  General  Regula-
tions for  the  Army"  (1825);  "Letter  to  the  Secre-
tary of  War"  (New  York,  1827):  "Infantry  Tac-
tics," translated  from  the  French  (3  vols.,  1835):
"  Letter  on  the  Slavery  Question  "  (1843) ;  "  Ab-
stract of  Infantry  Tactics  "  (Philadelphia,  1861):
"  Memoirs  of  Lieut.-Gen.  Scott,  written  by  Him-
self"  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1864).  Biographies  of
him  have  been  published  by  Edward  Deering  Mans-
field (New  York,  1846) ;  Joel  Tyler  Headley  (1852) ;
and  Orville  James  Victor  (1861). See  also  "  Cam-

Edgn  of  Gen.  Scott  in  the  Valley  of  Mexico,"  by
ieut,  Raphael  Semmes  (Cincinnati,  1852). — His
son-in-law,  Henry  Lee,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Berne,
N.  C„  3  Oct.,  1814;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  Jan.,
1886,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1833,  and  entered  the  4th  infantry  as  2d  lieu-
tenant. After  three  years'  service  in  the  Gulf  states
he  took  part  in  the  war  against  the  Seminoles,
and  in  1837-'8  was  engaged  in  removing  Cherokees
to  the  west,  after  which,  until  1840,  he  served
with  his  regiment  as  adjutant.  In  1842  he  was
appointed  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,
whose  daughter,  Cornelia,  he  had  married,  and  ac-
companied him  to  Mexico  in  the  capacity  of  chief
of  stafif.  He  attained  the  rank  of  captain  on  16
Feb.,  1847,  and  for  his  gallantry  in  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz,  the  battles  of  Cerro  (lordo  and  Churu-
busco,  and  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  re-
ceived the  brevets  of  major  and  lieutenant-colonel.
After  the  war  he  was  acting  judge-advocate  of  the
eastern  division  in  1848-'50,  and  senior  aide-de-
camp to  Gen.  Scott  from  1850  till  1861.  He  had
been  made  lieutenant-colonel  on  the  staff  on  7
March.  1855,  was  promoted  colonel  on  14  May,
1861,  and  was  inspector-general  in  command  of  the
forces  in  New  York  city  until  30  Oct.,  1861,  when
he  was  retired  from  active  service  for  '"disability
resulting  from  long  and  faithful  services,  and  from
injuries  and  exposure  in  the  line  of  duty."  He
accompanied  Gen.  Scott  to  Europe  on  leave  of  ab-
sence, remaining  abroad  till  the  close  of  the  war.
He  tendered  his  resignation  in  1862,  but  it  was  not
accepted  until  four  years  later.  He  was  the  author
of  "A  Military  Dictionary"  (New  York,  1861).


SCOULLEK,  Janieg  Bronn,  clergvman.  h,  near
Ncwville,  Cumberland  co..  Pa.,  12  July,  1820.  He
was  graduated  at  Dickinson  college  in  1839,  and  at
the  Associate  Reformed  theological  seminary,  Alle-
ghany, Pa.,  in  1842.  He  was  successivelv  pastor
of  the  United  Presbyterian  churches  in  Philadel-
phia, Cuylersville,  and  Argyle,  N.  Y.,  in  1844-"62,
and  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Instructor,"  Philadel-

ghia.  Pa.,  in  1862-'3.  Muskingum  college,  Concord,
hio,  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1880.  He
has  contributed  largely  to  magazines,  and  is  the
author  of  "  History  of  the  Big  Spring  Presbytery  "
(Harrisburg,  Pa.,  1879) ;  "  History  of  the  Prasbytery
of  Argyle  (1880) ;  a  "  Manual  of  the  Presbyterian
Church"  (1881);  and  "Calvinism,  its  History  and
Influences"  (1885).

SCOVILLE,  Joseph  A.,  journalist,  b.  in  Con-
necticut in  1811;  d.  in  New  York  citv,  25  June,
1864.  He  engaged  in  journalism  in  New  York,
and  afterward  was  for  some  years  the  private  sec-
retaiy  of  John  C.  Calhoun.  During  the  civil  war
he  was  New  York  correspondent  of  the  London
"  Herald  "  and  "  Standard,"  under  the  signature  of
"  Manhattan,"  and  in  their  columns  violently  op-
posed the  administration  of  President  Lincoln.
He  published  "  Adventures  of  Clarence  Bolton,  or
Life  in  New  York"  (London,  1860);  "The  Old
Merchants  of  New  York,"  under  the  pen-name  of
Walter  Barrett,  Clerk  (4  vols.,  1861-6);  "Vigor," a
novel  (1864) ;  and  "  Marion  "  (1864).

SCRANTON,  George  Whitefleld,  manufac-
turer, b.  in  Madison,  Conn.,  11  May,  1811;  d.  in
Scranton,  Pa.,  24  March,  1861.  He  settled  in  Ox-
ford, N.  J.,  in  1828,  where  he  was  a  teamster  and
subsequently  a  clerk,  engaged  in  the  manufacture
of  iron  in  1839,  and  the  next  year,  with  his  brother
Joseph,  built  furnaces  for  smelting  ore  with  an-
thracite coal  in  the  village  of  Slocum,  Pa.,  which
was  subsequently  named  Scranton  in  honor  of  the
brothers.  For  many  years  he  was  president  of  the
Lackawanna  and  Western,  and  the  Cayuga  and
Susquehaima  railroads,  and  in  1858-'61  he  was
a  member  of  congress,  having  been  elected  as  a
Protectionist  Republican.  —  His  brother,  Joseph
Hand,  capitalist,  b.  in  Madison,  Conn.,  27  June.
1813 ;  d.  in  Baden  Baden,  Germany,  6  June,  1872,
began  life  as  a  clerk  in  New  Haven,  .subsequently
entered  business  in  Augusta,  Ga.,  and  in  1847  set-
tled in  the  coal  region  of  the  Lackawanna  valley.
Pa.  With  the  aid  of  other  members  of  his  family
he  developed  the  vast  coal  and  iron  interests  of
that  section,  and  lived  to  see  Scranton,  which  was
a  hamlet  of  two  or  three  houses,  become  a  city  with
a  population  of  50,000.  He  was  successively  for
twenty  years  the  manager,  superintendent,  and
president  of  the  Lackawanna  iron  and  coal  com-
pany, and  president  of  several  railways  and  manu-
lacturing  and  banking  institutions.

SCREVEN,  WilHam,  clergyman,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1629 ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  S.  C,  in  1713.  He
came  to  this  coimtrv  about  1640,  settled  in  Piscata-
way,  N.  H.,  and  suffered  such  persecution  from  the
Puritans  on  account  of  his  religious  faith  that  he
removed  to  South  Carolina  and  founded  the  first
Baptist  church  of  Charleston.  He  subsequently
removed  to  a  spot  about  sixty  miles  north  of
Charleston,  and  was  the  original  proprietor  of  the
land  on  which  the  town  of  Georgetown  was  built.
He  is  the  author  of  "  An  Ornament  for  Church
Members,"  published  after  his  death  (Charleston,
1721). — His  grandson,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Georgia
about  1744;  d.  near  Midway,  Ga.,  24  Nov.,  1778,
early  espoused  the  patriot  cause,  and  in  1774  was
one  of  the  committee  that  drew  up  articles  of
association  for  the  defence  of  liberty  in  Georgia.


SCUIBNKR


SCUDDKR


443


He  WBS  pommissioncMl  brijfa<lK'r-^en«'raI  of  Goorjfia
militia  wlu-n  tin-  !«Uito  wa-s  iiivaiU'd  by  tlio  Hritish
from  Kjii't  Floridiv,  oominaiidiHl  a  brigade,  and,
after  rf|»i'aU'd  skirmifihes  with  tlie  enemy  l^elween
Sunbury  and  Savannah,  received  a  niort«l  wound
at  Midway.  Congress  ordered  the  erection  of  a
monument  to  his  memory,

SCKIUNKK,  ChurleH,  publisher,  b.  in  New
York  city,  21  Keb,,  1821 ;  d.  in  LuceniP,  Switzer-
land. 2i(  Aug.,  1871.  After  a  year  at  the  University
of  New  York  he  entered  Prineeton  college,  where
he  was  gradualetl  in  1840,  and  l>egan  the  study  of
law,  but  was  obliged  by  ill  health  to  make  a  trip  to
Euro|)e.  On  his  return  he  forme<l  a' partnership
in  1846  with  Isaac  D.  Baker,  under  the  firm-name
of  Baker  and  Scribner,  and  began  the  publishing
business.  A  year  or  two  lat«r  Mr.  Baker  dieil,  and
Mr.  Scribner  continued  under  the  title  of  Charles
Scribner.  and  later  of  Charles  Scribner  and  Co.
With  Charles  Welfortl  (who  died  in  May,  1885)  he
formed  in  1857  the  house  of  Scribner  and  Welford
for  the  im|)ortation  of  foreign  books,  which  is  still
carried  on  under  the  srfme  firm-name.  In  1865  he
began  the  publication  of  "  Hours  at  Home,"  a
monthly  magazine,  which  in  1870  was  merged  in
"Scribner's  Monthly,"  under  the  edit<^)rship  of
Josiah  G.  Holland,  and  which  was  published  by
a  separate  company,  Scribner  and  Co.,  with  Dr.
Holland  and  Roswell  Smith  as  part  owners.  On
Mr.  Scribner's  death,  the  next  year,  the  firm  of
Charles  Scribner  and  Co.  was  reorganized  as  Scrib-
ner, Armstrong,  and  Co..  the  partners  being  John
Blair  Scribner,  Andrew  C.  Armstrong,  and  ixiward
Seymour,  and  in  1877  the  publication-house  was
removed  to  743  Broadway,  its  present  site.  Mr.
Seymour  died  28  April,  1877,  and  in  1878,  when
Mr.  Armstrong  retired,  the  firm-name  was  changed
to  Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  under  which  form  the
business  has  been  conducted  since  1879  by  Charles
Scribner  and  Arthur  H.  Scribner,  younger  brothers
of  John  Blair.  In  1881  the  firm  sold  out  their
interest  in  the  magazine  company,  on  the  agree-
ment that  the  name  of  the  magazine  and  of  the
company  should  be  altered,  and  the  names  were
accordingly  changed  to  the  "  Century  Magazine  "
and  the  Century  company.  Charles  Scribner's
Sons  agreed  also  not  to  publish  an^  magazine
for  five  years,  but  after  the  expiration  of  that
time,  in  January,  1887,  they  began  the  publication
of  a  new  monthly,  entitled  "  Scribner's  Magazine,"
edited  by  Ekiward  L.  Burlingame  (q.  v.).  The  house
has  been  from  the  beginning  solely  a  publishing
firm  as  distinguished  from  a  printing  and  publish-
ing firm,  and  this  has  had  an  mfluence  on  tne  char-
acter of  its  publications,  which  have  chiefly  been
confined  to  the  works  of  contemporary  authors.
Besides  its  valuable  list  of  literary  and  e«luca-
tional  works,  it  has  a  large  subscription  depart-
ment, from  which  have  issued  some  of  the  most
important  and  successful  publications  of  the  time.
— John  Blair,  eldest  son  of  Charles,  b.  in  New
York  city,  4  June,  1^50;  d.  there,  21  Jan..  1879,
studied  at  Princeton,  and  succeeded  his  father  as
head  of  the  firm  in  1871.

SCl'DDER,  David  Colt,  missionary,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  27  Oct.,  1835;  d.  near  Periakulum,  In-
dia, 19  Nov.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1855,  and  at  Andover  thw)logical  seminary  in
1859.  Having  determinetl  to  become  a  missionary,
he  prpjMired  himself  by  study  of  the  Eastern  lan-
guages until  his  ordination  on  25  Feb.,  1861,  and
m  lH(i2  he  was  given  the  Periakulum  station  in  the
Madura  district  of  southern  India,  where  he  la-
bored until  his  death.  He  contributed  a  series  of
papers  on  foreign  missions  to  the  New  York  "  In-


dependent." Se«>  "  Life  an«l  Ix'tters  of  David  Coit
Scudder,"  by  Horace  H,.S<u(l(l(r  (.New  York,  1H64).
—  His  brother,  Saniii(>l  Hubbard,  naturalist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  13  April,  18;n,  wasgraduate<l  at  Will-
iams in  1857,  and  at  the  I^wrence  scientific  8c*hool
of  Harvard  in  1862.  where  in  1862- '4  he  acted  as
assistant  to  Ixmis  Aga.*wiz  in  the  Museum  of  com-
|jarative  zoology.  In  lH(J2-'70  he  was  secretary  of
the  lk»ston  s<KMetvof  natural  history,  and  he  Rerve<l
as  custodian  to  the  same  society  in  18(W-'70  and  as
its  president  in  1880-'7.  Mr,  Scudder  was  appoint-
ed in  1879  assistant  librarian  of  Harvard,  wdere  he
remained  until  1885,  and  in  1886  he  l>ecame  i>aleon-
tologist  of  the  U,  S,  geological  survey,  whicli  [dace
he  now  (1888)  holds.  He  is  a  member  of  many
scientific  societies,  was  chairman  of  the  section  on
natural  history  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science  in  1874.  and  general  secre-
tary of  the  association  in  1875,  librarian  of  the
An'ierican  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in  1877-'85,
and  in  1877  was  elected  to  the  National  academy
of  sciences.  His  swcialty  is  entomology,  and  he
has  chiefly  studied  uutterfties  and  fossil  insects,  in
the  knowledge  of  which  he  has  no  superior  in  this
country.  He  has  reported  oflicially  on  the  insects
of  New  Hampshire,  and  has  examined  the  speci-
mens that  were  collected  in  the  Yellowstone  expe-
dition of  1873,  and  on  the  geological  surveys  under
Lieut.  George  M.  Wheeler,  Ferdinand  V.  Hayden,
the  British  North  America  boundary  commission,
and  the  Canadian  geological  sur^•ey.  During
1883-'5  he  was  editor  of  "Science,"  published  in
Cambridge.  His  bibliography  down  to  1880  has
been  collected  by  George  Dimmock,  and  includes
about  300  titles.  '  His  larger  works  are  "  Catalogue
of  the  Orthoptera  of  North  America  "  (Washington,
18(J8) ;  "  Entomological  Correspondence  of  Thad-
deus  William  Harris  "  (Boston,  1869);  "  Fossil  But-
terflies" (Salem,  1875);  "Catalogue  of  Scientific
Serials  of  all  Countries,  including  the  Transactions
of  Learned  Societies,  in  the  Natural,  Physical,  and
Mathematical  Sciences,  1633-1876  "  (Cambridge,
1879) ;  "  Butterflies,  their  Structure,  Changes,  and
Life  Histories  "  (New  York.  1882) ;  "  Nomenclator
Zoologicus:  An  Alphabetiea  List  of  all  Generic
Names  that  have  been  employed  by  Natural i.st.s  for
Recent  and  Fossil  Animals'' (Washington,  1882);
"  Systematic  Review  of  Our  Present  Knowledge  of
Fossil  Insects "  (1886),  originally  contributwi  to
Zittel's  "  Handbuch  der  Palaeontologie  "  (Munich,
1885) ;  and  the  "  Winnipeg  Countrj*,  or  Rough-
ing it  with  an  Eclipse  Party,"  by  A  Rochester
Fellow  (Boston.  1886). — Another  brother,  Horace
Elisha,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  16  Oct.,
1838,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1858,  and
soon  afterward  came  to  New  York  city,  where  he
taught  for  three  years.  Meanwhile  he  wrote  his
first  stories  for  children,  which  were  issued  as
"Seven  Little  People  and  their  Friends"  (New
York,  1862).  The  death  of  his  father  led  to  his
return  to  Boston,  and  the  success  of  his  first
book  decided  him  to  follow  literature  exclusively.
His  second  work  was  "  Dream  Children  "  (Cam-
bridge, 1863), and  then  he  prepared  "The  Life  and
Letters  of  David  Coit  Scuuder"  (New  York.  1864).
He  was  editor  of "^^  The  Riverside  Magazine  for
Young  People  "  during  the  four  years  of  its  exist-
ence (1867- 70),  and  published  in  its  third  volume
"Stories  from  My  Attic"  (Boston,  1869).  He  has
since  been  associated  with  the  firm  of  Houghton,
Mifflin  and  Co.,  and  has  e<lite<l  for  them  the  series
of  "  American  Commonwealths,"  also  "  American
Poems"  (1879)  and  "American  Prose  "  (1880).  Mr.
Scudder  was  one  of  the  writers  of  Justin  Winsor's
"  Memorial  History  of  Boston  "  (Boston,  1880-'!).


444


SCUDDER


SCUDDER


His  other  works  include  "The  Bodley  Books,"
a  series  of  books  for  chijdren  (8  vols.,  Boston,
1875-'87) ;  "  The  Dwellers  in  Five-Sisters  Court "
(1876);  "Men  and  Manners  in  Ameritsa"  (New
York,  1876);  "Stories  and  Romances"  (Boston,
1880);  "The  Children's  Book"  (1881);  "Boston
Town"  (1881);  "Noah  Webster,"  in  the  "Ameri-
can Men  of  Letters  "  series  (1882) ;  a  "  History  of
the  United  States"  (Philadelphia,  1884) ;  and  "  Men
and  Letters."  He  was  joint  author  with  Mrs.  Bay-
ard Taylor  of  "  Life  and  Letters  of  Bayard  Tay-
lor" (Boston,  1884).— David  Coit's  daufjlitcr,  VIda
Diitton,  author,  b.  in  Madura,  India,  15  Dec.  1861,
was  graduated  at  Smith  college  in  1884,  and  sul>-
sequently  spent  a  year  in  higher  studies  at  Oxford,
England.  In  1887  she  became  instructor  at  Wel-
lesley  college,  which  place  she  now  (1888)  fills.
Miss  Scudder  has  published  "  How  the  Rain  Sjiriles
were  Freed  "  (Boston,  1883),  and  "Selected  Poems
from  George  MacDonald  "  (New  York,  1887).

SCUDDER,  Henry  Joel,  lawyer,  b.  in  North-
port,  L.  I.,  in  1825  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  12  Feb.,
1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  in  1846,  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  of  New  York  city  in  1848,  and
five  years  later  entered  into  a  partnership  with
James  C.  Carter,  under  the  firm-name  of  Scudder
and  Carter,  in  which  he  continued  until  his  death,
gradually  advancing  to  the  front  rank  in  his  pro-
fession, especially  in  matters  regarding  a<lmiralty
law.  He  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Republican
in  1872  from  a  district  that  had  never  before  l)een
represented  by  a  member  of  that  party,  served  one
term,  declined  renomination,  ana  was  an  unsuc-
cessful candidate  for  a  seat  on  the  New  York  su-
preme bench  in  1875.  Columbia  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  A.  M.  in  1862,  and  Roanoke  college,  Va.,
that  of  LL.  D.  in  1881.

SCUDDER,  John,  missionary,  b.  in  Freehold,
N.  J.,  3  Sept.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Wynberg,  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  Africa,  13  Jan.,  1855.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1811,  and  at  the  New  York  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons  in  1813.  He  then  set-
tled in  New  York
city  and  practised
successfully,  but
in  1819  went  to
India  as  a  mis-
sionary under  the
direction  of  the
American  board.
He  was  ordained
to  the  ministry
of  the  Dutch  Re-
formed church  in
1820,  settled  in
Ceylon,  and  la-
bored there  for
nineteen  years  in
the  double  capa-
city of  ckrg\'raan
and  physician.
His  most  impor-
tant service  was
the  establishment  of  a  large  hospital,  of  which  he
was  also  physician  in  chief,  and  he  was  especially
successful  in  the  treatment  of  «holera  and  yellow
fever.  He  also  founded  several  native  schools  and
churches.  He  was  transferred  to  the  Madras  station
in  1839,  was  in  the  Unitetl  States  in  1842-'6,  and,
returning  in  1847,  labored  until  his  death,  which
occurred  on  a  visit  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  that
had  been  undertaken  for  the  benefit  of  his  health.
His  seven  sons  and  two  daughters  were  all  mission-
aries in  southern  India.  He  published  "  Letters
from  the  East "  (Boston,  1833) ;  "  Appeal  to  Youth


CA>i,ytSLjBiljlU\<~


in  Behalf  of  the  Heathen"  (1846);  "Letters  to
Pious  Young  Men "(1846);  "Provision  for  Pass-
ing over  Jonlan"  (New  York,  1852);  and  many
tracts  and  papers  that  were  published  in  the  "  Mis-
sionary Herald."  See  a  "  Memoir"  of  him  by
Rev.  John  B.  Waterbury  (ia56).— His  son,  Henry
Martyn,  clergyman,  b.  in  Panditeripo,  Jaffna  dis-
trict, Ceylon,  5  Feb.,  1822,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  New  York  in  1840,  and  at  Union
theological  seminary  in  1843,  and  returned  to  In-
dia as  a  missionary  to  the  Madura  station  under
the  care  of  the  American  board.  He  labored
successively  at  Madras,  Arcot,  Vellore,  Coonoos,
and  Oolacommed,  organized  schools  and  churches,
founded  the  Arcot  mission,  and  established  a  dis-
pensary there.  Having  studied  medicine,  he  also
practised  that  profession.  He  prepared  various
religious  books  and  tracts  in  the  Sanscrit,  Tamil,
and  Teluga  languages.  The  failure  of  his  health
in  1864  compelled  his  return  to  this  country,  and
he  was  pastor  of  the  Howard  Presbyterian  church
in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  in  1865-'71,  of  the  Central
Congregational  church  in  Brooklyn  in  1872-'82,
and  from  the  latter  date  till  1887  of  the  Plymouth
Congregational  church,  Chicago,  from  which  he
resigned  in  that  year  to  resume  missionary  work
in  Japan.  His  publications  include  "  Liturgrv  of
the  Reformed  Protestant  Dutch  Church  "  (Madras,
India,  1862) ;  "  The  Bazaar  Book,  or  the  Vernacu-
lar Teacher's  Companion"  (1865);  "Sweet  Savors
of  Divine  Truth,"  a  catechism  (1868) ;  and  "  Spirit-
ual Teaching  "  (1870).  These  are  all  in  the  Tamil
language. — Another  son  of  John,  Jared  Water-
bnry,  missionary,  b.  in  Panditeripo,  Ceylon,  in  1830,
was  graduated  at  Western  Reserve  college  in  1850,
and  at  the  New  Brunswick  theological  seminary  in
1855.  He  was  then  ordained  a  missionary  to  In-
dia under  the  Reformed  Dutch  church,  and  since
1857  has  held  native  charges  there.  He  has  pub-
lished translations  from  the  Tamil  of  Henrv  M.
Scudder's  "  Spiritual  Teaching  "  (Madras,  1870),
and  his  "Bazaar  Book"  (1870),  and  a  "  Histoiy
of  the  Arcot  Mission  "  (1872).  He  is  also  a  mem-
ber of  the  committee  for  the  revision  of  the  Tamil
translation  of  the  Bible. — Another  son  of  John,
Silas  Doremus,  physician,  b,  in  Cevlon,  India,  6
Nov.,  1833 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10  Dec,  1877,  was
graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1856,  studied  medicine,
and  was  licensed  to  practise  in  New  York  city.
He  went  to  India  as  a  medical  missionary  in  1860,
established  himself  at  Arcot,  and  founded  a  dis-

Eensary  and  hospital  there  which  was  supported
y  p]nglish  and  native  residents.  He  also  success-
fully treated  a  large  native  out-door  practice,  and
obtained  patients  among  high-caste  Hindoo  women,
which  had  not  hitherto  been  accomplished.  After
thirteen  years'  labor  for  the  American  board  he
returned  to  this  country  on  account  of  an  illness
which  had  been  occasioned  by  overwork.

SCUDDER,  Nathaniel,  patriot,  b.  near  Hunt-
ington, Long  Island.  N.  Y.,  10  May,  1733;  d.  near
Shrewsbury,  N.  J.,  17  Oct.,  1781.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1751,  studied  medicine,  and
for  many  years  hati  an  extensive  practice  in  the
county  of  Monmouth,  N.  J.  At  the  beginning  of
the  Revolutionary  war  Dr.  Scudder  was  made  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  1st  regiment  of  Monmouth,
New  Jersey,  militia.  In  1777  he  was  made  colonel
of  that  regiment  at  the  joint  meeting  of  the  legis-
lature. During  that  same  year  he  was  a  member
and  a  constant  attendant  upon  the  meetings  of  the
council  of  safety.  On  30  Nov.,  1777,  he  was  elect-
ed a  delegate  to  concress.  In  the  labors  and  re-
sjKJnsibilities  of  legislation  during  the  Revolution-
ary war  he  took  an  active  part. On  13  July,  1778,


SCULL


SEABURY


445


he  mnde  n  powerful  appoai  to  the  Iefn-<<)ature  of
New  Jersey  to  ct»nfer  ujmmj  the  delopttcs  in  con-
gress the  authority  to  sign  the  article)*  uf  fonft*<l-
eration.  This  letter,  published  in  "New  Jersey
Revolutionary  Correspondence,"  stamfM  him  at
once  as  a  strong  writer  and  clear  thinker,  and  a
whoIe-hearte<l  |tatriot.  He  servwl  in  c«)!ijfres«  dur-
ing the  years  1777-'9.  From  1778  till  1782  he  was
a  truste«'  of  the  College  of  New  Jersey.  He  was
also  un  elder  in  the  church  of  the  celebrate*!  Will-
iam Tenneiit,  on  the  old  Monmouth  battle-gmtnul.
During  the  Uevolutrtm,  Monmouth  county  was  fre-
(^uently  exciteti  by  the  incursions  of  foraging  par-
ties of  Britis'h  troops  and  Tories.  In.  an  engage-
ment with  a  party  of  refugees  at  Black's  ixiint  near
Shrewsbury,  Col.  Scudder  was  killed  while  leading
a  Imttalion  of  his  regiment.  He  was  burie<l  with
the  honors  of  war  in  the  old  graveyard  at  the  Ten-
nent  church.  He  was  the  only  congressman  that
was  kilKnl  in  battle  during  the  Revolutionary  war.

SCULIj,  Nicholas,  surveyor,  b.  al)out '  17(K).
About  1722  he  was  engaged  in  surveying  in  Penn-
sylvania, and  occasionally  in  the  public  service,
acting  in  Indian  affairs  in  the  capacitv  of  runner
or  as  interpreter  for  the  Delawares.  He  was  also
a  member  of  Franklin's  Junta  club,  in  1744  he
became  sheriff  of  Philmlelphia  county,  and  in  June,
1748.  he  succeeded  William  Parsons  as  surveyor-
general  of  the  province,  serving  till  December.
17H1.  He  made  a  map  of  the  improved  parts  of
Pennsylvania,  which  was  publishea  by  act  of  par-
liament in  January,  1759.  lie  was  sheriff  of  North-
ampton county  in  1753-'5.  His  .sons,  James,  Peter,
William,  Edward,  and  Jasper  were  surveyors.  Will-
iam published  a  map  of  the  province  in  1770.

SK.VBRA,  Vicente  Coelho  de  (sav-ah -brah),
Brazilian  chemist,  b.  in  Minas  Gcraes  in  1760;  d.
in  Lisbon,  Portugal,  in  March.  1804.  He  was
graduated  at  Coimbra  in  1787,  and.  returning  to  his
native  countrv,  took  part  in  the  conspiracy  of
Minas  Geraes  in  1788. He  was  banished  to  Portu-

El,  where  in  1789  he  became  corresponding  mem-
r  of  the  Academy  of  sciences. of  Lisbon,  and  in
1795  the  University  of  Coimbra  made  him  assistant
professor  of  zoOlogy,  mineralogy,  l)otanv,  and
agriculture.  He  wrote  "  Elementos  de  chimica"
(2  vols.,  Lisbon,  1787);  "  Fermenta^So  em  geral  "
(1788);  '-Calorico"  (1789);  "Memoria  sobre  a  eul-
tura  do  riccino  ou  da  mamona  em  Portugal "
(1794) ;  and  "  Nomenclatura  chimica  Portugueza,
Franceza  e  Latina,"  a  work  of  great  merit  (1801).

SE.\BURY,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Groton,
Conn.,  8  July,  1706 ;  d.  in  Hempstead.  Long  Island,
N.  Y.,  15  June,  1764.  He  was  educated  partly  at
Yale,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1 724.  After
becoming  a  license<l  preacher  of  the  Congregational-
ists  in  1726,  he  was  ordained  deacon  and  priest
in  the  Church  of  England  by  the  bishop  of  Lon-
don in  1731,  and  served  as  a  missionary  of  the  So-
ciety for  propagating  the  gospel.  He  was  rector
of  St.  James's  church.  New  London,  from  1732  till
1743,  and  of  St.  George's  church.  Hempstead,  L.  I.,
from  1743  till  his  death,  connecting  with  liis  work
here  the  charge  of  a  school  and  the  c^re  of  mission
stations  both  on  Long  Island  and  at  Fishkill.  N.  Y.
His  extant  publications  are  a  f^trmon  preache*!  at
New  London  (1742),  and  a  pamphlet  entitled  "A
Modest  Reply  to  a  Letter  from  a  Gentleman  to  his
Friend  in  Dutchess  County"  (New  York.  1759). —
His  son,  Samuel,  1st  bishop  of  the  diocese  of  Con-
necticut, b.  in  Groton,  Conn.,  30  Nov.,  1729;  d.  in
New  Lon<lon,  Conn.,  25  Feb.,  1796,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1748,  was  a  catechist  of  the  Society
for  propagating  the  gospel,  and  a  student  of  the-
ology under  his  father,  until  1752,  and  then  for  a


vear  a  student  of  medicine  at  the  Universitv  of
VMinburgh.  He  was  ordaiiie<l  deacon  by  Dr.  John
Thoma.s,  bishop  of  Lincoln.  21 Dec., 'l75JJ.  and

finest  by  Dr.  Richard  Usl»aldi»ton.  bishop  of  Car-
isle,  in  Ix>n-
d«n.  23  Dec,
17Wi.  Deserved
as  a  missicmary
at  New  linins-
wick.N.  J..fn)m
25  May,  1754,
became  rector
of  Jamaica,  in-
cluding Flush-
ing and  New-
town, L.  I.,  12
Jan.,  1757,  and
rector  of  St.
Peter's,  West-
chester, N.  Y.,
1 March,  1767.  /» ^^  x>

p'iTmSStrZ y^/^ (U^ucc/-

the  exercise  of

his  ministry  by  the  Whigs,  by  some  of  whom  he
was  at  one  time  seized  and  imprisoned  in  New  Ha-
ven for  six  weeks.  He  then  retired  to  the  city  of
New  York,  where  he  supporte<l  himself  in  part  by
the  practice  of  medicine,  serving  also  as  chaplain
of  tne  king's  American  regiment  under  commis-
sion of  Sir  Henry  Clinton  of  14  Feb.,  1778.  He
was  particularly  obnoxious  to  the  American  party
on  account  of  his  authorship  of  the  series  of  pam-
phlets signed  A.  W.  Farmer,  and  entitle<l  "  Free
Thoughts  on  the  Proceedings  of  the  Continental
Congress"  (16  Nov.,  1774);  "The  Congress  Can-
vassed "  (26  Nov.,  1774) :  and  "  A  View  of  the  Con-
troversy between  Great  Britain  and  her  Colonies"
(24  Dec.,  1774).  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  the  University  of  Oxford,  15  Dec..  1777.
Dr.  Seabury  was  electe<l  bishop  of  Connecticut  by
the  Church  of  England  clergy  therein  at  Wood-
bury, 25  March,  1783.  and  applied  to  the  English
episcopate  for  consecration  in  London.  He  await-
ed their  assent  sixteen  months,  but  it  was  withheld
on  account  of  unwillingness  to  act  without  the
sanction  of  the  civil  authority,  and  failure  at  that
time  to  procure  such  sanction;  one  who  was  to
exercise  his  office  in  a  foreign  state  not  lieing  able
to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  required  by  law  of
those  who  were  consecrated  bishops  in  the  English
church.  He  was  finally  consecrated  bishop,  14  Nov.,
1784.  at  Aberdeen,  by  Bishops  Kilgour.  retrie.  and
Skinner,  representing  the  episcopate  of  the  Scot-
tish church,  who  could  not  be  deterre<l  from  exer-
cising the  powers  of  the  episcopal  offic*e  bv  the  ap-
t)rehensionof  the  lossof  temporalities  of  which  they
lad  l)een  long  since  deprived.  Bishop  Seabury  ex-
ercised cpisco|)al  jurisdiction  with  the  acceptance  of
the  laity  as  well  as  of  the  clergy  in  Conne<'ticut,
residing  in  New  London  as  rec-tor  of  St.  James's
church  until  his  death,  and  also,  by  its  invitation,
over  the  church  in  Rhode  Island.  He  was  the  first
presiding  bishop  of  the  chun-hes  in  the  several
states,  unite<l  under  the  general  convention  in  1789,
and  joined  with  Bishops  Pn)voost,  White,  and
Madison  in  the  consecration  of  Bishop  Claggett,
through  whom  everv  bishop  of  the  Anglican  com-
munion 8ul)seauently  consecrate*!  in  the  United
States  traces  nis  episcojMite.  Bishop  Seabury's
knowledge  of  and  devotion  to  the  church  system,
applie<l  with  remarkable  prudence  and  imtience,
made  him  peculiarly  valuanle  to  his  churcn  in  this
country  in  that  formative  period  that  succeeded
i  the  Revolution. The  special  benefits  for  which  it


446


SEABUBY


SEARING


is  indebted  to  him  are,  directly,  the  transfer  to  this
country  of  a  free,  valid,  and  regular  episcopacy,
and,  indirectly,  the  clearing  of  the  way  for  the
transmission  of  the  episcopate  of  the  established
Church  of  England  by  demonstrating  the  possibility
of  obtaining  consecration  from  another  and  equally
valid  source,  and  the  fact  that  episcopacy  could
live  in  this  country ;  the  reunion  through  him,  in
the  consecration  of  Claggett,  of  the  lines  of  the
Scottish  church  and  of  the  English non-jurors

with  the  line
of  the  estab-
lished Church
of  England,
represented  by
White,  Pro-
voost,  and
Madison ;  the
securingofthe
just  rights  of
the  episcopate
in  the  govern-
ment of  the
church,  which
was  attained
by  the  amend-
ment of  its
constitution  changing  the  house  of  bishops  from  a
mere  house  of  revision  to  a  co-ordinate  branch  of
the  legislature;  and,  lastly,  the  restoration  of  the
oblation  and  invocation  to  the  communion  office.
Two  volumes  of  his  sermons  (1791)  and  many  occa-
sional papers  were  published  during  his  life,  and  a
third  volume  of  discourses  after  his  death  (1798).
See  his  "Life  and  Correspondence,"  by  Rev.  Eben
Edwards  Beardsley,  D.  D.  (Boston,  1881).  The
"  Bishop's  palace,"  as  his  simple  residence  at  New
London  was  jestingly  styled,  is  shown  in  the  ac-
companying illustration. — His  grandson,  Samuel,
clergyman,  son  of  Rev.  Charles  Seabury,  b.  in  New
London,  9  June,  1801 ;  d.  in  New  York  city.  10
Oct.,  1872,  was  privately  educated,  and  received  the
degree  of  M.  A.  and  D'.  D.  from  Columbia  college
in  1823  and  1837,  respectively.  He  was  ordained
deacon  in  1826,  and  priest  in  1828,  by  Bishop  Ho-
bart,  and  was  professor  of  languages  in  Flushing
institute  and  St.  Paul's  college  until  1834,  after
which  he  was  editor  of  "  The  Churchman  "  until
1849.  He  was  rector  of  the  Church  of  the  Annun-
ciation, New  York,  from  1838  till  1868,  and  pro-
fessor of  biblical  learning,  etc.,  in  the  General
theological  seminary.  New  York,  from  1862  till  his
deatli.  His  reputation  and  influence  were  chiefly
established  by  his  editorial  writings.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Historical  Sketch  of  Augustine,  Bishop
of  Hippo"  (New  York,  1833) :  "The  Continuity  of
the  Church  of  England  in  the  16th  Century"
(1853) ;  "  The  Supremacy  and  Obligation  of  Con-
science" (18G0);  "American  Slavery  distinguished
from  the  Slavery  of  English  Theorists,  and  justi-
fied by  the  Law  of  Nature"  (1861);  "Mary  the
Virgin"  (1868);  and  "Theory  and  Use  of  the
Church  Calendar  in  the  Measurement  and  Dis-
tribution of  Time"  (1872). — The  second  Samuel's
son,  William  Jones,  clergjman,  b.  in  New  York
citv,  25  Jan.,  1837(  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1856,  and  admitted  to  the  New  York  bar  in  1858,
but,  abandoning  law  for  divinity,  was  graduated  at
the  General  theological  seminary  in  1866,  ordained
deacon.  5  July,  1806,  and  priest.  30  Nov.,  1866,  by
Bishop  Horatio  Potter.  He  has  been  rector  of  the
Churcn  of  the  Annunciation,  New  York,  fi-om  1868,
and  professor  of  ecclesiastical  polity  and  law  in
the  General  theological  seminary  since  1873.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  frouiQpbart  college  in


1876  and  from  the  General  theological  seminary  in
1885.  He  has  edited  Dr.  Samuel  Seabury 's  "Me-
morial "  (New  York,  1873),  and  "  Discourses  on  the
Nature  and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  "  (1874),  and
is  the  author  of  "  Suggestions  in  Aid  of  Devotion
and  Godliness"  (1878),  and  various  pamphlets,
including  "  The  Union  of  Divergent  Lines  in  the
American  Succession"  (New  York,  1885).  For
a  complete  bibliography  of  these  four  clergymen
see  the  "  American  Church  Review  "  for  July,  1885.

SEALSFIELD,  Charles,  author,  b.  in  I^onpitz,
Moravia,  Austria,  3  March,  1793;  d.  in  Solotlium,
Switzerland,  26  May,  1864.  His  real  name  was
,  Karl  Postel,  He  became  a  member  of  a  religious
order  in  his  youth,  but  escaped  from  the  convent
at  Prague  in  1822,  soon  afterward  came  to  this
country,  where  he  assumed  the  name  of  Sealsfield.
and  for  a  short  time  was  connected  with  the  "  Cour-
rier  des  fitats-Unis  "  in  New  York  city.  He  went
back  to  Europe  about  1828  as  correspondent  in
Paris  of  the  "  Courier  and  Enquirer,"  and  in  1832
settled  in  Solothurn,  but  returned  to  the  United
States,  and  passed  several  years  in  Louisiana  and
subsequently  in  Mexico  and  Central  America.  His
principal  works  are  "  Tokeah,  or  the  White  Rose  "
(2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1828 ;  German  ed.,  under  the
title  of  •'  Der  Legitime  und  die  Republikaner,"  3
vols.,  Zurich,  1833);  "  Transatlantische  Reiseskiz-
zen  "  (2  vols.,  1833) ;  "  Der  Virey  und  die  Aristokra-
ten,"  a  Mexican  novel  (2  vols.,  1834) ;  "  Leliensbilder
aus  beiden  Hemisphfiren  "  (2  vols.,  1834 ;  2d  ed.,
entitled  "Morton,  oder  die  grosse  Tour,"  1846);
"  Deutsch  -  americanische  Wahlverwandschaften  "
(5  vols.,  18;38-'42) ;  and  "  SUden  und  Norden  "  (3
vols.,  1842-'3).  His  works  have  been  translated  into
English,  and  several  of  them  into  French.  Two
complete  editions  have  been  published  in  German
(15  vols.,  Stuttgart,  1845-'7 ;  18  vols.,  1846).  See
"  Erinnerungen  an  Sealsfield  "  (Brussels,  1864).

SEAMAN,  Ezra  Champion,  author,  b.  in
Chatham,  N.  Y.,  14  Oct.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Ann  Arbor,
Mich.,  1  July,  1880.  He  was  educated  in  the  com-
mon schools,  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Ballston  Spa,
N.  Y.,  was  chief  clerk  to  the  U.  S.  comptroller
of  the  treasury  in  1849-'53,  and  subsequentlv  in-
spector of  Michigan  state  prisons.  He  edited  the
"  Ann  Arbor  Journal "  in  1858-'63,  and  published
"  Essays  of  the  Progress  of  Nations "  (Detroit,
1846 ;  with  additions,  New  York,  1848 ;  supple-
ment, Detroit,  1852) ;  "  Commentaries  on  the
Constitution  and  Laws,  People  and  History,  of
the  United  States"  (Ann  Arbor,  1863);  "The
American  System  of  Government"  (1870) ;  "Views
of  Nature"  (1873) ;  and  essays  and  pamphlets.

SEAMAN,  Valentine,  physician,  b.  in  Hemp-
stead, L.  L,  2  April,  1770;  d.  in  New  York  city,  3
July,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1792,  studied  medicine  under
Dr.  Nicholas  Romeyn,  and  was  a  surgeon  to  the
New  York  hospital  from  1796  until  his  death.  He
was  active  in  the  introduction  of  vaccination  in
New  York  city,  sustaining  his  theory  as  to  its  ex-
pediency in  the  face  of  much  opposition.  His
publications  include  a  "  Pharmacopoeia  "  and  "  In-
augural Discourse  on  Opium  "  (Philadelphia,  1792);
"Waters  of  Saratoga"  (New  York,  1793;  2d  ed.,
with  "Waters  of  Balston,"  1805);  "Midwife's
Monitor"  (1800) ;  and  "  On  Vaccination  "  (1816).

SEARING,  Laura  Catherine  (Redden),  au-
thor, b.  in  Somerset  county,  Md.,  9  Feb.,  1840.
She  became  deaf  about  the  age  of  ten,  through  an
attack  of  spinal  meningitis,  and  her  education  was
consequently  carried  on  in  a  somewhat  irregular
manner.  Though  she  also  lost  the  power  of  speech,
being  unable  to  make  herself  understood,  she  re-


SEARLE


SEARS


447


tained  her  memory  of  houiuIs*  aiul  )i(*r  appreciation
of  rhvthin.  She  early  W'gnu  writinjr  vi-rse,  ami
contribut*^!  Iwth  prose  aiid  poetry  to  the  presx.
while  attoiKliiiK'  the  Missouri  state  institution  for
the  deaf  and  «lunib.  her  parents  haviUj^j  removwi
to  St.  I/ouis.  In  liiGO  she  lieeame  a  writer  for  the
**  Itepublican  "  of  that  city,  adopting  the  |»en-name
of  "  Howard  Glyndon."  Subsequently  she  wa«
sent  to  Washington,  D.  ('.,  as  war  corres|)ondent
for  the  same  journal.  She  went  abroad  in  1865,
ami  n«ide<l  in  Kurt)iH'  until  the  eml  of  IHOH,  jK'r-
fecting  herself  in  French,  Italian,  Simnish,  and
Uerinan.  On  her  return  she  seven'«l  tier  coniKH--
tion  with  the  New  York  "Times,"  for  which  she
hatl  corresjHinded,  and  for  the  next  eight  years  was
employed  on  the  "  Mail "  in  the  same  city.  Mean-
time she  was  taking  lessons  in  articulation  from
various  teachers,  among  them  Alexander  Graham
Bell,  with  marked  success.  In  1876  she  married
Edward  W.  Searing,  of  the  New  York  bar,  and  in
1886  they  removed  for  her  health  to  California,
where  she  now  0^88)  resides.  Besides  being  a
frequent  contributor  to  periodical  literature,  Mrs.
Searing  has  published  "  Notable  Men  of  the  Thirty-
Seventh  Congress,"  in  pamphlet-form  (Washing-
ton, 1862) ;  "  Idyls  of  Battle,  and  Poems  of  the
Rebellion"  (New  York,  1864);  "A  Little  Boy's
Story,"  translated  from  the  French  (1869);  and
"Sounds  from  Secret  Chambers"  (Boston,  1874).

SKARLE,  George  Mary,  astronomer,  b.  in
London,  England,  27  June,  1839.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvanl  in  1857,  and  then  became  assistant
at  the  Dudley  observatory,  Albany,  where  he  dis-
covered, on  11  Sept.,  1858.  the  asteroid  Pandora.
In  January,  1859,  he  entered  the  service  of  the
U.  S.  coast  survey,  and  in  September,  1862,  he  was
appointed  a.ssistant  professor  in  the  U.  S.  naval
academy.  He  returned  to  Harvard  as  assistant  in
the  observatory  in  June,  1866,  and  remained  there
until  March,  \SG8,  when  he  joined  the  Paulists,  and
was  ordained  as  a  priest  in  that  community  in
March,  1871,  having  oeen  converted  to  the  Roman
Catholic  faith  in  1862.  He  has  had  charge  of  the
science  teaching  of  the  seminary  that  forms  part
of  the  home  in  New  York,  Father  Searle  is  also
a  photographer  of  considerable  skill,  and  has  ad-
vancetl  that  art  by  his  studies.  He  has  contributed
largelv  to  the  journals  and  reviews  of  the  lioman
Catholic  church  and  to  the  "  Astronomical  Jour-
nal," and  he  is  the  author  of  '•  Elements  of  Ge-
ometry "  (New  York,  1877). — His  brother,  Arthnr,
astronomer,  b.  in  London,  England,  21  Oct.,  1837,
was  graduated  at  Harvanl  in  1856,  and  then  was
variously  engaged  for  about  twelve  years.  In  1869
he  was  appointed  assistant  at  Harvard  college  ob-
servatory, where  he  has  since  continued  in  various
offices  until  1887.  when  he  was  made  full  professor
of  astronomy.  His  work  has  included  photometric
measurements  of  certain  variable  stars,  researches
in  zodiacal  phenomena,  and  observations  with  the
meridian  photometer  durinjf  1879-'82.  Prof.  Searle's
papers  have  appeared  in  scientific  journals  at  home
and  abroad  anu  in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Ameri-
can Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,"  of  which  body
he  is  a  member.  He  is  also  the  author  of  "Out-
lines of  Astronomy"  (Boston,  1874).

SEARLE,  James,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  New  York  city  about  1730;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7  Aug.,  1797.  Little  is  known
of  his  early  life,  but  when  he  attained  his  maiority
he  engaged  in  business  with  his  brother  John  in
Madeira,  and  was  ailmittetl  to  the  firm  of  John
Searle  and  Co.  in  1757.  He  left  Madeira  in  1762,
settled  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1765  signed  the
**  non-importation  agreement,"  by  which  the  citi-


'  zens  of  Philadelphia  iMund  themselves  to  onler  no
more  g(NNls  from  (>n*at  Britain. He  was  a  mana-
ger of  the  r.  S.  lottery  in 1776-*8,  and  in  August
of  the  latter  year  became  a  member  <»f  the  naval
board,  resigning  that  office  in  OcUjIier  on  account
of  his  objections  to  the  existing  naval  regulations.
From  Novemljer,  1778,  till  July,  1780,  he  was  in
the  Continental  congress,  serving  as  chairman  of
the  commercial  committee,  and  on  that  to  ap[>or-
tion  the  quota  of  taxes  to  l)e  paiti  by  each  state.
He  was  also  a  member  of  the  marine  committee,
and  that  on  foreign  affairs. He  was  sent  to  Eu-
rojie  as  the  agent  of  the  state  of  Pennsylvania  in
I  July,  1780,  "to  negotiate  a  loan  of  £20,(XK)  in  such
I  countries  or  states  as  he  should  judge  most  likely
I  to  favor  his  views" ;  but  the  mission  was  unsuc-
I  cessful. He  returned  to  Philadelphia  in  1782.  and.
having  lost  his fortune,  re-entere<l  business  and
residwl  for  several  years  in  NewTork  city.

SEARS,  Harnas,  educator,  b.  in  Sandisfleld,
Ma.ss.,  19  Nov.,  1802;  d.  in  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,
6  July,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1825,
and  completed  his  theological  studies  at  the  New-
ton seminary  in  1829.  After  a  two  years'  i>astorat«
in  Hartford,  Conn.,  he  accepted  a  professorship  in
Hamilton  literary  and  theological  institution  (now
Madison  university),  Hamilton,  N.  Y.  On  leaving
that  place  in  1833  he  spent  some  time  in  Germany
prosecuting  his  studies.  During  this  residence
abroad  he  shared  the  privilege  of  establishing
Baptist  missions  in  Germany.  On  his  return  he
was  elected  a  professor  in  Newton  theological
seminary,  and  for  several  years  he  was  its  presi-
dent. In  1848  he  was  made  secretar}'  and  execu-
tive agent  of  the  Massachusetts  board  of  educa-
tion. In  1855  he  became  president  of  Brown
university,  which  place  he  filled  with  eminent
ability  and  success  until  1867,  when  he  accepted
the  office  of  general  agent  of  the  Pealxxly  educa-
tional fund.  In  the  wlministration  of  this  great
trust,  for  which  he  was  singularly  qualified,  he
remained  until  his  death.  His  last  years  were
spent  in  Staunton,  Va.  He  received  in  1841  from
Harvard  the  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.,  and  from
Yale  in  1862  that  of  LL.  D.  Dr.  Sears  ranked
with  the  most  eminent  scholars  and  educators  of
his  day.  Besides  contributions  to  the  "Christian
Review,"  of  which  he  was  for  some  time  after
1838  the  editor,  he  was  the  author  of  an  enlarged
edition  of  "  Nohden's  German  Grammar  "  (Ando-
ver,  1842) ;  "  Essays  on  Classical  Literature,"  with
Bela  B.  Edwards  and  Cornelius  C.  Felton  (Boston,
1843) ;  "  The  Ciceronian,  or  Prussian  Mode  of  In-
struction in  Latin"  (1844);  "Selett  Treatises  of
Martin  Luther,  in  the  Original  German"  (1846);
"  Life  of  Luther  "  (Phila<lelphia.  1850 :  republished
in  England  as  "Mental  and  Spiritual  llistoir  of
Luther,"  London,  1850) ;  "  Roget's  Thesaurus,'  re-
vised edition  (Boston,  1853) ;  and  "  Discourse  at  the
Centennial  Celebration  of  Brown  University  "(1864).
SEARS,  Edmund  Hamilton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Sandisfield,  Mass.,  in  1810;  d.  in  Weston.  .Mass.,
14  Jan.,  1876.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in
1834,  and  at  Harvard  divinity-school  in  1837,  and
was  pastor  of  Unitarian  societies  in  Wavland,
Mass.,  in  1839- '40,  and  in  Lancaster  in  1^0-'7.
He  then  edited  the"  Monthly  Religious  Magazine"
for  several  years,  and  from  1865  until  his  death
was  pastor  in  Weston,  Mass.  Union  college  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1871.  He  published
"Regeneration"  (Boston,  1853;  9th  ed.,  1873);
"Pictures of  the  Olden  Time"  (1857);  "Christian
Lvrics"  (I860):  "  Athanasia"  (1860);  "The  Fourth
Gospel:  the  Heart  of  Christ"  (1H?2):  and  "  Ser^
mons  and  Songs  of  the  Christian  Life  "  (1875).


448


SEARS


SEBASTIAN


SEARS,  Edward  I.,  editor,  b.  in  County  Mayo,
Irelaml,  in  IHll);  d.  in  New  York  city,  7  Dec.,
1876.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college,  Dub-
lin, in  18J39,  came  to  this  country  in  1848,  and
for  many  years  was  professor  of  languages  in
Manhattan  "college.  He  l)ecame  editor  and  pro-
prietor of  the  "  National  Quarterly,"  a  literary
magazine,  in  1860,  and  conducted  it  until  his
death.  He  was  a  writer  of  cultivated  taste  and  j)ure
and  expressive  style,  and  contributed  regularly  to
English  and  American  reviews.  He  published,  un-
der the  pen-name  of  "  H.  E.  Chevalier,"  "  Legends
of  the  Sea"  (New  York,  1863).

SEARS,  Isaac,  patriot,  b.  in  Norwalk,  Conn.,
in  1729;  d.  in  Canton,  China,  28  Oct.,  1786.  His
ancestor,  Richard,  emigrated  to  this  country  from
Colchester,  England,  in  1630.  Isaac  commanded
a  privateer  agamst  the  French  in  1758-'61,  but  lost
his  vessel  in  the  latter  year,  and  then  engaged  in
the  West  Indian  and  European  trade,  making  New
York  city  his  home.  On  trie  passage  of  the  stamp-
act  he  ardently  engaged  in  the  patriot  cause  and
became  an  active  member  of  the  Sons  of  liberty.
In  November,  1775,  with  a  troop  of  horse,  he  went
to  the  printing  establishment  of  James  Rivington,
editor  of  the  '•  Royal  Gazette,"  destroyed  his  presses,
and  carried  off  his  type,  which  was  afterward
converted  into  bullets.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Provincial  congress  of  New  York  in  1783  and  of
the  assembly  in  the  same  year.  He  lost  his  fortune
by  the  war,  and  in  1785  became  supercargo  on  a
merchant  ship,  contracting  the  fever  from  which
he  died  on  his  first  passage  to  China.

SEARS,  Robert,  publisher,  b.  in  St.  John,  New
Brunswick,  28  June,  1810.  His  father  was  Thach-
er  Sears,  one  of  the  loyalists  of  the  Revolution.
He  served  an  apprenticeship  in  the  printing  busi-
ness at  St.  John,  and  in  1832  emigrated  to  New
York  city,  where  he  opened  a  small  printing-office
in  Park  row.  In  1839  he  began  the  publication
of  illustrated  works,  which  were  sold  almost  en-
tirely by  subscription.  He  was  a  liberal  patron
and  friend  of  the  earlier  wood-engravers,  did  much
to  develop  that  art,  then  in  Its  infancy,  and  was
one  of  the  earliest  pioneers  in  arousing  and  foster-
ing that  taste  for  pictorial  representation  which
has  grown  to  such  large  dimensions.  He  was  also
one  of  the  first  to  recognize  the  value  of  judicious
advertising.  He  expended  many  thousands  of  dol-
lars in  making  his  publications  Known  throughout
the  United  States,  and  in  1847  procured  an  exten-
sive recognition  of  the  merits  of  American  wood-
engraving  from  the  British  public  by  presenting  a
complete  set  of  his  publications  to  Queen  Victoria
and  receiving  her  personal  thanks  for  the  same.
Among  his  publications  are  "  Illustrations  of  the
Bible '^ (New  York,  1840);  "Bible  Biography"
(1843) ;  "  Wonders  of  the  World  "  (1847) ;  "  Picto-
rial History  of  the  United  States,"  his  most  ira-
g)rtant  work  (1847);  and  "Description  of  the
ussian  Empire  "  (1854.)

SEATON,  WiUIam  Winston,  journalist,  b.  in
King  William  county,  Va.,  11  Jan.,  1785;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  16  June,  1866.  lie  was  a  de-
scendant of  Henry  Seaton  (of  the  Scottish  family  of
that  name),  an  adherent  of  the  fortunes  of  the  Stu-
arts, who  came  as  a  political  exile  to  Virginia  at  the
end  of  the  17th  century.  His  mother,  whose  maid-
en name  was  Winston,  was  a  cousin  of  Patrick  Hen-
ry. He  was  educated  by  Ogilvie,  the  Earl  of  Fin-
later,  a  Scotchman,  who  for  several  years  kept  an
academy  at  Richmond.  When  eighteen  years  of  age
he  engaged  ardently  in  politics,  and  lt)ecame  assist-
ant etfitor  of  a  Richmond  paper.  He  next  edited  the
Petersburg  "  Republican, but  soon  purchased  the


"North  Carolina  Journal."  published  at  Halifax,
which  was  then  the  capital  of  the  state.  When
Raleigh  became  the  capital,  he  removed  thither
and  connected  himself  with  the  "  Register,"  edited
by  Joseph  Gales,  Sr.,  whose  daughter  he  married.
In  1812  he  removed  to  Washington  and  joined  the
"  National  Intelligencer."  in  company  with  his
brother-in-law,  Joseph  Gales,  Jr.,  which  partner-
ship lasted  till  the  death  of  the  latter  in  1860.
From  1812  till  1820  Messrs.  Seaton  and  Gales  were
the  exclusive  congressional  reporters  as  well  as  edi-
tors of  their  journal,  one  taking  charge  of  the  pro-
ceedings in  the  senate  and  the  other  in  the  house
of  representatives.  Their  "Register  of  Debates"
was  considered  a  standard  authority.  After  the
death  of  Mr.  Gales,  Mr.  Seaton  was  sole  editor  and
manager  of  the  "National  Intelligencer"  until  it
was  sold  a  short  time  before  his  death.  In  1840
he  was  elected  mayor  of  Washington,  and  he  held
that  office  for  twelve  successive  years.  Together
with  Mr.  Gales,  he  published  "  Annals  of  Con-
gress :  Debates  and  Proceedings  in  the  Congress
of  the  United  States  from  3  March,  1798,  till  27
May,  1824  "  (42  vols.,  Washington,  1834-'56) ;  "  Reg-
ister of  Debates  in  Congress  from  1824  to  1837  "
14  vols,  in  29,  1827-'37);  and  "American  State
Papers,  selected  and  edited  by  Walter  Lowne  and
M.  St.  Clair  Clarke "  (21  vols.,  1832-'4).  See  his
"  Life."  by  his  daughter  (Boston,  1871).

SEAWlELL,  Washington,  soldier,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia in  1802 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  9  Jan.,
1888.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1825,  assigned  to  the  7th  infantry,  ana
from  1^2  till  1834  was  disbursing  agent  of  Indian
affairs,  from  which  post  he  was  transferred  to  that
of  adjutant-general  and  aide-de-camp  on  Gen.  Mat-
thew Arbuckle's  staff.  He  was  promoted  captain
in  July,  1836,  saw  service  against  hostile  Indians
and  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  was  promoted
major  of  the  2d  infantry,  3  March,  1847.  He  be-
came lieutenant-colonel  of  the  8th  infantry,  23  Feb.,
1852,  colonel  of  the  6th  infantry,  17  Oct.,  1860,
and  was  retired  from  active  service,  20  Feb.,  1862,
in  consequence  of  disability  resulting  from  expo-
sure while  in  the  line  of  duty.  He  was  chief  mus-
tering and  disbursing  officer  of  the  state  of  Ken-
tucky from  March,  1862,  till  September,  1863,  and
of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific  from  October,
1863,  till  January,  1864,  and  was  appointed  com-
missary of  musters  and  superintendent  of  recruit-
ing service  of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific  in

1863.  He  was  acting  assistant  provost-marshal  at
San  Francisco  from  November,  1865,  till  June,
1866,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,  U.  S.
army,  13  March,  1865,  for  long  and  faithful  ser-
vices. Gen.  Seawell  was  with  the  2d  infantry  at
Monterey,  Cal.,  in  1849,  and  was  consequently  one
of  the  California  pioneers.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  next  to  the  eldest  general  on  the  re-
tired list. He  had  lived  on  the  Pacific  coast  since

1864,  and  owned  one  of  the  largest  ranches  in  Cali-
fornia, in  Sonoma  county.

SEBASTIAN,  William  King,  senator,  b.  in
Vernon,  Tenn.,  in  1814 ;  d.  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,  20
May,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  col-
lege, Tenn.,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  practised  his  profession  at  Helena,  Ark.  He
was  prosecuting  attorney  in  1835-'7,  circuit  judge
in  1840-'2,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  appointed  a
judge  of  the  state  supreme  court.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  state  senate  in  1846,  a  presidential
elector  in  1848,  and  was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator
from  Arkansas  as  a  Democrat  in  place  of  Chester
Ashley,  deceased,  serving  from  1847  till  1853.  He
was  re-elected  for  the  term  that  ended  in  1859,  and


SECCOMB


SEDGWICK


440


in  the  latter  year  was  cbo«en  Bghin  for  another  full
term,  llu  was  t-hairman  of  the  coininiltcc  on  In-
dian affairs,  nml  a  member  of  tlu<  coinmitt«c!  on
territories.  Mr.  SvlNtstiait  wa«  eX|K'lleU  for  disloy-
alty on  11  July,  18U1.  but  it  wa.H  Hftrrwanl  elaimeil
that  he  was  loval,  and  the  senate  revoked  the  res«>-
lution  of  exiiul.sion  and  paid  his  full  salary  to  his
children.  lie  remained  ouietly  at  Helena  until  the
National  troops  (Kt>upie«t  that  ]>lace,  and  in  1U04
removinl  to  Memphis.  Tenn.

SECCOMB,  JoHeph,  elerj,'yman,  b.  in  Metlfonl,
Mass.,  in  170(1;  d.  ni  17(M).  He  wa.s  dest-endtnl
from  Richanl  Sec'c<»mb,  who,  coming  from  Kngland,
settled  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  in  l(MM).  He 'was  (gradu-
ated at  HaA'anl  in  1731,  and  Ixt-ame  minister  of
Kingston.  N.  H.,  in  1737.  He  published  "  Plain
and  Brief  Rehearsal  of  the  Operations  of  ChrLst  as
God"  (Boston,  1740) ;  **  Business  and  Diversion  In-
offensive to  God,"  a  discourse  (174^});  and  "The
Ways  of  Pleasure  and  the  Paths  of  Peaee,"  a  dis-
course.— His  brother.  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Med-
fonl,  Ma.«vs.,  25  April,  1708;  d.  iii  ('hej*ter,  Nova
Scotia,  in  January,  17J>3,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1728,  an»l  was  minister  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  at  Harvard,  Mass..  from  10  Oct..
1788,  till  September,  1757.  In  17G3  he  became
minister  of  a  dissenting  congregation  in  Chester,
Nova  Scotia,  where  he  remained  till  his  death.
He  gained  great  notoriety  as  a  humorous  poet  by
"Father  Abbey's  Will,"  which  was  published  in
both  the  "Gentleman's"  and  "  Euro|)ean  "  maga-
zines in  May.  1732.  It  was  reprinted  in  the  "  Mas-
sachustMts  Magazine"  in  Novemlier,  1704,  and  in
1854  by  John  Langdon  Sibley,  with  historicail  and
biographical  notes.  The  subje<'t  of  the  poem,  Mat-
thew Abdy,  held  a  menial  position  in  connection
with  Harvard  college.  He  also  published  an  onli-
nation  sermon  (Halifax,  1770),  and  a  "Sermon
on  the  Death  of  Abigail  Belcher,  with  an  Epistle
by  Mather  Bayles,  I).  D."  (Boston,  1772).

SEDDON,  James  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fal-
mouth, Stafford  co.,  Va..  13  July,  1815 ;  d.  in  Gooch-
land county,  Va..  19  Aug.,  1880.  Thomas  Seddon,
his  father,' who  was  first  a  merchant  and  then  a
banker,  was  descend-
ed from  John  Seddon,
of  Lancashire.  Eng-
land, who  settled  ui
Stafford  county,  Va.,
in  colonial  days.  Su-
san Alexander,  his
mother,  was  a  iineal
descendant  of  t  he  Ear  I
of  Sterling.  Through-
out his  life  Mr.  Sed-
don was  of  a  frail  con-
st itut  ion,  and,  owing
to  his  delicate  health,
his  early  education
was  much  neglected.
The  knowledge  of  the
ancient  classics  and
literature,  for  which
he  was  noted  in  af-
ter-life, was  mainly  self-acnuired.  At  the  age  of
twenty-one  he  entered  the  law-school  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia,  where  he  was  graduated  with
the  degree  of  B.  L.  He  settled  in  Richmond  in
the  |)nu-tice  of  the  law.  and  almost  immediate-
ly attvancwl  to  the  front  rank  of  the  bar.  In  1845
he  wius  nominatiMl  by  the  Democratic  j»arty  for
congress,  and,  though  the  district  was  a  doubt-
ful one,  he  was  elect^nl  by  a  handsome  majority.
In  1847  he  was  renominate*!,  bnt.  not  being  in  ac-
cord with  the  resolutions  of  the  nominating  con-

TOL. T. — 29


(S^'Ufnn  yf-c&/^


vcntion.  ho  declined,  and  the  Whig  candidate  was
electe<l.  In  1849  he  was  re-elected,  serving  fnmi
3  De<>.,  1849,  till  3  Manh,  1851.  Owing  to  bis
health,  he  decline<l  another  nomination  at  the
end  of  his  t«nn.  and  rc>tin-4l  t4>  SaUit  Hill,  his  estate
on  James  river  alx)ve  Richmond.  While  in  con-
gress he  took  part  in  most  of  the  imp«>rtant  debates
of  the  |)eriod,and  wjis  recognized  as  a  leaiier  of  his
party.  In  1840  hu  parti(-i|>ate<l  actively  in  the  de-
bates upon  the  reform  revenue  bill,  advocating  the
principles  of  free-trade.  In  1800  the  excitement
of  imj»ending  war  brought  him  again  into  {>olitics.
On  19  Jan.,  18(J1,  he  was  ap|>ointed  by  the  legis-
lature of  Virginia  a  commissioner  with  John  Tyler
and  others  to  the  Peace  c<(nvention.  which  met
at  the  call  of  Virginia  in  Washington  on  4  Feb.
He  represented  Virginia  in  the  committee  upon
resolutions,  and,  in  accordance  with  the  instruc-
tions of  his  state,  made  a  minority  report  recom-
mending that  the  constitution  should  be  amended
according  to  the  resolutions  that  Imd  been  intro-
duced in  the  .senate  by  John  J.  Crittenden  and  by
a  further  article  expressly  recognizing  the  right  of
any  stAte  i»eaceably  to  withdraw  from  the  I  nion.
He  IxHjame  a  meml)er  of  the  first  Confederate  con-
gress, and  in  Noveml)er,  1802,  having  been  chosen
by  Jefferson  Davis  as  secretary  of  war,  became  a
member  of  his  cabinet.  He  devoted  himself  to  the
duties  of  his  office  until  1  Jan.,  1865,  when  he  re-
tired finally  from  public  life  to  his  country  estate.

SEDE5iO,  Antonio  (say-day n'-yo),  Spanish  sol-
dier, b.  in  Spain  about  the  end  of  the  15th  cen-
tury ;  d.  in  Cubagua,  Venezuela,  in  March,  1538.
He  went  to  Santo  Domingo  with  Diego  Columbus
in  June,  1509,  where  he  served  till  1512,  when  he
was  appointed  by  King  Ferdinand  first  treasurer
of  Porto  Rico.  In  1515  he  l)ecame  alderman  of
Saint  John.  Several  years  afterward,  being  ac-
cused of  peculation  in  the  treasury,  he  was  impris-
oned, but  escajwd  to  Santo  Domingo,  where  he
served  until  1528.  On  his  return,  an  exj)edition
to  the  Windward  islands,  especially  Trinidatl,  the
headquarters  of  the  Carib  Indians,  who  devastated
Porto  Rico  repeatedly,  was  suggested  by  the  gov-
ernor, and  Sedefio  sailed  to  Spain,  where  he  ob-
tained a  royal  permit  for  the  conquest  of  the  island
of  Trinidad.  He  returned  to  Porto  Rico,  where
he  recruited  150  men,  and  sailed  early  in  1530,
landing  on  the  southwest  coast  of  the  island  in  the
territory  of  Cacique  Chat-omar,  by  whom  he  was
received  in  a  friendly  manner.  Soon  the  abuses  of
his  followers  causetl  a  general  revolt,  but,  aided  by
Chacomar.  Setlefio  defeated  the  natives  in  many
encounters,  and  built  a  fortress,  which  he  called
Paria.  Leaving  a  garrison,  he  returned  in  1531  to
Porto  Rico,  carrying  many  Carib  prisoners ;  but  on
his  arrival  he  was  forced  to  release  them.  Although
meanwhile  Geronimo  Ortal  had  l)een  a|)(^)ointed
adelantado  of  Trinidml  and  taken  possession  of
Fort  Paria,  and  Sedeiio's  claim  had  been  declared
void  by  the  audiencia  of  Santo  Domingo,  the  lat-
ter gathereil  some  tnx)ps  in  Porto  Rico,  to  whom
he  promised  the  fabulous  wealth  of  the  river  Meta,
which  was  included  in  his  original  grant.  He
landed  in  Trinidatl  during  Ortal's  al>*eiK-e.  cap-
tured F'ort  Paria  by  surj^rise.  and.  entering  by  the
river  Peilernales,  inva<led  the  mainland,  where  he
had  serious  disputes  with  Ortal  about  the  Ixtund-
ariesof  his  pinivince.  He  was  finally  fx)is«>ned  by
his  native  ccx)k  in  the  island  of  Culwgua.

SEIHiSWICK,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Cornwall,
Conn..  13  Sept.,  1813;  d.  near  S|»ottsy|yaniaCourt-
Ilouse,  Va.,  9  Mav,  1804.  He  was  graduateil  at  the
U.S.  military  academy  in  1837,24th  inaclassof  fifty
members,  among  whom  were  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker,


450


SEDGWICK


SEDGWICK


the  eitv  of  Mexico.


Gen,  Bruxton  Bragg,  and  Gen.  Jubal  A.  Early.  Im-
mediately after  his  graduation  he  served*  in  the
Florida  war  against  the  Seminole  Indian;!.  His  first
engagement  was  a  skirmish  near  Fort  Clinch,  20
May,  ISSH.  The  same  year  he  was  employed  in  re-
moving the  Cherokees  to  their  new  home  beyond

the  Mississippi.
He  was  made
1st  lieutenant
of  artillery,  19
April,  \mQ.  In
the  Mexican  war
he  was  succes-
sively bre  vetted
captain  and  ma-
j<ir  for  gallant
conduct  at  Con-
treras,  Churu-
busco,  and  Cha-
pultepec.  He  al-
so distinguished
himself  at  the
head  of  his  com-
mand in  the  at-
tack on  the  San
Cosmo  gate  of
He  was  made  captain,  26
Jan.,  1849.  major  of  the  1st  cavalry,  8  March,  1855,
and  served  in  Kansas  and  on  the  western  frontier
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  2d  cavalry.  On  25  April,  1861,
he  was  promoted  to  the  colonelcy  of  the  4th  cav-
alry, and  on  'SI  Aug.  was  commissioned  a  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  and  placed  in  command
of  a  brigade  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  which
in  the  subsequent  organization  of  the  army  was
assigned  to  the  2d  corps,  under  Gen.  Sumner,  Gen.
Sedgwick  assuming  command  of  the  3d  divis-
ion. In  this  capacity  he  took  part  in  the  siege  of
Yorktown  and  the  subsequent  pursuit  of  the  ene-
my up  the  peninsula,  and  rendered  good  service  at
the  battle  of  Fair  Oaks.  In  all  the  seven  days'
fighting,  and  particularly  at  Savage  Station  and
Glendale,  he  bore  an  honorable  part,  and  at  the
battle  of  Antietam  he  exhibited  conspicuous  gal-
lantry, exposing  himself  recklessly.  On  this  occa-
sion he  was  twice  wounded,  but  refused  for  two
houi-s  to  be  taken  from  the  field.  On  23  Dec.  he
was  nominated  by  the  president  a  major-general  of
volunteers,  and  in  the  succeeding  February  he  as-
sumed command  of  the  6th  army  corps.  At  the
head  of  these  troops  he  carried  Marye's  Heights  in
the  rear  of  Fredericksburg  during  the  Chancel-
lorsville  campaign  in  Mav,  1863,  and,  after  the  re-
treat of  Gen.  Joseph  Hoolcer  across  the  Rappahan-
nock, succeeded  only  by  very  hard  fighting  in  with-
drawing his  command  in  the  face  of  a  superior-
force,  against  which  he  had  contended  for  a  whole
day.  to  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  He  commanded
the  left  wing  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  during
the  advance  from  the  Kappahannock  into  Mary-
land in  June,  and  also  at  the  succeeding  battle  of
Gettysburg,  where  he  arrived  on  the  second  day  of
the  fighting,  after  one  of  the  most  extraordinary
forced  marches  on  record,  his  steady  courage  in-
spiring confidence  among  his  troops.  During  the
passage  of  Ilapidan  river  on  7  Nov..  1863,  he  suc-
ceeded, by  a  well-executed  manoeuvre,  in  captur-
ing a  whole  Confederate  division  with  guns  and
colors,  for  which  he  was  thanked  by  Gen.  Meade
in  a  general  order.  In  command  of  his  corps  he
took  part  in  the  spring  campaign  of  the  Wilderness
under  Gen.  Grant,  and  on  5  and  6  May  had  posi-  I
tion  on  the  National  right  wing,  where  the  hardest  '
fighting  of  those  sanguinary  engagements  took  ;


place.  Three  days  later,  while  directing  the  placing
of  some  pieces  of  artillery  in  position  in  the  in-
trenchments  in  front  of  SpottsylvaniaCourt-House,
he  was  struck  in  the  head  by  a'  bullet  from  a  sharp-
shooter and  instantly  killed.  Gen.  Setlgwick  was
one  of  the  oldest,  ablest,  and  bravest  soldiers  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  inspiring  both  officers  and
men  with  the  fullest  confidence  in  his  military
capacity.  His  simplicity  and  honest  maidiness
endeared  him,  notwithstanding  he  was  a  strict  dis-
ciplinarian, to  all  with  whom  he  came  in  contact,
and  his  corps  was  in  consequence  one  of  the  best  in
discipline  and  morale  in  the  ariny.  He  declined
the  command  of  the  Armv  of  the  Potomac  just  be-
fore it  was  given  to  Gen.  ^leade,  but  several  times
held  it  temporarily  during  that  general's  absence.
A  fine  bronze  statue  of  Gen.  Sedgwick  stands  on
the  plateau  at  West  Point.

SEDOWICK,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  England
about  1590 :  d.  in  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  24  May,  1656.
He  had  been  a  member  of  the  Artillery  company
in  London,  and  settled  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  in
1635.  He  engaged  in  business,  became  a  success-
ful merchant,  and  was  for  many  years  a  deputy
from  Charlestown  to  the  general  court.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Ancient  and  honorable
artillery  company  in  1638,  its  captain  in  1640,  and
commanded  tne  castle  in  1641.  In  1643  he  l)ecame
colonel  of  the  Middlesex  regiment,  and  in  1652
commander  of  all  the  Massachusetts  militia.  He
was  associated  with  John  Winthrop,  Jr.,  in  1643-'4,
in  establishing  the  first  furnace  and  iron-works  in
the  country.  He  was  employed  to  expel  the  French
from  Penobscot  in  1654,  was  engaged  in  the  expe-
dition against  the  Spanish  West  Indies  in  1655,
when  Jamaica  was  taken,  and  was  one  of  three
commissioners  appointed  by  Cromwell  to  govern
that  island.  Just  before  his  death  the  protector
advanced  him  to  the  sole  command  with  the  rank
of  major-general. —  His  descendant,  Theodore,
statesman,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  in  1746;  d.  in
Boston,  24  Jan.,
1813,  lost  his  fa-
ther when  he  was
thirteen  years  of
age,  and  was  aid-
ed by  his  broth-
er to  enter  Yale,
which  he left  in

1765,  owing  to  a
slight  misdemean-
or, without  being
graduated.  He
afterward  studied
divinity,  but  aban-
doned it  for  law,
was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  April,

1766,  and  prac-
tised in  Great  Bar-
rington,  and  af-
terward in  Shef-
field, Mass.  Though  always  strongly  attached  to
the  mother  country,  he  engaged  in  the  war  of  the
Revolution  with  ardor  on  the  side  of  the  colonies,
served  as  aide  to  Gen.  Jojtxn  Thomas  in  his  expe-
dition to  Canada  in  1776,  and  was  subsequent-
ly actively  engaged  in  procuring  sunplies  for  the
army.  He  represented  ShefBeld  in  tne  Massachu-
setts legislature  both  before  and  after  the  Revo-
lution, and  was  a  memlwr  of  the  Continental  con-
gress in  1785-6.  In  the  winter  of  1787  he  was
active  in  the  suppression  of  Shays's  rebellion,  and
incurred  the  especial  enmity  of  the  insurgents,
who  frequently  threatened  his  life. His  house  was


eH^jL^o~cC<rr< V-e.-c/j^/KM^c'^^


SEDGWICK


SEDGWICK


461


attaoki'tl  by  thoin  (luring;  his  absence  in  the  legis-
lature.  He  wuji  an  active  nienilH<r  of  the  Massa-
chusetUt  convention  that  ratitied  the  constitution
of  the  United  States  in  1788.  In  1 789  he  wa« electe*!
to  congress,  of  which  he  remained  a  rej)re8entative
by  successive  elections  till  March,  I7tf<l,  when  he
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  siMiate.  lie  servwl  in  this
body  for  three  years,  and  was  president  pro  tfmprjrf
in  1797.  In  17JM)  he  was  a^iin  electe<l  to  the  hous*.-
of  n-presentatives,  and  was  choM'H  its  siicHker.  In
1802  he  was  a|>iM>inte<l  a  judge  of  the  sujtrenie
c<jurt  of  Massachusetts,  which  office  he  held  till
his  death.  Soon  after  the  adoi)tion  of  the  Massa-
chusetts constitution  Elizal^eth  F'reelnan,  a  negro
slave  of  great  force  of  character  and  intelligence,
having  fled  from  her  master  in  consecjuence  of
cruel  treatment.  Judge  Setlgwick  defended  her
fn>m  the  latter's  suit  to  recover  his  slave.  The
court  pronounced  her  free,  thus  making  the  earli-
est practical  application,  so  far  ju<  known,  of  the
declaration  of  tne  Massachusetts  bill  of  rights,  that
"all  men  are  born  free  and  equal."  He  was  an
active  member  of  the  old  Federal  party,  and  an
intimate  associate  of  many  of  its  lejiders.  His  ju-
dicial opinions  were  remarkable  for  clearness  of
expression  and  elegance  of  diction.  He  was  a
member  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sci-
ences, and  in  1799  received  the  uegree  of  LL.  D.
from  Princeton. — His  eldest  son,  Theodore,  law-
yer, b.  in  Sheffield,  Mass.,  31  Dec.,  1780 ;  d.  in  Pitts-
fleld,  Mass.,  7  Nov.,  1839,  was  graduate<l  at  Yale
in  1798.  studied  law  with  his  father,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1801,  and  practised  at  Albany
till  1821,  when  he  removed  to  Stockbridge,  Mass!,
owing  to  impaired  health,  and  retired  from  the
active  practice  of  his  professitm.  He  afterward
interestetl  himself  in  agriculture,  was  repeatedly
chosen  president  of  the  Agricultural  society  of  the
county,  was  a  memljer  of  the  legislature  In  1824.
1825,  and  1827,  and  in  the  last  year  carried  through
a  bill  for  the  construction  of  a  railroad  across  the
mountains  from  Boston  to  Albany,  which  had  been
generally  regarded  as  a  chimerical  scheme.  He
was  for  a  series  of  years  the  unsuccessful  candidate
of  the  Democratic  party  for  lieutenant-governor.
He  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  free-trade  and  tem-
perance, and  an  opponent  of  slavery.  His  death
resulted  from  a  stroke  of  apoplexy,  which  occurred
at  the  close  of  an  address  to  the' Democratic  citi-
zens of  Pittsfield.  He  published  "  Hints  to  my
Countr>men  "  (1826):  "  Public  and  Private  Econ-
omv,  illustrated  bv  Observations  made  in  Eurojie
in  ■l836-'7"  (3  vols..  New  York,  1838);  and  ad-
dresses to  the  Berkshire  agricultural  asswiation
(1823  and  18:^0).— His  wife,  Susan  Ridley,  author,
b.  about  1789 ;  d.  in  Stockbridge.  Mass.,  in  1807.
was  a  granddaughter  of  Gov.  William  Livingston,
of  New  Jersey,  and  the  author  of  "Morals  of  Pleas-
ure "  (Philatlelphia,  1829) :  "  The  Young  Emi-
grants" (Boston,  1830):  "Allen  Prescott"  (2  vols.,
New  York,  18^15):  "Alida.  or  Town  or  Country"
(1844) ;  and  "  Walter  Thornley  "  (18.59).  The  Sedg-
wick mansion  at  Stockbridge  is  seen  in  tlie  illus-
tration on  pap  4o2. — Henry  Dwight,  second  son
of  the  first  Theodore,  author,  b.  in  Sheffield,  Mass.,
in  1785:  d.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass..  23  Dec..  1831.
was  gra<luateil  at  Williams  college  in  1804,  and
became  an  eminent  memlier  of  the  New  York  bar.
He  contributed  to  the  "North  American  Review"
and  other  journals,  and  published  an  "Appeal  to
the  City  of  New  York  on  the  Proposed  Alteration
of  its  "Charter."  His  "English  Practice  of  the
Common  I^aw  "  (New  York.  1822)  was  an  argu-
ment against  the  complexity  and  absunlity  of  that
system which  was  one  of'  the first  suggestions


of  the  co«le  of  civil  proce«lure  afterward  adopted
by  the  state  of  New  York.  He  was  an  ardent  o{>-
|K)nent  of  8laver\'  and  an  advrxatte  of  free-iratie,
in  support  of  which  he  publishe<l  numerous  [»•
[wrs,  including  a  series  of  forty-seven  articles  in
the  "  lianner  of  the  Constitution."  Mr.  Sedgwick
was  instrumental  in  persuading  William  Cullen
Bryant  to  renu»ve  to  New  York,  and  was  one  of
the  first  to  appr»»ciate  his  talent.s.  During  the
struggle  of  the  Grt-eks  for  indei>endence  two  frig-
ates that  hml  lieen  built  for  tiiem  in  this  coun-
try were  detained  to  answer  exorbitant  charges
for  their  construction.  Thrf)Ugh  the  exertions  of
Mr.  Sedgwick  and  his  associate  counsel  one  of  the
ships  was  discharged  from  attachment  and  sent  to
Greece.  His  death  was  caus^nl  bv  |>aralvsis,  brriught
on  by  his  efforts  in  this  litigation.  Ilis  "  Refuta-
tion of  the  Reasons  in  the  Award  in  the  Case  of  the
Two  Greek  Frigates  "  was  8ul)sequently  publishe<l
(1826).— The  first  Theoilore's  daughter,  Catherine
Maria,  author,  b.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  28  Dec,
1789:  d.  near  Roxbury,  Mass.,  31  July.  1867.  re-
ceived an  excel-
lent education,
and,  on  her  fa-
ther's death  in
1813,  undertook
the  management
of  a  private
school  for  young
ladies,  and  con-
tinued it  for  fifty
years.  Her  broth-
ers Theodore  and
Henry  encour-
aged the  develop-
ment of  her  pow-
ers. Miss  Sedg-
wick's first  work
of  fiction,"  A  New
England  Tale."
appeared  anony-
mously (New
York. '1822:  last
ed.,  with  "Miscellanies,"  1856),  and  its  very  favorable
reception  encouraged  her  to  prosecute  authorship.
"Redwood  "  followed  (2  vols.,  1824).  also  anonymous.
It  was  reprinted  in  England,  and  translated  into
four  European  languages,  the  French  translator
erroneously  attributing  the  authorship  to  James
Fenimore  tooper.  "  The  Traveller  "  appeared  next
(1825);  "  Hope  Leslie,  or  Early  Times  in  Massachu-
!  setts  "  (2  vols.,  1827) ;  "  Clarence,  a  Tale  of  our  Own
Times  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia.  18:^0) ;  "  Le  Bossu,"
one  of  the  "  Tales  of  the  Glauber  Sjia  "  (1832) ;  and
"The  Linwoods,  or  Sixty  Years  Since  in  America"
(2  vols.,  1835).  This  was  the  last,  and  by  many  is
thought  to  be  the  best,  of  her  novels,  "that  year
she  also  published  a  collection  of  her  "Sketches
and  Tales  "  from  the  magazines.  She  next  issued
a  series  of  papers  illustrative  of  common  every-day
life,  and  inculcating  moral  lessons,  under  the  title
of  "The  Poor  Rich  Man  and  the  Rich  Poor  Man "
(New  York,  1836).  in  1837  "  Live  and  I-*t  Live."
and  in  1838  "A  Love-Token  for  Children"  and
"  Means  and  Ends,  or  Self-Training."  In  the  spring
of  1839  she  visited  Europe,  travelling  for  a  year,
and  conveying  her  impressions  in  "  Letters  from
Abroad  to'  Kindred  at  Home,"  which  were  pub-
lished after  her  return  (2  vols.,  1841).  These  were
folio we<l  that  same  vear  bv  "  H istorical  Sketches
of  the  Old  Painters ''  and  biographies  of  the  sis-
ters "  Lucretia  and  Margaret  Davidson."  Among
her  other  works  are  "  Wilton  Harvev.  and  Other
Tales  "  (1845) ;  "  Morals  of  Manners  "  (1846) ;  "  Facts


462


SEDGWICK


SEELYE


and  Fancies"  (1848);  and  "  Married  or  Singlet"
(1857).  Miss  Sedgwick  both  edited  and  wrote  arti-
cles for  literary  periodical  publications,  and  she
contributed  largely  to  the  annuals.  Collections
of  these  papers  constitute  several  volumes  of  her
works.  She  is  thoroughly  American  in  thought
and  feeling,  and  with  very  marked  individuality,
of  the  best  New  England  tyj)e.  Her  delineations
of  character  and  manners,  Jis  then  found,  in  her
native  state,  are  unsurpassed  for  their  picturesque-
ness  and  truth.  See  ner  "  Life  and  Letters,"  by
Marv  E.  Dewey  (New  York,  1871).— Elizabeth
Dwight,  author,  married  Charles,  a  son  of  the
first  Theodore,  and  was  well  known  as  a  teacher.
She  wrote  "  Beatitudes  and  Pleasant  Sundays,"
"  Lessons  without  Books,"  "  A  Talk  with  my  Pu-
pils" (New  York,  1863),  and  "Spanish  Conquest."
— The  second  Theodore's  son  Theodore,  lawyer,  b.
in  Albany,  N,  Y.,  27  Jan.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Stockbridge,
Mass.,  9  Dec,  1859,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in
1829,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  May,  1833.  The
following  fifteen  months  he  passed  in  Europe,  prin-
cipally in  Paris,  as  an  attache  to  the  U.  S.  embassy
under  Edward  Livingston.  On  his  return  he  prac-
tised law  successfully  in  New  York  till  1850,  when
failing  health  forced  him  to  desist  for  a  time  from
active  professional  labor.  President  Buchanan
tenderea  him  the  mission  to  the  Hague  in  1857,
and  he  twice  declined  the  office  of  assistant  secre-
tary of  state. In  January,  1858,  he  was  appointed


U.  S.  attorney  for  the  southern  district  of  New
York,  which  office  he  held  till  his  death.  He  was
president  of  the  New  York  Crystal  palace  asso-
ciation in  1852.  Mr.  Sedgwick  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  periodicals  and  newspapers,  and
published  "  Memoir  of  William  Livingston  "  (New
York,  1833) ;  "  What  is  Monopoly  ?  "  (1835) :  "  State-
ment re  New  York  Court  of  Chancery"  (1838);
"  Thoughts  on  the  Annexation  of  Texas,"  a  series
of  papers  in  opposition  to  that  measure  (1844);
"  Treatise  on  the  Measure  of  Damages,  or  an  In-
quiry into  the  Principles  which  govern  the  Amount
of  Compensation  in  Suits  at  Law"  (1847);  "The
American  Citizen :  a  Discourse,  at  Union  (College  "
(1847) ;  and  "  Treatise  on  the  Rules  which  govern  the
Interpretation  and  Application  of  Statutory  and
Constitutional  Law  "  (1857 ;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,  with
notes  hj  John  Norton  Pomeroy,  1874).  He  edited
the  political  writings  of  William  Leggett  (2  vols,,
New  York,  1840).— The  third  Theodore's  son,  Ar-
thnr  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  6  Oct.,
1844,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1864,  became
1st  lieutenant  in  the  20th  Massachusetts  regiment,
was  captured  at  Deep  Bottom,  Va.,  and  confined  in
Libby  prison  during  the  latter  part  of  the  summer
of  1864.  His  confinement  having  produced  an  ill-
ness which  incapacitated  him  for  further  service,
he  entered  Harvard  law-school,  and  after  gradua-
tion was  admitted  to  the  Boston  bar,  where  he
practised  law  for  several  years,  during  part  of  this


time  editing  the  "American  Law  Review"  with
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  Jr.  Returning  to  New
York  in  1872,  he  practised,  and  was  also  for  some
time  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Evening  Post,"
and  also  of  the  "  Nation."  to  which  he  constantly
contributed  legal,  political,  and  critical  articles.
He  edited  the  5th  edition  of  his  father's  work  on
"  Damages"  (New  York.  1869),  and  with  G.  Willett
Van  Nest  the  7th  (1880).  He  also  published,  with
P.  S.  Wait,  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Principles  and  Prac-
tice governing  the  Trial  of  Title  to  Land  "  (1882).
— John,  grandnephew  of  the  first  Theodore,  b.  in
New  York  city,  2  June,  1829,  was  graduated  at  tht
University  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1847,  and
was  assistant  district  attorney  of  New  York  in
1856-'61.  Since  1  Jan.,  1872,  he  has  been  judge  of
the  siiperior  court  of  the  city  of  New  York.

SEDLEY,  William  Heiiry,  actor,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery, Wales,  4  Dec,  1806 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,
Cal..  17  Jan.,  1872.  He  was  the  son  of  a  British
army  officer,  who  was  killed  in  the  peninsular
war.  The  boy  left  home  when  he  was  fourteen
years  old,  joined  a  company  of  strolling  players,
and,  assuming  the  name  of  W.  H.  Smith,  began  to
play  minor  parts  in  the  Shrewsbury  theatre.  In
1822  he  obtained  his  first  regular  engagement  at
the  Theatre  royal,  Lancaster,  and,  coming  to  this
country  in  1827,  made  his  first  appearance  at  the
Walnut  street  theatre,  Philadelphia.  He  won  his
highest  reputation  in  1828  at  the  Tremont  theatre,
Boston,  as  Rolando  in  "The  Honeymoon."  In  1836
he  managed  the  National  theatre,  Boston,  and  from
1843  till  1860  he  was  stage-manager  of  the  Boston
museum.  His  first  appearance  in  New  York  was
at  the  old  Chatham  street  theatre,  3  Nov..  1840,
when  he  acted  Edgar  to  the  Lear  of  Junius  Brutus
Booth.  He  also  appeared  acceptably  as  Laertes,
Gratiano, and  Marc  Antony.  His  last  professional
appearance  in  New  York  was  made  at  the  Winter
garden,  6  May,  1865.  During  the  few  years  pre-
ceding his  death  he  had  been  employed  at  the
California  theatre,  San  Francisco,  as  actor  and
manager. — His  wife,  formerlv  a  Miss  Riddle,  b.  in
Philadelphia  in  1811  :  d.  in  'New  York,  27  Sept.,
1861,  made  her  debut  at  the  Walnut  street  theatre,
in  her  native  city,  in  1823,  and  first  appeared  in
New  York  at  the  old  Chatham  street  theatre  as
Virginia  in  "  Virginius."  She  was  very  popular
for  many  vears. — Their  son,  Henry,  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  4  April,  1835,  was  educated  in  his
native  place,  studied  civil  engineering  at  Rensselaer
polytecnnic  institute,  Trov,  N.  Y..  and  afterward
practised  his  profession  in  fean  Francisco.  He  sub-
sequently engaged  in  journalism,  was  one  of  the
editors  of  the  New  York  "  Times,"  and  the  "  Even-
ing Post,"  and  for  some  time  was  an  editor  of  the
"Commercial  Advertiser."  He  is  the  author  of
" Dangerfield's  Rest,  a  Romance"  (New  York,
1864),  and  "  Marion  Rooke,  or  the  Quest  for  For-
tune "  (1865),  and  has  also  contributed  to  English
and  American  magazines.

SEELYE,  Julius  Hawley,  educator,  b.  in
Bethel,  Conn.,  14  Sept.,  1824.  He  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1849.  studied  at  Auburn  theological
seminary  in  1849-'52,  and  continued  his  studies
in  theology  at  Halle,  Gej-many.  in  1852-'3.  He
was  ordained  by  the  classis  of  Schenectady  in  1853.
and  in  that  year  became  pastor  of  the  1st  fleformed
Dutch  church  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  where  he  re-
mained until  1858.  In  that  year  he  was  elected
Erofessor  of  mental  and  moral  philosophy  at  Am-
erst  college,  which  post  he  held  until  1875.  He
was  chosen  to  congress  in  1874  from  Massachusetts
without  being  nominated  by  any  party,  serving
from  6  Dec,  1875,  till  3  March,  1877,  and  at  the


SEEMAN


SKOIIKRS


458


end  of  hJH  t«rm  (Uvlinwl  a  renomination.  While  in
oonifre'W.  thoiijjh  a  Uopublioan.  ho  o|)|)<)sc<l  thei-lec-
toral  foinmisMJon  and  Oio  de<-larati<tn  of  th«»  election
of  Ruthorfonl  H.  Hayes  to  the  olllce  of  president
of  the  United  States.' In  1H77  he  was  installed  as

ftresident  of  Amherst  collejre,  which  odlee  he  now
1888)  holds.  In  \HTi  he  visited  India  by  invita-
tion, and  (lelivercKl  a  course  of  Iwliires.  In  1874
he  was  ap|>ointe<l  by  the  governor  of  Massachu-
setts one  of  a  commission  to  revise  the  laws  of
that  state  on  taxation.  During  the  early  years  of
his  presidency  of  Amherst  he  inaugurated  the
'•  Amherst  system  "  of  college  self-government,  by
which  the  students  have  a  large  slmre'in  maintain-
ing discipline,  ami  which  has  U'en  productive  of
gwHl  results.  President  S-elyo  has  been  a  trustee
of  the  Clarke  institute  for  deaf-mutes,  and  of  Smith
college  for  women,  and  has  served  on  the  boartl
of  visitors  of  Andover  theological  seminary.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  Union  college  in
1862,  and  that  of  LL.  I),  from  Columbia  in  1876.
In  addition  to  articles  in  various  reviews,  sermons
and  addresses,  and  contributions  to  religious  maga-
isines,  he  has  published  a  translation  of  Dr.  Albert
Schwegler's  "  Ilistorv  of  Philosophy"  (New  York,
1856) ;  "  Lectures  to  "EducAttnl  Hindus  "  (liomlmy,

1873  ;  republishetl  by  the  Congregational  publish-
ing sfK'iety.  Boston,  187;J.  under  the  title  "The
Way,  the  Truth,  the  Life":  also  translated  into
Hindustani.  Japanese,  and  German) ;  "  Christian
Missions  "  (New  York.  1875) ;  and  revise*!  and  edit-
ed Hickok's  "  Moral  Science  "  (Boston,  1880).^His
brother,  Lanren.s  Clark,  educator,  b,  in  Bethel,
Conn.,  20  Sept.,  1837.  was  gmduated  at  Union
college  in  18o7,  studie<l  at  Andover  theological
seminary  in  1857-'9,  and  was  at  Berlin  and  Heidel-
bt^rg  universities  in  1860-'2.  He  afterward  trav-
elled in  Fiiirope,  Kgypt,  and  Palestine,  and  in  1863
was  ordained  pastor  of  the  North  Congregational
church  at  Spnngfleld,  Mass.,  where  he  remained
two  years.  He  was  professor  of  English  literature
and  oratory  at  Amherst  from  18(J5  till  1873,  and  in

1874  became  president  of  Smith  college  for  young
women  (which  he  hatl  organiztnl)  at  Northampton,
Mass.  His  various  contributions  to  reviews  in-
clude articles  on  college  education  and  on  Celtic
literature.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on
him  bv  Union  college  in  1875.

SEtMAN,  Berthold,  German  traveller,  b.
in  Hanover,  Germany,  28  Feb.,  1825  ;  d.  at  the
Javali  mine,  Nicaragua,  10  Oct.,  1871.  He  was
educated  at  the  lyceum  of  his  native  city,  took  his
degree  at  the  University  of  Gottingen,  and  was
appointed  in  1846  naturalist  on  board  the  British
government  vessel  "  Herald"  on  an  exploring  ex-
pedition round  the  world.  He  subsequently  served
on  three  arctic  voyages  (1846-'51),  and  published
"  A  Narrative  of  the  Voyage  of  the  '  Herald,'  and
Three  Cruises  to  the  Arctic  Regions  in  Search  of
Sir  John  Franklin "  (London,  1852).  Then  ap-
peared "Popular  History  of  Palms"  (1855).  and
"Botany  of  the  Voyage  of  the  '  Herald'"  (1857).
He  was  appointed  m  1860  by  the  colonial  office
one  of  the  royal  commissioners  to  the  Fiji  islands
to  ascertain  their  fitness  for  British  colonization,
the  results  of  which  ap(>eared  in  "  Viti.  an  Account
of  a  Government  Mission  to  the  Viti,  or  Fiji
Islands"  (1862).  He  also  issued  "Popular  No-
menclature of  the  American  Flora."  "Paradesus
Vindol)onensis,"  and  "Twentv-four  Views  of  the
Coast  and  Islands  of  the  Pacific."  He  accom-
panied ('apt.  Beilford  Pim  on  his  travels  to  Central
America,  and,  in  collalwration  with  him,  wrote
"  Dottings  on  the  Roa4lside  in  Panama,  Nicaragua,
and  Mosquito"  (1869). He  was  editor  of the


"Bonplandia"  and  of  the  "Journal  of  Botany,
British  and  Foo'ign."  Dr.  Swman  contributed
lareely  to  scientific,  literary,  ami  jK»litical  journals
in  I^iondon.  The  "  P'lora  Vitiensis"  he  completed
only  a  short  time  Ix'fore  his  death.

^4EFT0N,  John,  actor,  b.  in  Liverpool,  Eng-
land, 15  Jan..  1805:  d.  in  New  York  city,  19  Sept..
1868.  He  iM'gan  the  study  of  law,  but'prefemng
the  stage,  entered  upon  his  professional  carec'r  at
the  age  of  sixteen.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1827,
playe<I  for  two  sea.sonsat  the  Walnut  strei't  theatre,
Philadelphia,  and  gained  ^reat  i«opularitv  in  New
York  as  Jemmy  Twitcher  in  the  "  Golden  iParmer."
He  was  stage-manager  at  the  Astor  place  opera-
house  during  the  Macready  riot.  an<l  afterward  held
the  same  jxist  at  Richmond,  at  the  Walnut  street
theatre,  Philadel|)hia,  at  Charleston  and  Colum-
bia, S.  C,  and  at  New  Orleans,  I>a.  His  la.st  ap-
{learance  was  at  the  Broadway  theatre  in  October,
1867.  In  certain  comic  part-s  he  had  no  superior
either  in  this  country  or  m  England.

SE(MR,  JoHeph  E.,  member  of  congress,  b.  in
King  William  county.  Va.,  1  June.  1804 ;  d.  in  1885.
He  was  e<lucated  at  the  public  schools,  and  in  ISSfi
was  elected  to  the  state  house  of  n»presentatives,
where  he  served  for  several  terms.  He  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  Unionist  from  Virginia,  serving
from  6  May,  1862,  till  3  March,  1864,  and  was
chosen  U.  S.  senator  from  Virginia  in  the  place  of
Lemuel  J.  Bowden.  deceased,  but  was  not  admitted
to  a  seat.  He  was  appointed  arbitrator  on  the  part
of  the  Unite<l  States  under  the  United  States  and
Spanish  claims  convention  of  1877.

SEGHERH,  CharleH  John,  archbishop,  b.  in
Ghent,  Belgium,  26  Dec,  \md;  d.  in  Alaska,  28
Nov.,  1886.  He  studied  for  the  priesthood  in  the
ecclesiastical  seminary  of  Ghent,  and  afterward  in
the  American  college,  Lou  vain,  was  ordained  a
priest  at  Mechlin  in  1863,  and  went  to  Vancouver's
island  as  a  missionary,  rising  to  be  vicar-general.
During  these  years  he  also  labored  for  the  conver-
sion of  the  Indians  in  British  North  America.  In
1871  he  was  made  administrator  of  the  diocese,
and  on  29  June,  1873,  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of
Vancouver's  island.  His  accession  to  the  episco-
pate gave  a  great  impulse  to  Roman  Catholicism
in  the  northwest.  He  was  the  first  missionary  of
his  church  who  attempted  the  conversion  of  the
Alaskan  Indians.  In  1878  he  visited  that  territory
and  all  the  adjacent  islands,  travelling  on  snow-
shoes  and  afterward  going  on  dog-sleds  or  canoes
among  the  tribes  in  the  interior  and  along  the
coast.  Toward  the  end  of  the  year  he  was  appointed
coadjutor  archbishop  of  Oregon  and  reached  Port-
land on  1  July,  1879.  He  spent  a  year  in  exploring
Washington  territory.  Idano,  ancl  Montana,  antl
published  a  series  of  letters  in  Roman  Catholic
periodicals  in  the  eastern  states,  describing  his
atl ventures.  In  1881  he  succeeded  to  the  arch-
bishopric, but  for  several  years  he  had  been  anx-
ious to  resign  his  see  in  order  to  devote  himself
to  the  conversion  of  the  Alaska  Indians,  and  he
visited  Euror)e  in  1883  to  obtain  r)ermission  from
the  pope.  His  resignation  was  at  length  accepted,
and  he  was  reappointed  bishop  of  Vancouver's
island,  retaining  nis  title  of  archbishop.  On  his
return  he  stopped  at  Baltimore,  Md.,  to  take  part
in  the  3d  plenary  council  in  1884,  and  h%  reached
Victoria  early  in  the  following  year.  He  then  set
about  re-establishing  among  the  Alaska  Indians
the  missions  that  hn<l  come  to  a  stand -still  during
his  absence  in  On»gon.  He  left  Victoria  in  July,
1886.  for  Alaska  in  company  with  two  Jesuits  and
a  guide  named  Fuller,  according  to  some  accounts
an  Englishman,  according  to  others  an  American.


454


SEGUIN


SfiGUR


They  arrived  sttfelv  at  Chilcat,  and  then  travelled
northward  alone  the  coast  until  they  reached  the
station  of  the  Alaska  trading  company  at  the  head
of  Stewart's  river.  Leaving  the  Jesuits  to  estab-
lish a  mission  among  the  Stckin  Indians,  the  arch-
bishop, with  Fuller  and  some  Indian  guides,  set
out  on  8  Sept.  for  Muklakayet,  a  village  near  the
mouth  of  the  Tannanah  river,  which  he  reached  on
34  Oct.  He  spent  a  few  weeks  in  missionary  duties
among  the  Indians  of  this  trading-post,  by  whom
he  w^as  well  received,  and  then  decided  to  push  on
to  Nulata,  200  nules  down  the  Yukon  river.  Trav-
elling on  sleds,  the  party  arrived  at  a  deserted  vil-
lage about  thirty  miles  from  their  destination.
They  entered  a  hut,  and,  after  making  a  fire,  lay
down  before  it.  At  daylight  the  next  morning
Fuller,  who  had  several  times  exhibited  anger  at
being  drawn  farther  and  farther  into  these  deso-
late regions,  levelled  his  rifle  at  the  archbishop
and  shot  him.  The  murderer,  while  afterward  ex-
pressing great  remorse,  gave  no  sufHcient  reason
for  committing  the  crime.  Archbishop  Seghers,
besides  being  one  of  the  most  adventurous  of  ex-
plorers, was  a  divine  of  great  erudition  and  an
efifeetive  pulpit  orator.

SEGUIN,  Arthur  Edward  Sheldon,  actor
and  singer,  b.  in  London,  England,  7  April,  1809 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  13  Dec,  1852.  He  was  one  of
the  earliest  pupils  of  the  Royal  academy  of  music,
from  which  he  retired  in  1830  with  all  the  honors.
He  first  appeared  at  the  Queen's  theatre,  London,
in  1831  as  Polyphemus  m  Handel's  "  Acis  and
Galatea,"  and  in  1838  came  to  this  country  and
made  his  first  appearance  on  the  American  stage
on  15  Oct.,  at  the  National  theatre.  New  York,  as
Gen.  Von  der  Teimer  in  the  opera  of  "  Amelie."
He  afterward  performed  in  the  principal  cities
with  great  success  as  a  bass-singer  and  comic  actor.
— His  wife,  whose  maiden  name  was  Ann  Childe,
b.  in  London,  England,  in  1809,  was  a  pupil  of  the
Royal  academy  of  music,  and  appeared  for  several
seasons  at  Her  Majesty's  theatre,  London.  She  was
long  a  member  of  the  Italian  opera  company  in
that  city,  and  first  appeared  on  the  American  stage,
15  Oct.",  1838,  at  the  National  theatre.  New  York
city.  She  subsequently  travelled  as  a  star  through
the  L^nited  States  and  gained  great  popularity.
She  made  her  first  appearance  in  Philadelphia,  4
Nov..  1839,  as  Linda  in  *'  Der  Freischiitz,"  but  after-
ward retired  from  the  stage  and  engaged  in  teach-
ing in  New  York,  where  (in  1888)  she  still  resides.

SEGUIN.  Edouard,  phvsician,  b.  in  Clamecy,
France,  20  Jan.,  1812 ;  d.  "in  New  York  city,  28
Oct.,  1880.  He  was  educated  at  the  College  of
Auxerre  and  St.  Louis,  and  then  studied  medicine
and  surgery  under  Jean  Gaspard  Itard.  At  the  sug-
gestion of  Itard  he  deterramed  to  devote  himself
to  the  training  of  idiots,  and  thoroughly  investi-
gated the  causes  and  philosophy  of  idiocy  and  the
best  means  of  dealing  with  it.  In  1837  he  began
to  treat  an  idiot  boy,  and  in  1839  he  opened  the
first  school  for  idiots.*  He  was  soon  able  to  obtain
remarkable  results  by  his  system  of  training.  In
1844  a  commission  from  the  Academy  of  sciences
in  Paris  examined  critically  his  plan  of  educating
idiot  children,  and  in  their  report  declared  that,  up
to  the  time  when  he  began  his  labors,  idiots  could
not  be  educated  or  cured  by  any  means,  but  that
he  had  solved  the  problem.  '  After  the  revolution
of  1848  he  came  to  the  United  States,  and  after
visiting  various  schools,  modelled  on  his  own,  that
had  been  established  in  the  United  States,  and  as-
sisting in  their  organization,  he  settled  in  Cleve-
land, and  later  in  Portsmouth,  Ohio.  In  18G0  he
removed  to  Mount  Vernon,  N.  Y.,  and  he  received


the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  medical  department
of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  18C1,
after  which  he  came  to  reside  in  New  York  city.
Subsequent  to  1806  he  devoted  attention  to  the
study  of  animal  heat,  adding  greatly  to  the  knowl-
edge on  that  subject  by  the  methods  of  thermom-
etry that  he  devised  and  the  instruments  that
he  invented,  of  which  the  physiological  thermom-
eter, largely  used  by  physicians,  is  the  most  im-
portant. In  1873  he  was  a  commissioner  to  the
World's  fair  in  Vienna  from  the  United  States,  and
published  a  special  "  Report  on  Education."  He
was  a  member  of  various  medical  societies,  and  was
president  of  the  Association  of  medical  officers  of
American  institutions  for  idiotic  and  feeble-minded
persons.  To  Dr.  Seguin  more  than  any  other  per-
son is  due  the  honor  of  showing  to  what  degree
the  congenital  failures  of  nature  can  be  redeemed
and  educated  to  comparative  usefulness.  Accord-
ing to  his  testimony,  "  not  one  idiot  in  a  thousand
has  been  entirely  refractory  to  treatment,  not  one
in  a  hundred  has  not  been  made  more  happy  and
healthy ;  more  than  thirtv  per  cent,  have  been  taught
to  conform  to  social  and  moral  law,  and  rendered
capable  of  order,  of  good  feeling,  and  of  working  like
the  third  of  a  man  ;  more  than  forty  per  cent,  have
become  capable  of  the  ordinary  transactions  of  life
under  friendly  control,  of  understanding  moral  and
social  abstractions,  of  working  like  two-thirds  of  a
man ;  and  twenty-five  to  thirty  f)er  cent,  come  nearer
and  nearer  to  the  standard  of  manhood,  till  some  of
them  will  defy  the  scrutiny  of  good  judges  when
compared  with  ordinary  young  men  and  women."
His  writings,  which  are  numerous,  include  "  Re-
sume de  ce  que  nous  avons  fait  pendant  quatorze
mois"  (Paris,  1839) ;  "  Conseils  k  M.  0.  sur  I'educa-
tion  de  son  enfant  idiot "  (1839) ;  "  Theorie  et  pra-
tique de  I'education  des  idiots  "  (2  parts,  1841-'2) ;
"  Hygiene  et  education  des  idiots"  (1843) ;  "Ima-
ges graduees  a  I'usage  des  enfants  arrieres  et  idi-
ots "  (1846) ;  "  Traitement  moral,  hygiene  et  edu-
cation des  idiots  et  des  autre  enfants  arrieres  "
(1846),  which  is  accepted  as  the  standard  author-
ity on  the  subject ;  "  Jacob  Rodrigue  Pereire,  notice
sur  sa  vie  et  ses  travaux  "  (1847);  "  Historical  Notice
of  the  Origin  and  Progress  of  the  Treatment  of  Idi-
ots "  (translated  by  Dr.  John  S.  Newberry,  Hartford,
1856) ;  "  Idiocy  and  its  Treatment  by  the  Physio-
logical Method"  (New  York,  1866);  "New  Facts
and  Remarks  concerning  Idiocy  "  (1879) ;  "  Pre-
scription and  Clinical  Record"  (1870);  "Medical
Thermometry,"  with  C.  A.  Wunderlich  (1871);
"  Manual  of  Thermometry  for  Mothers "  (1873) ;
"  Thermometres  physiologiques "  (Paris,  1873) ;
"  Tableaux  de  thermoinetrie  mathematique  "  (1873) ;
and  "  Medical  Thermometry  and  Human  Tempera-
ture "  (New  York,  1876).

S^GUR,  Lonis  PhiHppe,  Count  de,  French
historian,  b.  in  Paris,  10  Dec,  1753 ;  d.  there,  27
Aug.,  1830.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  field-
marshal  Louis  de  Segur,  studied  in  the  school  of
artillery  at  Strasburg,  and  obtained  in  1769  the
commission  of  lieutenant  of  cavalry.  He  was  pro-
moted captain  in  1771,  and  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  regiment  Orleans  in  1776.  He  became  an  advo-
cate of  the  cause  of  the  American  colonists  at  court,
and  as  early  as  1777  asked  from  the  king  permis-
sion to  serve  in  this  country  as  a  volunteer,  but
was  reprimanded.  He  was  afterward  appointed
colonel  of  the  regiment  "  Soissonnois,"  and  em-
barked on  7  April,  1781,  in  the  frigate  "  La  Gloire."
He  served  during  the  remainder  of  the  war,  and
after  the  withdrawal  of  the  French  forces  in  1782
obtained  leave  to  remain,  and  visited  the  southern
states,  Mexico,  Peru,  and  Santo  Domingo,  where  he


SE6URA


SEIDEL


4R5


owniHl  A  liir^'i'  I'j'trttc.  A  few  years  later  in  his
"  Mi'lniiffi's "  ht)  |>ut>li»hcH|  the  j<»umiil  <»f  liw  trav-
els, whicii  Httracti>«i  much  attention.  He  wait  min-
ister t«i  Uuv^ia  in  1 7>*4-'».  ami  to  lierlin  in  171)2.
Kuinoil  by  tiif  revolution,  he  sup|)ortetl  his  family
during  the  followint;  years  almost  exclusively  by
his  |)en.  He  was  deputy  t<)  the  corps  Ir^islatif  in
1801.eUH'te<l  in  lst»;{  a  n>'eml>erof  the  French  acad-
emy, and  afterwanl  Ix'came  a  councillor  of  »Uite,
(H^nd  nuister  of  the  ceremonies,  count  of  the  em-
pire in  IHIO.  and  a  senator,  5  April,  1814.  After
the  restoration  of  the  Bourbons  he  l)ec«me  a  j»eer
of  France,  4  June,  1814,  and  always  sided  with  the
liberals.  His  works  include  "  Pens«*t«»  |K)liti(|ues"
(Paris.  17U5):  "Melanges"  (17««);  "Tableau  hi»-
toric|ue  et  jKtlititjue  de  rEurojx",  17WH7UO"  (3
vols.,  1801);  "llistoire  de  Frwleric  Guillaume  II."
(1801);  "Politique  do  tous  les  cabinets  de  I'Eu-
rope  i)endant  les  regnes  de  Ix)uis  XV.  et  Louis
XVI.'*  (3  vols.,  1801-22);  "  Galerie  morale  et  poli-
tique "  (3  vols.,  1817-*24);  "  llistoire  de  France"
(9  vols.,  1824-'30);  and  "  Mcmoires  on  souvenirs  et
anecdotes  "  (3  vols.,  1824).  His  complete  works  were
publishe*!  in  1824  (iW  vols.).

SEGl'RA,  Jnaii  BaiitiHta  (say -goo -rah),  Span-
ish missionary,  b.  in  Toledo,  Spain;  d.  in  Virginia
in  February,  1571.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus
at  Alcala  in  April,  15GG,  was  appointed  vice-pro-
vincial of  Florida  in  1568,  ana  sailetl  the  same
year  from  Spain  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  mission-
aries. Lanuing  at  Havana,  he  made  arrangements
for  the  e<lucation  of  young  Indians,  and  then  set
out  for  the  province  of  Carlos  in  Florida.  He
spent  several  months  in  studying  the  language,  at
tne  same  time  attending  to  tlie  spiritual  interests
of  the  Spanish  soldiers.  When  able  to  converse
with  the  natives,  he  labored  for  alx)ut  a  year  in  the
countries  along  Appalachee  bay,  but  with  little  suc-
cess. Thinking  that  he  would  have  better  prospects
at  a  distance  from  the  Spanish  ports,  he  accepted
the  offer  of  a  converted  Indian,  Luis  de  Velasco.
who  promisnl  to  conduct  him  in  safety  to  his  triln?
and  assist  him  in  his  pious  endeavors.  Accom-
t)anie<l  by  Luis,  a  Jesuit,  and  seven  lay  brothers,
aegura  sailetl  from  Santa  Helena  on  5  Aug.,  1570,
entered  Chesapeake  bay,  ascended  the  Potomac,
and  landetl  on  10  Sept.  The  missionaries  found
the  natives  in  a  miserable  condition,  owing  to  a
famine  which  had  prevailed  for  several  years,  and
therefore  sent  their  vessel  Iwick  for  supplies,  es-
pecially seed-corn,  which  they  hoinnl  to  persuade
the  Indians  to  plant.  They  then  pressed  on
through  avast  track  of  marsh  and  wootl.  exi)ecting
to  find  a  village  which  Luis  said  was  rukil  by  his
brother.  They  s[)ent  more  than  a  month  travelling,
living  on  roots  and  herbs,  but  without  reaching
their  destination.  In  February  they  were  deserted
bv  their  guide,  who  went  to  fcis  brother's  village,
about  five  miles  distant,  promising  to  prepare  his
countrymen  for  their  arrival.  Some  time  having
elapsi'd  without  hearing  from  him,  Segura  sent
three  of  his  companions  to  beg  him  to  return.
The  messengers  were  attacked  and  killed  by  Luis
at  the  head  of  a  band  of  Indians.  Luis  then  pro-
ceeded to  the  hut  which  the  missionaries  had
erected  and  demandeil  the  hatchets  and  knives
which  they  had  with  them.  Segura  gave  them  up
silently,  and  then  knelt  with  his  companions  in
praver.  At  a  signal  they  were  all  massacri'd,  only
an  Indian  bov  escaping.  The  name  given  to  the
country  which  Segura  attempteil  to  evangelize  was
Axacan.  It  lay  between  tne  Potomac  and  the
Rapfmhannock,  probably  exten<ling  on  each  side  of
these  rivers.  He  wrote  "Tratadode  la  iiumildad
J  Obediencia"  (Madrid,  1600).


SE(>rROLA,  SobaHtlau  de  (iwy-goo-ro -lab).
Stuinish-Anierican  !Mjldier,  b.  in  (Juipuzcoa,  Spain,
2*  Jan.,  1740;  d.  in  I^  Paz,  Bolivia,  2  (ict..  1789.
After  pursuing  the  studies  then  necessary  for  the
career  of  arms,  he  was  ajifxiinted  a  cailet  in  the
regiment  of  royal  guards  in  1758.  In  177(1  he  sailetl
from  Cadiz  to  take  i>art  in  the  exiKHlition  sent  by
the  viceroy  of  Buenos  Ayres  to  clieck  the  incur-
sions of  the  Portuguese  on  .Spanish  territory.  He
was  «lecorate<I  with  the  ci-oss  of  Calatrava  for  his
services,  and  ap|)ointed  corn-gidor  over  the  prov-
ince of  I^recaja.  He  trK>k  [mrt  in  the  campaign
on  the  Kio  de  la  Plata,  and,  on  the  c*onclusion  of
peace,  fixe«l  his  residence  in  .Sorata.  the  principal
town  of  his  government  of  I^n-caja.  Here  he
received  intelligence  of  the  rel)ellion  of  J<»se  Ga-
briel Tupac-Amaru,  cacique  of  Tungasucii,  which
extended  to  several  provinces,  and  he  was  ordered
to  take  command  of  the  city  of  I^ii  Paz  and  the
neighl)oring  provinces  on  1  Jan.,  1781.  The  siege
of  La  Paz  was  the  most  memorable  incident  in  the
rebellion,  and  the  city's  safety  was  entirely  due  to
his  firmness  and  enerjcy.  In  1782  he  wjis  raised
to  the  rank  of  brigadier,  and  a{»jKnnte<l  governor
of  the  city,  which  |M>st  he  held  until  his  death.
His  "  Diario  de  los  sucesos  del  cerco  de  la  ciudad
de  I^i  Paz  en  1781  hasta  la  total  pacificacion  de  la
rebelion  general  del  Peni,"  printed  in  the  first
volume  of  the  "  Archivo  Boliviano"  (Paris,  1871),
gives  a  minute  account  of  the  incidents  of  the  siejje
and  the  subsequent  expeditions  against  the  hostile
tribes,  and  cijiitaiiis  interesting  letters  from  the
inca  and  other  Indian  chiefs.

SEIDEL,  Nathaniel,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in
Lauban,  Silesia,  2  Oct.,  1718;  d.  in  liethlehem.  Pa.,
17  May,  1782.  He  emigrated  to  this  country  in
1742,  and  became  the  most  indefatigable  of  the
early  Moravian  evangelists  among  the  white  set-
tlers and  the  Indians.  For  eighteen  years  his  life
was  an  almost  unintemipted  succession  of  jour-
neys. He  began  such  itinerant  work  with  a  visit
to  the  aborigines  of  the  Sus<iuehanna  in  1743;  af-
ter that  he  rejwatedly  traversed  Pennsylvania  as
far  as  Sunbur)',  the  eastern  counties  of  S'ew  York,
New  England  as  far  as  Boston,  and  Maryland  as
far  as  Fretlerick  county.  All  these  journeys  were
performed  on  foot.  He  was  often  in  great  danger,
and  on  one  occasion  barely  esca|)ed  falling  into  the
hands  of  two  savages,  who  pursued  him  through  a
forest  for  hours.  In  1750  he  proceeded  to  Europe
and  gave  Count  Zinzendorf  an  account  of  the  work
in  America,  returning  in  1751  and  continuing  his
itinerant  labors  until  1753,  when  he  sailed  to  the
West  Indies  and  visited  the  mission  on  the  Danish
islands.  He  came  back  the  same  year  and  soon
afterward  led  a  company  of  Moravian  settlers  to
North  Carolina,  where  the  church  had  purchased  a
large  tract  of  land.  It  was  a  hard  and  fx^rilous
journey  of  forty  days.  In  midwinter  he  returnetl
to  Bethlehem.'  His  next  tour  was  to  Surinam,  in
South  Americjv,  where  in  1755  he  selected  a  site  for
a  mission.  On  his  return  he  again  began  to  itin-
erate among  the  settlers  and  natives,  and  con-
tinued such  labors  until  1757.  In  that  year  he
visited  Europe  a  second  time,  and  on  12  May,
1758,  was  consecrated  to  the  episcopacv  at  Herm-
hut.  His  first  visitation  took  place  in  the  West  In-
dies in  1759.  Two  years  later  lie  returned  to  lieth-
lehein,  having  Ix'en  apjK>inte<l  presiding  bishop  of
his  church.  The  onerous  duties  of  this  office  he
dischargeil  with  great  faithfulness  for  twenty-one
years  until  his  death.  He  continued  to  take  a
warm  interest  in  the  Indian  mission ;  and  the  mas-
sacre of  nearly  100  converts,  in  the  spring  of  1782,
at  Gnadenhuetten,  Ohio,  by  a  band  of  whites,  on  the


456


SEIDENBUSH


SELDEN


groundless  suspicion  of  havinjj  l)een  engaged  in
outrages  in  Pennsylvania,  so  affec-ted  him  that  his
health  gave  way  and  he  died  two  months  later.
An  old  record  savs  of  him:  "His  ejjiscopate  was
precious  and  excellent ;  his  memory  wdl  live  in  this
country,  in  the  West  Indies,  and  among  the  Indians
of  North  and  South  America."

SEIDENBUSH,  Rupert,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Munich,  Bavaria,  30  Oct.,  1830.  He  began  his
theological  studies  in  Bavaria,  and  emigrated  to
the  United  States  in  1851.  In  1852  he  entered  the
Benedictine  order  in  St.  Vincent's  abbey,  West-
moreland CO.,  Pa.  He  was  raised  to  the  priest-
hood on  22  June,  1853,  was  for  some  years  sta-
tioned at  Newark,  N.  J.,  and  in  1807  was  made
abbot  of  the  monastery  of  St.  Louis  on  the  Lake,
Minn.  The  northern  part  of  Minnesota  was  erect-
ed into  a  vicariate  apostolic  by  a  papal  brief  on  12
Feb.,  1875,  and  he  was  appointed  its  vicar  apos-
tolic on  30  May  following,  under  the  title  of  bishop
of  Halia  in  partibus.  The  Roman  Catholic  church
has  made  great  progress  during  his  administration.
In  1887  the  vicariate  contained  70  priests,  6  eccle-
siastical students,  90  churches,  50  chapels  and  sta-
tions, 14  convents,  a  monastery,  seminary,  college
and  academy.  The  Roman  Catholic  population,
including  white  and  Indian,  exceeded  45,000.

SEIP,  Theodore  Lorenzo  (sipe),  clergyman,
b.  in  Easton,  Pa.,  25  June,  1842.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in  1864,
and  at  the  Lutheran  theological  seminary,  Phila-
delphia, in  1867,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  or-
dained to  the  ministry.  Immediately  after  his  or-
dination he  became  principal  of  the  academic  de-
partment of  the  newly  established  Muhlenberg
college,  Allen  town,  Pa.  He  was  adjunct  professor
of  Greek  there  in  1867-'72,  professor  of  Latin  in
1872-'80,  of  Greek  in  1880-'6,  and  president  of  the
college  since  1886.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1886  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Dr.
Seip  has  done  more  than  any  other  man  for  the  suc-
cessful establishment  and  endowment  of  Muhlen-
berg college.  He  is  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
periodicals  of  his  church.  Besides  sermons  and
addresses,  he  has  published  "  Inaugural  Address
as  President  of  Muhlenberg  College^'  (Allentown,
Pa.,  1886) ;  "  Muhlenberg  College,"  an  address  de-
livered before  the  ministerium  of  Pennsylvania
(Philadelphia,  1887) :  and  "  History  of  the  College
Association  of  Pennsvlvania,"  of  which  he  was  a
founder  (1887).

SEISS,  Joseph  Augustus  (sees),  theologian,  b.
in  Gracehara,  Frederick  co.,  Md.,  18  March,  1823.
His  ancestors,  whose  original  name  was  Suess,  emi-
grated from  the  Alsatian  mountains  and  settled
near  Reading,  Pa.  His  grandfather  removed  at  an
early  period  to  the  Moravian  settlement  of  Grace-
ham,  Md.  His  father,  who  was  a  farmer,  would
have  preferred  him  to  be  a  field-laborer,  and,  on  ac-
count of  his  studious  habits  and  thirst  for  knowl-
edge, called  him  "  dreamer  Joseph,"  but  his  moth-
er sympathized  with  him  and  encouraged  him.
After  his  confirmation,  in  his  sixteenth  year,  as  a
member  of  the  Moravian  church,  he  determined  to
devote  his  life  to  the  ministry.  Receiving  no  en-
couragement from  his  father  or  his  church,  he  was,
by  the  help  of  a  few  Lutheran  clergymen,  enabled
to  enter  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in  1839.
Here  he  remained  a  year  or  two,  afterward  pursu-
ing his  theological  course  in  private.  In  1842  he
was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  synod  of  Virginia,
and  in  1844  he  was  ordained  to  the  Lutheran  min-
istry. After  holding  pastorates  in  Virginia  and
Maryland  he  was  called  to  St.  John's  English  Lu-
theran church,  Philadelphia,  in  1858. In  1874  the


necessity  for  an  English  Lutheran  church  in  the
western  part  of  the  city  led  to  the  establishment  of
the  Church  of  the  Holy  Communion  by  members
of  St.  John's  congregation,  and  he  was  at  onco
elected  its  pastor.
A  beautiful  Gothic
church  of  green
serpentine  marble
was  erected  on  the
corner  of  firoad
and  Arch  streets,
at  a  cost  of  $225,-
000.  It  was  con-
secrated on  1 7  Feb.,
1875,  and  is  one  of
the  finest  Protest-
ant churches  in
Philadelphia.  Dr.
Seiss  is  an  eloquent
pulpit  orator.  His
style  is  clear,  or-
nate, attractive,
and  forcible.  He
published  his  first
work  at  the  age  of
twenty-two  years,
and  has  now  attained  a  wide  reputation  as  an  au-
thor. His  publications  number  more  than  a  hun-
dred, and  some  of  them  have  been  republished  in
England  and  translated  into  other  languages.  A
bibliography  of  his  published  works  (Philadel-
phia, 1887)  makes  a  duodecimo  volume  of  fifty-
seven  pages.  He  was  joint  editor  of  the  "  Luther-
an," Philadelphia,  in  1860-'l,  and  of  the  "  Lutheran
and  Missionary "  in  1861-73,  editor  of  the  same
for  several  years,  and  editor  of"  Prophetic  Times"
in  1863-75.  He  spent  the  years  1864-'5  in  Euro-
pean and  Eastern  travels,  including  a  tour  through
Syria  and  Palestine.  His  numerous  publications
include  "  Popular  Lectures  on  the  Epistle  to
the  Hebrews^'  (Baltimore,  1846);  "  The  Baptist
System  Examined"  (Philadelphia,  1854;  re-
vised ed.,  1858);  "The  Last  Times"  (1856);  "The
Lutheran  Church  "  (1859);  "  Holy  Tvpes  "  (1860) ;
"  Petros,  or  the  Wonderful  Building  "  (1862) ;  "  Lec-
tures on  the  Gospels  of  the  Church  Year  "  (3  vols.,
1868);  "The  Apocalypse,  with  Revised  Text"  (3
vols.,  1869-81 ;  complete  ed.,  London,  1882 ;  Ger-
man translation,  Basle,  1884-'7) ;  "  Uriel,  or  some
Occasional  Discourses  "  (1874) ;  "  A  Miracle  in
Stone,  or  the  Great  Pvramid "  (1877) ;  "  Recrea-
tion Songs  "  (1878 ;  with  supplement,  1887) ;  "  Life
after  Death"  (1878);  "Practical  Sermons"  (1879);
"  Blossoms  of  Faith  "  (1880) ;  "  Remarks  on  Infi-
delity "  (1882) ;  "  The  Gospel  in  the  Stars  "  (1882 ;
enlarged  ed.,  1885) ;  "  Luther  and  the  Reforma-
tion '  (1883) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Epistles  of  the
Church  Year  "  (2  vols.,  1885) ;  "  Right  Life  "  (1886) ;
"The  Children  of  SUence"  (1887);  and  "Christ's
Descent  into  Ilell"  (1887).  He  has  also  pub-
lished various  liturgical  works,  including  "Book
of  Forms"  (1860);  "How  shall  we  Order  our
Worship?"  (1869);  "The  Golden  Altar "  (1882) ;
and  several  collections  of  church  music.

SELDEN,  Samuel  Lee,  jurist,  b.  in  Lyme,
Conn.,  12  Oct.,  1800;  d.  ii)  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  20
Sept.,  1876.  His  ancestors  settled  in  the  colony  of
Connecticut  in  1636.  He  began  to  practise  law  in
Rochester  in  1825,  was  chancery  clerk  and  first
judge  of  common  pleas  in  Monroe  county  for  many
years,  and  in  1847  was  elected  justice  of  the  su-
preme court.  In  1856  he  was  elected  judge  of  the
court  of  appeals,  which  place  he  resigned  in  1862. —
His  brother,  Henry  Rogers,  jurist,  b.  in  Lyme,
Conn.,  14  Oct.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  18


SRLPRIDOR


SELKIRK


457


Sept.  1885.  In  1H25  \w  rumovwl  to  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
where  he  tttiuliiHl  law  iiiul  woh  iulmittc>(l  to  the  bar
in  lHaO.  He  Im'^m  pntctire  in  Clurkson,  Monroe
CO.,  hut  retiimiMl  to  I^K'hestur  in  \Mi);  un«l  wiu<
reporter  of  the  court  of  api>«al8  in  1851 -'4.  He
was  a  lK>niocrat,  but,  Iwin^c  <ip[M)8t>4l  to  the  exten-
sion of  Hlavcry.  aide*!  in  the  formation  of  the  Re-
publican iMirty,  and  in  IK'iU  was  it.s  successful  c^tn-
dldatc  for  the  licutenant-pncrnorship.  lie  at-
tended the  Republican  national  convention  at  Chi-
ctt^o  in  I8G0,  and  (!oncurr<><l  with  his  colleagues
from  New  York  in  advocating;  the  nomination  of
William  11.  Seward,  but  accjuiesceil  in  the  nomina-
tion of  Abraham  Lincoln.  In  July,  1802,  Mr.  Sel-
den  was  a(>|M)inted  a  judt^c  of  the  court  of  appeals
to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resijfnation  of  his
brother,  and  he  was  aftcrwartl  ele«tc<l  for  a  full
term,  but  ri'si^jned  in  1804.  In  1872  he  attcndeil
the  Cincinnati  convention  that  nominated  Horace
Greeley  for  the  prt»sidency,  and,  though  opposed  to
this  course,  reluctantly  supported  him  in  nis  can-
vass. He  published  "  Reports.  New  York  Court  of
Appals,  18r)l-'4"  (0  vols.,  Albany,  1853-'(50).

SKLFRIIMiE,  ThoiiiaM  Oliver,  naval  officer,
b.  in  IJostoii,  MiLss.,  24  Anril,  1804.  He  entered
the  navy  as  midshipman,  1  Jan.,  1818,  was  promoted
to  lieutenant,  3  March,  1827,  and  served  in  the  West
Indies,  Brazil,  and  the  Mediterranean.  He  was
commissione<l  commander,  11  April,  1844,  and  was
a.ssigned  to  the  ship  "Columbus,"  which  was  the
flag-ship  of  the  East  India  souadron  in  1845-'0,
and  substHjuently  of  the  Pacific  squjulron  during
the  Mexican  war,  1840-'7.  In  May,  1847,  he  was
transferretl  to  the  sloop  "  Dale,"  in  which  he  par-
tici|)ate<l  in  the  engagement  and  capture  of  Mazat-
lan  and  Guaymas;  at  the  latter  place  he  received
a  severe  wound,  in  consequence  of  which  he  was
obligeil  to  relinquish  the  command  of  the  "  Dale,"
and  returned  home  in  June.  1848.  He  was  then  on
leave  and  on  duty  at  the  Boston  navy-yard  until

1861,  when  he  had  command  of  the  steam  frigate
"  Mississippi,"  in  the  Gulf  scjuadron,  for  a  few
months.  Ilis  wound  incapacitated  him  for  sea-
service,  and  he  had  charge  of  the  navy-yard  at
Mare  island,  Cal.,  in  1802-'5.  He  was  promoted  to
captain,  14  Sept.,  1855,  and  to  commodore,  16  July,

1862,  and  was  retired  on  24  April,  1866. He  was

E resident  of  the  examining  board  in  1869-'70,  light-
ouse  inspector  at  Boston,  and  also  member  of  the
examining  board  in  1870-'l,  since  which  time  he
has  been  on  waiting  orders,  and  is  now  the  senior
officer  of  the  navy  on  the  retired  list.  He  was  pro-
moted to  rear-admiral,  25  July.  1866. — His  son,
Thomas  Oliver,  naval  officer,  "b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  6  Feb.,  1837,  was  gnwluated  at  the  U.  S,
naval  academy  at  the  head  of  his  class  in  1854.  He
was  promoted*  to  lieutenant,  15  Feb.,  1860,  and  was
2d  lieutenant  of  the  "Cumberland"  when  she  was
sunk  by  the  "Merrimac"  in  Hampton  Roads,  Va.
He  wjLs  detailed  to  command  the  "  Monitor"  after
the  engagement  with  the  "  Merrimac,"  but  was
transferretl  as  flag-lieutenant  of  the  North  Atlan-
tic blocrkmling  squadron.  He  was  promoted  to
lieutenant-commander,  16  July,  1802,  and  com-
manded the  iron-clad  steamer  "Cairo,"  which  was
blown  up  by  a  torfwdo  in  Yazoo  river,  near  Vicks-
burg.  He  ha<l  charge  of  a  siege-battery  in  the  cap-
ture of  Vicksburg,  and  the  steamers  "Conestoga"
and  "  Manitou."  He  commanded  the  iroiK'lad
"  Osage  "  in  the  Re<l  river  exjH'dition,  during  which
he  inflicted  a  loss  of  400  killed  and  wounde«i  on  the
Confederates  at  Blair's  plantation.  He  next  com-
manded the  "  Vindicator"  and  the  5th  division  of
the  Mississippi  river  fleet  until  18<J4.  He  had
charge  of  the  steamer  "  Huron  "  in  both  attacks


on  FoK  Fisher,  and  commandi*«l  the  3d  divinion
of  the  landing  juirty  of  sailors  that  stormed  the
fort.  He  was  [iromoteil  to  crimmander,  81  Dec,
1809,  and  in  that  year  took  charge  of  surveys  for
an  interoc*eanic  canal  acrotts  the  IsthmuN  of  I)arien.
He  8urveye<l  the  .San  Bias  r«)ute  in  1870,  the  lines
near  (,'aledonia  Iwy,  the  De  I'tiytlt  route,  and  the
Gorgozii  route  in  1871,  and  the  Atrato  river  in
1871-'3,  He  was  also  a  meml)er  of  the  interna-
tional conf;ri>ss  at  Paris  on  the  subject  of  the  canal
in  1876,  The  official  reiM)rts  of  thes»«  surveys  were
publisheil  by  congress.  He  commandiHl  the  steamer
"Enterprise,"  North  Atlantic  station,  in  1877-'80,
during  which  cruise  he  surveyed  Amazon  river.  He
was  commissioncHi  captain,  24  Feb.,  1881,  and  in
January  tfxik  charge  of  the  torjK-do  station  at  New-
port, R.  I.,  where  he  remained  until  1885,  During
nis  service  at  the  tor^Knlo  station  he  inventc<l  a  de-
vice to  protect  a  shi[)  by  suspending  tor|M>drM>s  to  a
net  by  which  an  attacking  toriH^lo  woultl  U*  de-
stroyed. In  1885-'7  he  commanded  the  "Omaha,"
of  the  Asiatic  s^^uadron,  and  in  March,  1887,  after
he  had  engaged  in  target  practice  oflt  the  island  of
Ike-Sima,  Japan,  the  bursting  of  an  unexploded
shell  caused  tne  death  of  four  natives  of  the  island.
He  was  tried  by  court-martial  for  criminal  care-
lessness in  Washington  in  1888,  but  was  acquitted.
SELKIRK,  or  SEALCHRAIU,  Alexander,
Scottish  mariner,  b.  in  Largo,  Fifeshire,  Scotland,
in  1676;  d,  at  sea  in  1723.  When  a  young  lad  he
ran  oft  to  sea  and  engaged  in  several  buccaneering
expeditions,  half  exploring  and  half  piratical.  In
1703  he  was  sailing-master  of  a  privatt'cr  called
"  Cinoue  Ports  Galley."  but,  having  had  a  quarrel
with  liis  captain,  whose  name  was  .Stradliiig,  he
was,  in  September  of  the  following  year,  at  his
own  request,  |)ut  on  shore  at  Juan  Fernandez,  an
uninhabited  island  400  miles  off  the  coast  of  Chili
(seen  in  the  accompanying  illustration),  with  some
necessaries,  such  as  a  knife,  kettle,  axe,  gun,  am-
munition, and  a  few  books.  The  island  is  twelve
miles  long,  four  miles  broad,  and  mostly  covered
with  mountains,  the  highest  peak  being  3.000  feet
above  the  sea-level. There  are  also  numerous  fer-


tile valleys,  and  many  wild  goats  frequent  the
clifTs.  In  this  lonely  island  Selkirk  remained  for
four  years  and  four  months,  till  the  arrival  of  two
English  vessels,  under  the  command  of  Capt,
WcKKles  Rogers  {q.  v.),  by  whom  he  was  taken  off
in  February,  1709.  Rogers  made  Selkirk  his  mate,
and  sailed  with  him  round  the  world,  reaching
England  on  1  Oct.,  1711.  In  his  account  of  his
voyage  (1712)  he  tells  of  Selkirk's  experiences  in
the  island.  Selkirk  had  built  two  huts,  the  roofing
being  long  grass,  and  the  wainscoting  the  skins
of  goats.  Pimento  wood  supplied  him  with  fire
and  light,  burning  very  clearly  and  yielding  a  fra-
grant smell.  He  made  goat-skins  into  clothes,  and
petted  cats  and  kids.  Rogers  also  tells  of  Selkirk's
difficulty  in  returning  to  the  use  of  sj)eech  and  to
the  ortlinary  provisions  use<l  on  shiplx>ard.  Sel-
kirk return»Jd  to  liurgo,  elo{»etl  with  a  girl,  married
her,  and  brought  her  to  Ijondon. He  subsequently

t'oined  the  navy,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant,
t  is  said  that  Daniel  Defoe  met  Selkirk  at  Wap-


468


SELKIRK


SELLERS


Eing.  and  that  his  adventures  suggested  "  Robinson
rusoe  " :  but  there  is  a  German  book  of  an  ear-
lier date  narrating  similar  experiences.  Cowper's
"  Lines  on  Solitude,  supposed  to  be  written  by
Alexander  Selkirk,"  begmning  "  I  am  monarch  of
all  I  survey,"  are  well  known.  See  "  The  Life  and
Adventures  of  Alexander  Selkirk,"  by  John  How-
ell (Edinburgh,  1829).  A  bronze  statue  of  Selkirk
was  recently  unveiled  at  Largo  on  the  site  of  the
cottage  in  which  the  mariner  was  born.

SELKIRK.  Eihvard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Water-
bury,  Conn.,  13  Oct.,  1809.  lie  was  graduated  at
Trinity  in  1840,  at  the  General  theological  semi-
nary, Kew  York  city,  in  18-13,  was  ordained  deac-on
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  the  same  year,
and  became  priest  in  1844,  He  was  then  rector  of
Trinity  church,  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  which  he  con-
tinued' till  1884,  when  he  became  rector  emeritus.
He  is  an  honorary  canon  of  the  Albany  cathedral.
He  has  published  "  An  Address  on  the  Laying  of
the  Corner-Stone  of  Trinitv  Church"  (Albanv,
1844)  and  "  Historv  of  Trinitv  Church  "  (1870).

SELKIRK.  Thomas  Douglas,  Earl  of,  b.  at
the  family-seat,  St.  Mary's  isle,  Kirkcudbrightshire,
Scotland,  in  June,  1771 ;  d.  in  Pau,  France,  8  April,
1820.  He  studied  at  Edinburgh  university  from
1786  till  1790,  early  developed  a  taste  for  literary

fursuits,  and  was  an  associate  of  Sir  Walter  Scott.
le  succeeded  his  brother  as  Lord  Dacre  in  1797,
and  his  father  as  F'arl  of  Selkirk  in  May,  1799.  In
1803  he  settled  a  colony  of  800  Scottish  I'lighlanders
upon  waste  land  that  Wfis  given  to  him  by  the
government  in  Prince  Edward  island,  and  soon
afterward  he  established  a  small  colony  in  Kent
county.  Upper  Canada.  While  residing  in  Mon-
treal he  conceived  the  project  of  planting  a  colony
of  evicted  Highlanders  from  the  estates  of  the
Duchess  of  Sutherland  in  the  Red  river  country.
To  accomplish  this  he  purchased  a  large  tract  of
land  on  the  Red  river  lor  colonization  from  the
Hudson  bay  company.  His  Highland  colonists  be-
gan to  arrive  in  1811,  and  in  1812  the  Red  river
colony  was  established.  Trouble  ensued  between
the  colony  and  the  Northwest  trading  company,
and  the  emigrants  were  driven  from  their  new
homes.  In  1816  Lord  Selkirk  went  to  Red  river  to
aid  his  colonists  against  their  enemies,  and,  as-
sisted by  a  small  armed  force,  restored  them  to
their  lands  and  reimbursed  them  lor  their  losses.
He  became  financially  embarrassed  in  consequence
of  his  philanthropic  schemes,  and  persecution  and
slander  so  shattered  his  health  that  he  never
recovered.  Soon  after  his  return  to  Scotland  he
went  to  the  south  of  France  to  recruit,  but  he
died  shortly  afterward.  He  wrote  "  Observations
on  the  Present  State  of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,
with  a  View  of  the  Causes  and  Probable  Conse-
quences of  Emigration  "  (London,  1805) ;  '•  The
Necessity  of  a  more  Effectual  Svstera  of  National
Defence""  (1808);  "Sketch  of 'the  British  Fur
Trade"  (1816):  "The  Red  River  Settlement"
(1817) ;  and  "Occurrences  in  the  Indian  Countries
of  North  America  "  (Montreal.  1818).

SELLERS,  Coleman,  dynamical  engineer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  Jan.,  1827.  He  was  educated
at  common  schools  and  studied  for  five  years  with
Anthony  Bolmar  in  West  Chester,  Pa.  In  1846  he
became  draughtsman  in  the  Globe  rolling-mill  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  he  remained  there  for  three

Sars.  during  part  of  the  time  as  superintendent,
r.  Sellers  then  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of
locomotives,  and  served  for  five  years  as  foreman
in  the  works  of  Niles  and  Co.  In  1856  he  moved
to  Philadelphia,  where  he  became  chief  engineer
of  William  Sellers  and  Co.  (the  senior  partner  of


which  firm  was  his  second  cousin),  makers  of  ma-
chinists' tools,  and  general  millwrights.  Since
1888  he  has  devoted  himself  chiefly  to  consulting
practice.  Mr.  Sellers  has  obtained  more  than  thirty
lelters-patent  for  inventions  of  his  own.  one  of  the
first  of  which,  a  coupling  device  for  shafting  (1857),
is  the  essential  factor  in  the  modem  system  of  in-
terchangeable shafting  parts.  His  invention  in
1866  of  feed-disks  for  lathes  or  other  machine  tools
was  the  first  practical  solution  of  the  problem  of
the  infinite  gradation  of  feeds.  His  other  pat-
ents relate  chiefly  to  improved  forms  of  tools
or  modifications  of  existing  machines.  The  use
of  absorbent  cotton  for  surgical  operations  was
recommended  by  him  as  early  as  1861,  and  he
proi)osed  the  employment  of  glycerine  in  order
to  keep  photographic  plates  wet.  He  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  mechanics  in  the  Frankhn
mstitute  in  1881,  and  non-resident  professor  of
engineering  practice  in  .Stevens  institute  of  tech-
nology in  1888.  both  of  which  chairs  he  still  (1888)
holds.  The  order  of  St.  Olaf  was  conferred  on
him  by  the  king  of  Sweden  in  1877,  and  the  degree
of  doctor  of  engineering  by  Stevens  institute  in
1888.  He  was  president  of  the  Franklin  institute
during  l870-'5,  and  of  the  American  society  of
mechanical  engineers  in  1884,  and  he  has  also  held
that  oflice  in  the  Pennsylvania  society  for  the  pre-
vention of  cruelty  to  animals  and  the  Photo-
graphic so<;iety  of  Philadelphia.  He  is  a  member
of  other  learned  societies  both  at  home  and  abroad.
Mr.  Sellers  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  Se^bert
commission  to  investigate  the  claims  of  Spiritual-
ists, owing  to  his  knowledge  of  sleight-of-hand,
having  been  an  expert  in  the  practice  of  that  art
from  his  childhood.  He  was  American  correspond-
ent of  the  "  British  Journal  of  Photography  "  in
1861-3.  and,  in  addition,  contributed  many  papers
to  technical  journals.

SELLERS,  WilUani,  mechanical  engineer,  b.  m
Upfjer  Darby,  Pa.,  19  Sept.,  1824.  He  was  educated
at  a  private  school,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  was
apprenticed  to  his  uncle,  a  machinist,  with  whom  he
remained  for  seven  years.  In  1845  he  was  called
to  the  management  of  the  shops  of  the  Fairbanks
and  Bancroft  machine-works  m  Providence,  R.  I.,
and  two  years  afterward  he  established  himself  inde-

Eendently  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  then  joined  by
is  former  employer,  and  in  1848  the  firm  of  Ban-
croft and  Sellers  was  formed,  which  continued  until
1855,  when,  on  the  death  of  the  senior  member,
the  style  became  William  Sellers  and  Co.  Mr.
Sellers'  has  been  active  in  the  improvement  of  ex-
isting forms  of  tools  and  machines,  as  well  as  in  the
invention  of  new  patterns,  and  from  his  first  pat-
ent, for  an  improvement  on  turning-lathes  in  1854,
until  1888  he  has  received  seventy  patents.  His  in-
ventions have  received  numerous  medals,  and  at  the
World's  fair  in  Vieima  in  1873  he  was  awarded  a
grand  diploma  of  honor.  In  1868  he  established  the
Edgemoor  iron  company,  which  now  owns  the
largest  plant  in  this  country  for  building  iron
bridges  and  other  structures  of  iron  and  steel.  All
of  the  iron-work  for  the  buildings  of  the  World's
fair  in  Philadelphia  in  1876  were  supplied  by  this
company.  He  oecame  president  of  the  Midvale
steel-works  in  1873,  and  reorganized  that  concern,
which  is  now  one  of  the  largest  establishments  in  the
vicinity  of  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Sellers  was  electetl
president  of  the  Franklin  institute  in  1864,  and
while  holding  that  oflice  proposed  the  first  formula
that  was  ever  offered  for  a  system  of  screws,
threads,  and  nuts,  which  subsequently  became  the
standard  for  the  United  States.  He  is  a  member
of  scientific  societies  both in  this  country  and


SELI^TEDT


SEMMGS


4fi9


•broad,  was  elected  to  the  American  {ihilosophical  I
society  in  1864,  to  the  Nationnl  academy  of  »ci-  |
ences  in \HT'i,  and  com'sixinilent  of ilu-  StK?i»*te  i
d'encourH);umi'nt  |H)iir  I'intluittrio  nHtioiinle  in  1875.  i
At  the  formation  of  the  Kairmoiint  {Mirlc  comniis-  I
sion  in  1807  he  wa.s  ai>[M)inted  a  eomniisxioner  for
Ave  yearn,  during  which  time  all  of  the  land  now  ,
comprisetl  in  this  jfreat  |mrk  wjus  pun-iiaM-d  hy  the
mm  mission. He  wa.s  active  in  the  orgiinixation  |
of  tlir  Worhl's  fair  in Philadelnhia  in 1X7((,  and  i
was  at  the  liejjinninff  vice-oresiuent  of  the  man-  ,
aurement. In  1H(W  he  was  elect e<l  a  trustee  of  the  |
I  nivt-rsity  of  Pennsylvania,  and  he  is  a  director
of several railmads. His publicafifms include
short  t>a|H'rs  and  discussions  on  technical  suhjec-ts.

SELLSTKDT.  LarM  (tUMtaf,  artist,  b.  in  Sunds-
vail.  Sweden.  ;iO  April,  1819.  For  several  years  he
followi*«l  the  life  of  a  sailor,  but  came  to  the  Unite<l
States  in  lt*ii4,  ami  in  1842  settled  in  BufTalo,  X.  Y..
where  he  still  (1888)  resides.  Soon  after  his  arrival
in  that  citv  he  began  to  {mint,  and  during  his
studies  proftte<l  much  by  association  with  Thomas
Le  Clear  and  William  H.  Beard.  Uo  has  devoted
himself  chiefly  tt>  |>ortraiture,  his  works  in  that  line
including  Solomon  U.  Haven  (1850):  George  W.
Clinton  (1802);  Millard  P'illmore(18«9);  a  portrait
of  himself  in  his  studio,  one  of  his  Ijest  works
(1871):  Sherman  S.  liogers  (1873):  William  G.
Fargo  and  Isaac  Vernlanck  (1874) :  Benjamin  Fitch
(1888) :  and  Grover  Cleveland  (1884).  He  has  also
|)ainte<l  a  few  marine  and  genre  pictures.  Since
1858  he  has  exhibited  frequently  at  the  National
academy,  where  he  was  elected  an  associate  in  1871,
and  an  academician  in  1874.  In  Buffalo  he  has
held  oflk-e  in  the  Fine  arts  academv  since  18(53.

SELWYN,  Alfred  Richard  Cecil,  Canadian

feologist,  b.  in  Somersetshire.  England,  in  1824.
le  was  educated  privately,  and  continuc<l  his
studies  in  Switzerland,  and  in  1845  was  appointed
assistant  on  the  geological  survey  of  Great  Britain.
In  1852  he  was  made  director  of  the  geological  sur-
vey of  the  colony  of  Victoria,  Australia,  in  1854
and  1859  he  examined  and  rej)orted  upon  coal-
fields and  gold-fields  in  Tasmania  and  South  Aus-
tralia, and  he  acted  in  other  important  capacities
until  he  left  Austrtilia  in  18<>9.  when  he  went  to
Canada  and  succeeded  Sir  William  E.  Logan  as
director  of  the  geological  survey  of  that  country.
He  has  contributed  to  and  edited  fifteen  volumes
of  annual  re|K>rts  of  the  geological  and  natural
historv  survey.

SELYNS,  Henriciis.  clergyman,  b.  in  Amster-
<lam,  Holland,  in  l()3<i :  d.  in  New  York  city  in  July,
1701.  His  unccstors  were  clergymen  in  the  Re-
formed church  in  Holland  for  a  century  previous  to
his  birth.  He  was  educated  for  the  ministry,  and
in  ItMJO  was  sent  to  this  country  by  the  classis  of
Amstenlam  to  become  pastor  of  the  Reformed
Dutch  church  of  Breukelen  (Brot)klyn).  To  sup-
plement his  salary,  he  was  also  iiermitted  to  offi-
ciate on  Sunday  afternoons  at  I*eter  Stuyvesant's
farm,  liouwerie(now^  Bowery),  New  York,  where  he
taught  negroes  and  the  poor  whites.  He  returned
to  Holland  in  1(J04.  I)ut  in  1(W2  accepted  a  call
from  the  1st  Reformed  Dutch  church  of  New  York
city,  of  which  he  was  pastor  until  his  death.  He
was  on  intimate  terms  with  the  most  eminent  men
of  his  day,  and  was  the  chief  of  the  early  minis-
ters to  enlarge  the  usefulness  of  his  church,  and
to  secure  for  it  an  independent  an<l  permanent
foun<lation  tm<ler  the  English  irovernment.  He
and  his  consistory  obtainiHl.  in  May.  l(»9(i,  the  first  I
church  charter  that  was  issued  in  the  colony.  Al-  |
though  his  original  work  that  has  lieen  preserved  1
is scanty,  he  wrote  much,  and  Cotton  Mather  |


savs  of  his  poetical  iMiwers  that  "he  had  tt>  nimble
a  fancy  fr>r  putting  tiis  devout  thoughts  into  verse
that  uiMtn  this,  as  well  as  upon  greater  account^
he  was  a  David  unto  the  flocks  in  the  wilder-
ness." He  collected  all  the  records  of  the  New
York  lieformed  Dutch  church  to  the  date  of  his
own  ministry,  and  transcriljcd  them  with  his  own
pen.  This  volume  is  still  extant  and  in  good
prj'servation  in  the  records  of  the  l{eform<Ml  Dutch
church  of  New  York  city.  His  only  publications
are  "  Poems,"  translated  from  the  Dutch  into
English  by  Henrv  C.  Murj)hv,  and  printed  in  his
*' Anthology  of  the  New  Netherlands"  in  the  col-
lections of  New  York  historical  society,  and  a  Latin
fKiem  (1687)  prefixed  to  some  editions  of  Cotton
Mather's  "  Magnalia."

SEMMES,  Alexander  Aldeburan,  naval  oflli-
cer,  b.  in  Washington,  I).  (".,  8  June,  1825;  d.  in
Hamilton,  Va..  22  Sej)!.,  1885.  He  entered  the
navy  as  a  midshipman,  22  Oct.,  1841,  attende«l  the
naval  academy  at  Anna|>olis,  and  liecame  a  passed
midshipman,  10  Aug.,  1847.  He  was  prf)mote<l  to
master,  11  Aug.,  18.M,  and  to  lieutenant,  15  Sept.,
1855.  During  the  civil  war  he  rendered  creditable
service  in  command  of  the  steamer  "  Rhode  Island  "
on  the  Atlantic  coast  bloc-kade  in  1861,  and  in  the
steamer  "  Wamsutta"  on  the  South  Atlantic  block-
ade, during  which  he  conducted  numerous  engage-
ments with  forts  and  batteries  on  the  coasts  of
Georgia  and  Florida,  where  he  captured  several
bloc-kade-runners  in  1862-'3.  He  commanded  the
monitor  •'  Lehigh  "  in  the  bombardment  of  Fort
Pringle,  and  participated  in  the  operations  at
Charleston  until  that  city  surrendered.  He  co-
operatetl  with  Grant's  army,  fought  the  Howlett
house  batteries,  and  was  present  at  the  fall  of  Rich-
mond in  1865.  He  was  commissioned  a  command-
er, 25  July,  1866,  promoted  to  cantain,  24  Aug..
1873,  and  stationed  at  the  Pensiicola  navy-yard  in
187;^'5.  In  1880  he  was  president  of  the  l)oard  of
inspection,  after  which  he  was  commandant  of  the
navy-yard  at  Washington.  He  was  commissione<l
commodore,  10  March,  1882,  and  was  in  command
of  the  navy-yard  at  the  time  of  his  death,  but  hatl
left  the  citv  on  account  of  his  health.

SEMMES,  Raphael,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Charles
county,  Md.,  27  Sept.,  1809;  d.  in  Mobile.  Ala.,  80
Aug.,  1877.  President  John  Quincy  Adams  ap-
pointed him  a
midshipman  in
the  U.  S.  navy
in  1826.  but  he
did  not  enter
ui)on  active  ser-
viie  until  18;i2,
the  intermedi-
ate years  being
spent  in  studv.
In  18:M,  after
returning  from
his  first  cruise,
he  wasadmitt«.Hi
to  the  bar,  but
decided  to  re-
main a  seaman.
In  1837  he  was
promoted  lieu-
tenant, and  in
1842  he  removed
to  Alabama.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  with
Mexico  he  was  made  flag-lieutenant  under  Com.
Conner,  commanding  the  s<juiulron  in  the  Gulf,
and  in  the  siege  of  \  era  Cniz  he  was  in  charge  of
one  of  the  naval  batteries  on  shore.  He  was  in  com-
mand of  the  U.  S.  brig  **  Somers  "  on  the  blockade


^^t,^^C<^.c£  ^^L<wc^


460


SEMMES


SEMPLE


of  the  Mexican  coast,  when  the  brig  foundered  in  a
gale,  and  most  of  her  crew  were  drowned.  Lieut.
Semmes  served  for  several  years  as  inspector  of
light-houses  on  the  Gulf  coast,  in  1855  was  pro-
moted commander,  and  in  1858  became  secretary
of  the  light-house  board  at  Washington.  On  the
secession  of  Alabama,  15  Feb..  1861,  he  'resigned
his  commission  in  the  U.  S.  navy  and  reported  to
Jefferson  Davis  at  Montgomery,  who  instructed
him  to  return  to  the  north  and  endeavor  to  pro-
cure mechanics  skilled  in  the  manufacture  and  use
of  ordnance  and  rifle  machinery  and  the  prepara-
tion of  fixed  ammunition  and  percussion-caps.  lie
was  also  to  buy  war  material.  In  Washington  he
examined  the  machinery  of  the  arsenal,  and  con-
ferred with  mechanics  whom  he  desired  to  go
south.  Within  the  next  three  weeks  he  made  a
tour  through  the  principal  workshops  of  New
York,  Connecticut,  and  Massachusetts,  purchased
large  quantities  of  percussion-caps  in  New  York,
which  were  sent  to  Montgomery  without  any  dis-
guise, made  contracts  tor  light  artillery,  powder,
and  other  munitions  of  war,  and  shipped  thou-
sands of  pounds  of  powder  to  the  south.  He  re-
turned to  Montgomery  on  4  April,  to  find  that  he
had  been  commissioned  commander  in  the  Confed-
erate navy,  and  placed  in  charge  of  the  light-house
bureau,  which  he  relinquished  within  two  weeks  to
go  to  New  Orleans  and  fit  out  the  "  Sumter,"  with
which  he  captured  eighteen  merchantmen.  After
the  blockade  of  that  ship  at  Tangiei"s  by  two  U.  S.
men-of-war,  he  sold  her  and  went  to  England,  hav-
ing been  promoted  meantime  to  the  rank  of  cap-
tam.  There  the  fast  steamer  "Alabama  "  was  built
for  him,  and  in  August,  1863,  he  took  command  of
her  at  the  Azores  islands,  put  to  sea,  and  captured
sixty-two  American  merchantmen,  most  of  which
he  burned  at  sea.  Upon  her  loss  in  the  battle  with
the  "  Kearsarge,"  on  19  June,  1864  (see  Winslow,
John  A.),  he  returned  to  England,  and  in  London
was  presented  by  officers  of  the  British  army  and
navy  with  a  sword  to  replace  that  which  he  had
cast  into  the  sea  from  the  deck  of  his  sinking  ship.
On  3  Oct.,  1864,  he  sailed  for  Havana,  whence  he
reached  Bagdad,  a  Mexican  port  on  the  Gulf,  and
passed  through  Texas  and  Louisiana.  He  was  ap-
pointed rear-admiral,  and  ordered  to  the  James
river  squadron,  with  which  he  guarded  the  water
approaches  to  Richmond  until  the  city  was  evacu-
ated. At  Greensboro',  N.  C,  on  1  May,  1865,  he
participated  in  the  capitulation  of  Gen.  Johnston's
army.  He  returned  to  Mobile  and  opened  a  law
office.  There,  on  15  Dec,  1865,  he  was  arrested  by
order  of  Sec.  Welles  and  was  imprisoned.  The  rea-
son, as  given  by  the  attorney-general  of  the  United
States,  was  his  liability  to  trial  as  a  traitor,  which
he  had  evaded  by  his  escape  after  the  destruction  of
the  "  A  labama."  From  his  prison  he  wrote  to  Presi-
dent Johnson  a  letter  claiming  immunity  for  all
East  deeds  under  the  military  convention,  to  which
e  was  a  party  at  Greensboro',  and  the  subsequent
quarrel  between  Mr.  Johnson  and  the  Republican
majority  of  congress  interrupted  any  proceedings
looking  to  his  trial.  He  was  released  under  the
third  of  the  president's  amnesty  proclamations,
and  in  May,  1866,  was  elected  judge  of  the  pro-
bate court  of  Mobile  county,  but  an  order  from
President  Johnson  forbade  him  to  exercise  the
functions  of  the  office.  He  then  became  editor  of
a  daily  paper  in  Mobile,  which  he  gave  up  to  accept
a  professor's  chair  in  the  Louisiana  military  insti-
tute. He  afterward  returned  to  Mobile  and  re-
sumed the  practice  of  law,  in  which  he  was  occu-
pied till  his  death.  He  published  "Service  Afloat
and  Ashore  during  the  Mexican  War  "  (Cincinnati,


1851) ;  "  The  Campaign  of  Gen.  Scott  in  the  Valley
of  Mexico"  (1852);  "The  Cruise  of  the  Alabama
and  Sumter  "  (New  York,  1864) ;  and  "  Memoirs  of
Service  Afloat  during  the  War  between  the  States  "
(Baltimore,  1869).  The  action  of  the  British  gov-
ernment in  permitting  the  "Alabama"  and  other
similar  cruisers  to  be  fitted  out  in  its  ports  gave
rise  to  the  so-called  "Alabama  claims"  on  the
part  of  the  United  States,  settled  by  arbitration
in  1872.  (See  Grant,  Ulysses  S.)-— His  cousin,
Alexander  Jenkins,  surgeon,  b.  in  Georgetown,
D.  C,  17  Dec,  1828,  was  educated  at  Georgetown
college,  and  graduated  at  the  National  medical  col-
lege, Washington,  D.  C,  in  1854.  He  subsequently
studied  in  Paris  and  London,  and  on  his  return
settled  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  but  removed  to  New
Orleans,  La.  lie  was  commissioned  a  surgeon  in
the  Confederate  army  in  1861,  served  in  that  ca-
pacity in  Gen.  Thomas  J.  Jackson's  corps  in  the
Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  was  surgeon  in  charge
in  the  Jackson  military  hospital,  Richmond,  Va.,
became  medical  inspector  of  the  Department  of
Northern  Virginia  in  1862,  inspector  of  hospitals  in
the  Department  of  Virginia  in  1863,  and  president
of  the  examining  boards  of  the  Louisiana,  Jack-
son, Stuart,  and  Winder  hospitals,  Richmond,  Va.,
in  1865.  He  was  visiting  physician  to  the  Charity
hospital.  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  1866-'7,  removed  to
Savannah,  Ga.,  and  in  1870-'6  was  professor  of
physiology  in  the  Savannah  medical  college.  Sub-
sequently he  took  orders  in  the  Roman  Catholic
church,  and  in  1886  he  became  president  of  Pio
Nono  college,  Macon,  Ga.  He  was  a  secretary  of
the  American  medical  association  in  1858-'9,  a
member  of  several  professional  societies,  and  the
author  of  medical  and  other  papers.  His  publica-
tions include  "  Medical  Sketches  of  Paris "  (New
York,  1852) :  "  Gunshot  Wounds  "  (1864) ;  "  Notes
from  a  Surgical  Diary  "  (1866) ;  "  Surgical  Notes
of  the  Late  War"  (1867) ;  "  The  Fluid  Extracts"
(1869) ;  "  Evolution  the  Origin  of  Life  "  (1873) ;  and
the  "  Influence  of  Yellow  Fever  on  Pregnancy  and
Parturition"  (1875).

SEMPLE,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Green  county,
Ky.,  5  Jan.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Elsah  Landing,  HI.,  20
Dec,  1866.  His  educational  advantages  were  lim-
ited to  the  common  schools  of  Greensburg  and  the
law-school  at  Louisville,  Ky.  After  his  graduation
at  the  latter  he  removed  at  once  to  Edwardsville,
111.,  and  practised  his  profession.  At  the  beginning
of  the  Black  Hawk  war  he  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general. He  represented  Madison  county  sev-
eral times  in  the  legislature,  and  was  twice  speaker
of  the  house.  From  1837  till  1842  he  was  minister
at  Bogota,  Colombia.  In  1843  he  was  elected  judge
of  the  superior  court,  but  he  soon  resigned  to  enter
the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  served  from  4  Dec,  1843,
till  3  March,  1847,  filling  the  unexpired  term  of
Samuel  McRoberts,  deceased.  He  became  an  active
advocate  of  the  54°  40'  line  in  the  Oregon  question.  <
Returning  to  his  home  in  1847.  he  declined  to  ac-
cept any  political  office.  He  expended  considera-
ble time  and  money  during  the  last  years  of  his
life  in  experimenting  on  a  steam  road-wagon  which
he  had  made,  but  it  proved  a  failure.

SEMPLE,  Robert,  British  author,  b.  in  ScoUand
about  1766 ;  d.  in  Fort  Douglas.  British  America,  19
June,  1816.  He  was  nominated  chief  governor
of  all  the  factories  and  territories  of  the  Hudson
bay  company  in  1815,  and,  sailing  from  England,
reached  York  factory,  British  America,  in  August
of  the  same  year.  He  made  a  tour  of  inspection  of
all  the  posts  of  the  company  immediately  upon  his
arrival,  and  did  not  reach  his  heiuhjuarters  at  Fort
Douglas  (now  part  of  Winnipeg)  until  the  spring


SEHPLB


SEPTENVILLE


461


of  1816.  For  some  time  pruviouM  to  the  arrival  of
Gov.  Somplc  then"  had  l>o«»n  a  conflict  of  authority
Ih'Iwcch  thi"  IIikIsoii  hay  c<)in|»anv  niid  tht*  North-
wi'st  tradiiij;  coiiUMiny,  which  rcsiillnl  in  hloodshcd
on  several  occjisions.  On  lU  June,  1H16,  Cuth-
bert  Grant,  a  half-brtHHl,  n-prcscntinj;  the  North-
west company,  in  command  of  a  lumtl  of  Indians
and  others,  marchctl  against  Fort  I)<)U|;las,  att^tckcHl
Gov.  St'nu)l«  while  he  was  paricyinj;  with  them,
and  i<ilUHl  him  and  twenty-seven  others.  He  is
n>presented  as  a  mild,  just,  and  honorable  man.
A monj;  other  works  he  wrote  "  Walks  aiul  Sketches
at  the  CajKj  of  Goo<l  Hotw"  (London,  IHOJJ);
*•  t^harles  Kllis,  or  the  Friends,"  a  novel  (1806) ;  "  A
Jouniey  through  S()ain  and  Italy  "  (2  vols.,  1807);
"Spanish  Post-Guide"  (1808);  "Second  Joumev
in  Spain  "  (1809) ;  "  State  of  Caraccas  "  (1812) ;  anil
"Tour  from  Hamburgh"  (1814).

SEMPliK,  Kobert  Bavlor,  clergyman,  b.  in
King  and  tjueeu  county,  Vju,  20  Jan.,  1761);  d.  in
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  25  Dec,  18:J1.  After  receiv-
ing a  goo<l  education  he  taught  in  a  private  family
and  then  Ijegan  to  study  law,  but  abandoned  it  and
devoted  himself  to  the  ministry.  In  1790  he  was
chosen  pastor  of  the  Bruington  Baptist  church,
and  he  continued  in  this  relation  until  his  death.
He  soon  became  one  of  the  most  useful  and  popular
men  in  Virginia,  performed  fretjuent  and  extensive
preaching  tours,  and  with  equal  vigor  and  wisdom
promoted  the  new  enterprises  of  benevolence  that
were  beginning  to  attract  the  attention  of  his  de-
nomination. The  interests  of  missions  and  education
found  in  him  a  powerful  friend.  He  received  many
testimonies  of  public  confidence  and  esteem.  He
was  for  some  time  financial  agent  of  Columbian
college,  and  president  of  its  l)oard  of  trustees,  de-
clined an  invitation  to  the  presidency  of  Transyl-
vania university  in  1805,  and  in  1820  was  elected
president  of  the  Baptist  triennial  convention,  con-
tinuing to  hold  this  office  until  his  death.  He  re-
ceived the  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown
in  1816.  Dr.  Semple  was  the  author  of  a  "Cate-
chism" (1809);  a  "History  of  Virginia  Baptists"
(1810);  "Memoir  of  Elder  Stmughan";  "Letters
to  Alexander  Campbell,"  etc.

SENEGAL,  Louis  Adelard,  Canadian  senator,
b.  in  Varennes,  Lower  Canada.  10  July,  1829;  d.
in  Montreal,  11  Oct.,  1887.  He  was  educated  in
his  native  place  and  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  and  after-
ward engaged  in  business.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Quebec  assembly  for  Drummond  and  Arthabaska
from  1867  till  1871i  and  of  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment for  Yamaska  from  1867  till  1872,  and  became
a  member  of  the  Dominion  senate,  12  March.  1887.
In  1857  he  ojwned  to  navigation  the  Yamaska  river
between  Sorel  and  St.  Aime.  and  the  St.  Francis
river  between  Sorel  and  St.  Francis.  He  has  con-
structed numerous  railways,  including  the  ice  rail-
way on  the  St.  Lawrence  from  Montreal  to  Long-
ueuil,  which  he  worked  for  two  winters.  Under  his
management  the  Kichelieu  line  was  extended  from
Hamilton  and  Toronto  to  Chicoutimi,  a  distance  of
atniut  1,000  miles.  He  was  a  genenil  su[K>rintend-
ent  of  the  government  railways  of  the  province  of
Quel)ec,  president  of  the  North  Shore  railway,  the
Montreal  City  Passenger  railway,  and  the  Ricfielieu
and  Ontario  navigation  company.  He  was  a  com-
mander of  the  French  Legion  of  honor.

SENER,  Jamen  Beverly,  lawver,  b.  in  Fred-
ericksburg, VjL,  18  May,  1837.  lie  received  an
academic  preparation,  attended  lectures  at  the
University  of  Virginia  as  a  state  student,  and  was
graduate<i  in  several  of  the  schools  of  the  univer-
sity. He  then  studied  law  at  Lexington,  Va.,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  March,  1860,  and  served  as


sergeant  (or  sherifT)  of  the  city  of  Fredericiuburg,
Va,,  in  18<J!i-'5.  He  was  army  correspondent  of
the  Southern  associate*!  press,  with  Gen.  I.iei''s  Armv
of  Northern  Virginia  in  18<{'i-'5,  and  from  1865  till
1875  was  eilitor  of  the  Fre<Iericksbur|^  "  Ijodger."
Mr.  Sener  was  a  delegate  from  Virgmia  fo  the
National  Kepublican  conventions  of  1872  and  1878
and  servinl  on  the  National  Hepublicvn  committee
from  1876  till  1880.  He  was  a  metnU'r  of  congress
in  187Ii-'5,  and  was  the  chairman  of  the  committee
on  expendituri's  in  the  de|>artment  of  justice,  lie-
ing  the  first  chairman  of  such  a  committee.  He
was  chief  justice  of  Wyonung  territory  from  18
Dec..  1879,  till  10  March,  1884.

8ENEY,  JoHhua,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  on  the  eastern  shore  of  Marvland  in
1750;  d.  there  in  1799.  He  was  educatetl  by  pri-
vate tutors,  engaged  in  planting,  and  supiwrted
the  patriot  cause  during  the  Itevolution.  He  wa.s
a  member  of  the  Continental  congress  in  1787-'8,
and  of  the  1st  congn>ss  in  1789,  and  served  by  re-
election till  1  May,  1792,  when  he  resigned.  He
was  a  presidential  elector  in  that  year,  supporting
Washington  and  Adams.  He  married  Frances,
daughter  of  Com.  James  Nicholson. — His  grandson,
(jeorge  Ingraham,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Astoria,
Ij.  I.,  12  May,  1826,  is  the  son  of  Rev.  Kol)ert  Senev,
a  clergyman  of  the  Methodist  P^piscopal  church.
George  was  a  student  in  1845  at  Wesleyan,  from
which  he  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1866.  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York
in  1847,  entered  the  banking  business,  and  rose  from
the  post  of  paying-teller  in  the  Metropolitan  bank.
New  York  city,  to  the  presidency  of  that  institu-
tion, holding  the  latter  office  in  1877-*84,  when  the
bank  was  suspended  and  Mr.  .Seney  lost  a  fortune
of  several  million  dollars,  a  large  part  of  which  he
has  since  regained.  His  contributions  to  chari-
table and  educational  institutions  include  $410,000
to  the  Methodist  general  hospital  of  Brooklyn,
flOO,(X)0  to  the  Jjong  Island  historical  society,
$250,000  to  f^mory  college  and  Wesleyan  female
college,  Macon,  Ga.,  and  $100,000  to  lienevolent
objects  in  Brooklyn.  He  founded  the  Seney  schol-
arships and  largely  endowed  Wesleyan  university,
and  has  contributed  to  miscellaneous  charities
more  than  $400,000.  His  gallery  of  pictures  is  one
of  the  finest  in  the  United  States,  and  he  has  pre-
sented several  valuable  paintings  to  the  Metropol-
itan museum  of  art,  New  York  city.

SENTER,  Isaac,  physician,  b.  in  New  Hamp-
shire in  1755 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I..  20  Dec,  1799.
He  went  to  Newport.  R.  I.,  early  in  life,  studied
medicine  with  Dr.  Thomas  Moflfat,  was  a  surgeon
in  the  lievolutionary  army,  and  accompanied
Benedict  Arnold's  expedition  to  Quel)ec,  an  inter-
esting account  of  which  he  publishetl  in  the  "  Bul-
letin of  the  Historical  Society  of  Pennsylvania."
He  afterward  practised  in  Pawtucket,  but  finally
settled  in  Newfxirt,  and  became  one  of  the  most
eminent  surgeons  and  practitioners  in  the  state.
He  was  an  honorary  memlx>r  of  the  medical  so-
cieties of  London,  Edinburgh,  and  Massachusetts,
and  for  many  years  was  president  of  the  Society
of  the  Cincinnati  of  Rho<le  Island.  He  contributed
to  the  medical  iournals.  and  published  "  Remarks
on  Phthisis  Pulmonalis"  in  trie  "  Transactions  of
the  College  of  Physicians  of  Philadelphia"  (1795).

SEPTENVILLE,  Charles  Edoiird  Langlols
(say-ton g- veal),  liaron  de,  French  author,  b.  in
Paris.  17  Nov.,  1835.  He  inherited  a  fortune,  and
devoted  himself  to  historical  researches.  esj>ecially
ujK)ii  the  early  history  of  South  America.  In
Marcli,  1876,  he  was  electetl  a  deputy  by  the  city
of  Amiens,  and  be  is  member  of  various  learned


462


SERCEY


SERGEANT


societies,  including  the  Antiquaires  do  France,  the
Historical  institute  of  Rio  Janeiro,  and  the  Archaeo-
logical society  of  Madrid.  Septenville's  works  in-
clude, besides  numerous  valuable  articles  in  his-
torical magazines,  "  V^ictoires  et  conquetes  de
I'Esprtgne  depuis  {'occupation  des  Maurcs  jusqu'i
DOS  jours  "  (3  vols.,  Paris,  1802) ;  "  Decouvertes
et  conquetes  du  Portugal  dans  les  deux  niondes"
(2  vols.,  1863);  "  Le  Bresil  sous  la  domination  Por-
tugaise"  (1872);  and  "  Pastes  militaires  et  marl-
times  du  Portugal "  (2  vols.,  1879).

SERCEY,  Pierre  C6sar  Charles  Ouillanme,
Marquis  de.  French  naval  officer,  b.  near  Autun,
26  April,  1753;  d.  in  Paris.  10  Aug.,  1836.  He  en-
tered the  navy  in  1766,  was  commissioned  ensign
in  May.  1779,  and  served  under  the  Count  de
Guichen.  For  his  participation  in  several  danger-
ous enterprises  during  the  siege  of  Pensacola,  Fla.,
he  was  made  lieutenant  and  given  the  cross  of  St.
Louis.  On  his  return  to  France  he  was  ordered  to
the  command  of  "  La  Surveillante "  in  1790,  and
sailed  for  Martinique.  He  was  promoted  captain
in  1792,  and  in  January,  1793,  was  ordered  to  con-
voy to  France  all  the  merchant  vessels  in  those
waters.  He  had  collected  more  than  fifty  ships
laden  with  valuable  cargoes,  when  the  rising  of
the  negroes  in  Santo  Domingo  occurred.  He  res-
cued 6.000  of  the  colonists.  As  his  scanty  supply
of  provisions  and  the  feebleness  of  his  naval  force
did  not  permit  of  his  attempting  to  cross  the  At-
lantic, he  set  sail  for  the  coast  of  New  England,
where  he  arrived  in  safety.  On  his  return  to
France  in  December  he  was  imprisoned  for  six
months  for  being  of  noble  birth.  In  December,
1795,  he  was  given  command  of  the  naval  force
that  was  detailed  to  accompany  the  two  civil  com-
missioners that  were  charged  with  the  execution
of  the  decree  giving  liberty  to  the  blacks  in  Mau-
ritius and  Reunion.  Sercey,  fearing  that  scenes
similar  to  those  he  had  witnessed  at  Santo  Domingo
might  be  enacted  there,  warned  the  colonists  of
the  nature  of  the  commissioners'  errand,  and  they
were  in  consequence  not  allowed  to  land.  In  1804,
at  his  earnest  request,  he  was  placed  on  the  retired
list,  and  sailed  for  the  Mauritius,  which  he  gallantly
defended  against  the  English  in  1810.  On  the
declaration of  peace in 1814  he  was  appointed

f)resident  of  the  commission  to  negotiate  in  Eng-
and  for  the  exchange  of  French  prisoners.  On
his  return  to  France  he  was  promoted  vice-admiral,
again  placed  on  the  retired  list  in  April,  1832,  and
became  a  member  of  the  house  of  peers.

SERtrEANT,  John,  missionary,  b.  in  Newark,
N.  J.,  in  1710;  d.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  27  July,
1749.  His  grandfather,  Jonathan,  was  a  found-
er of  NewarK  in  1667.  John  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1729,  and  served  as  tutor  there  in  1731-'o.
He  began  to  preach  to  the  Indians  at  Housatonic,
in  western  Massachusetts,  in  1734,  and  the  next  vear
permanently  settled  among  them  and  taught  them
m  their  own  language.  In  1736.  when  the  general
court  purchased  of  the  Indians  all  the  land  at
Skatehook,  and  in  return  granted  them  the  town-
ship which  is  now  called  Stockbridge,  he  was  made
owner  of  one  sixtieth  part,  and  ordained  "  settled
missionary  to  the  Indians"  there  and  at  Kaunau-
meek.  A  short  time  before  his  death  he  estab-
lished a  manual-labor  school  at  Stockbridge  that
was  in  successful  operation  several  years.  He
translated  into  the  Indian  language  parts  of  the
Old  Testament  and  all  of  the  New  except  the  book
of  Revelation,  and  published  a  "  Letter  on  the  In-
dians "(1743)  and  "A  Sermon"  (1743).— His  son.
Erastns,  physician,  b.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  7
Aug.,  1742;  d,  there,  14  Nov.,  1814,  passed  two


years  at  Princeton,  and  studied  medicine  with  his
uncle.  Dr.  Thomas  Williams,  in  Deerfield,  ^fass.
He  then  .settled  in  Stockbridge.  and  was  the  first
practitioner  in  that  town.  He  was  a  skilful  sur-
geon, and  the  principal  operator  within  a  circle  of
thirty  miles  radius.  He  entered  the  Revolutionary
army  in  1775  as  major  of  the  7th  Massachusetts
regiment,  and  served  with  it  on  Lake  C'hamplain
from  Decemljer,  1776,  till  April,  1777,  and  subse-
quently till  Burgoyne's  surrender. — Another  son  of
John,  John,  missionary,  b.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass..  in
1747;  d.  there,  8  Sept.,  1824,  studied  at  Princeton
two  years,  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the
Congregational  church,  and  in  1775  took  charge  of
the  Indian  part  of  the  Stockbridge  congregation.
When  they  removed  to  New  Stockbridge,  N.  Y.,
he  followed  them  and  labored  among  them  until
his  death.  One  of  his  daughters  established  a
temperance  society  for  Indian  women.  Mr.  Ser-
geant possessed  little  worldly  wisdom,  and  was  bet-
ter known  for  his  useful  and  blameless  life  than
for  his  intellectual  gifts,  but  he  exercised  great  in-
fluence among  the  Indian  tribes,  and,  on  hearing  of
his  expected  death,  one  of  the  chiefs  said :  "We
feel  as  if  our  sun  was  setting,  and  we  do  not  know
what  darkness  will  succeed."  —  The  first  John's
nephew,  Jonathan  Dickinson,  lawyer,  b.  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  in  1746 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa,  8
Oct.,  1793,  was  the  grandson  of  Jonathan  Dickin-
son, the  first  president  of  Princeton.  He  was
graduated  there  in
1762,  studied  law,
and  began  prac-
tice in  his  native
state.  He  took  his
seat  in  the  Conti-
nental congress  a
few  days  after  the
signing  of  the  Dec-
laration of  Inde-
pendence, served
m  1776-7,  and  in
July,  1777,  became
attorney  -  general
of  Pennsylvania.
In  1778,  congress
having  ordered  a
court-martial  for
the  trial  of  Gen.
Arthur  St.  Clair
and  other  officers
in  relation  to  the  evacuation  •of  Ticonderoga,  he
was  appointed  bv  that  body,  with  William  Pat-
terson, of  New  Jersey,  t9  assist  the  judge-advo-
cate in  the  conduct  of  the  trial.  He  resigned  the
office  of  attorney-general  in  1780,  settled  in  his
profession  in  PHiladelphia,  was  counsel  for  the
state  of  Pennsylvania  in  the  controversy  with  Con-
necticut concerning  the  Wyoming  lands  in  1782,
and  was  conspicuous  in  the  management  of  many
other  important  cases.  When  the  yellow  fever
visited  Philadelphia  in  1793  he  was  appointed  one
of  the  health  committee,  and  in  consequence  re-
fused to  leave  the  city.  He  distributed  large  sums
among  the  poor,  nursed  the  sick,  and  was  active
in  sanitary  measures,  but  fejl  a  victim  to  the  epi-
demic.— Jonathan  Dickinson's  son,  John,  lawyer,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  5  Dec,  1779 ;  d.  there,  25  Nov.,
1852,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1795,  and,
abandoning  his  intention  to  become  a  merchant,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Philadelphia
bar  in  1799.  For  more  than  half  a  century  he  was
known  throughout  the  country  as  one  of  the  most
honorable  and  learned  meral)ers  of  his  profession
and  its  acknowledged  leader  in  Philadeljjhia He


vWt<s%->S^^^  e*?!.-/!^


^


SEKXA


SERRA


468


entert>4l  ymUMc  life-  in  IHOl,  when  ho  was  ap|>ointed
toinnu»!«u»nor  of  Ijankniptcv  •>>'  Thonins  JefTurwm,
wu  a  inemlwr  of  the  lepisfntJirt*  in  1n<>K-*10,  and
of  congress  in  1815-'2a.  1827-'9.  and  18a7-'42.  In
1830  he  WHS  at'tivi*  in  stH-iirinn  the  |>iu<»aKe  of  the
MisMMiri  c'onipnimis*'.  He  whs  ii|i|M)inted  one  of
the  two  envoys*  in  \H'H\  to  the  raniunji  ron(,'ross.  was
president  of  the  Peiiiisvlvania  constitutional  con-
vention in  IHHO.  and  NVhij;  cHndidnte  for  the  viee-
presidenry  on  the  ticket  with  Henry  day  in  1832.
He  declined  the  mission  to  England  in  1841,  and
his  last  public  service  was  that  of  arbitrator  to  de-
termine a  long-pending  contn)versy.  The  (juestion
at  issue  concernetl  the  title  to  Pea  Patch  island  as
derive<l  bv  the  I'nited  States  from  the  state  of  Dela-
ware, and  by  James  Humphrey  claiming  through
Henry  (Jale  from  the  state  of  New  Jersey.  This
involved  the  tjuestion  of  the  lx)undary  l»etween  the
two  states,  or,  in  other  words,  the  claim  to  Delaware
river,  and  the  decision  in  favor  of  the  United  States
incidentally  decided  the  Ixiundary  dispute  in  favor
of  Delaware. — Another  son  of  Jonathan  Dickinson,
Thomas,  jurist,  b,  in  Philadelphia,  Pju.  14  Jan.,
1782;  d.  there.  8  Mav,  18(50,  was  gratluated  at
Princeton  in  1798,  studied  law  under  Jared  Inger-
8oll.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Philadelphia
in  1802.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1812-'14.  in
the  latter  year  was  appointed  associate  justice  of
the  districtCourt  of  Philadelphia,  and  was  secretary
of  the  commonwealth  in  1817-'19.  While  holding
that  office  he  be^an  the  formation  of  the  state  law
librarv  at  Harnsburg.  He  was  attorney-general
in  18l'9-'20.  j)ostmasterof  Philadelphia  in  1828-'32.
and  in  February,  1834,  became  associate-justice  of
the  state  supreme  court,  which  office  he  held  till
his  resignation  in  1846.  His  judicial  decisions  were
esteemed  for  their  brevity,  clearness,  and  accuracy,
and  it  is  said  that  he  was  the  only  judge  that  e"er
sat  on  the  Pennsylvania  bench  not  one  of  whose
decisions  was  reversed.  He  was  the  chief  expounder
of  the  limited  equity  jurisdiction  of  the  court,  and
was  of  service  in  bringing  this  into  an  intelligible
and  convenient  shape.  He  returned  to  the  bar  in
1847,  and  successful! v  practised  until  the  failure  of
his  health  compelled  nis  gradual  abandonment  of
professional  labor.  He  was  provost  of  the  law-
academy  of  Philadelphia  in  1844-'55.  for  many
years  president  of  the  Pennsylvania  historical  so-
ciety, a  member  of  the  American  philosophical
society,  and  a  trustee  of  the  University  of  Pennsvl-
vania.  He  married,  on  14  Sept.,  1812,  Sarah  Baclie,
a  granddaughter  o/  Benjamin  Franklin.  His
publications  include  "Treatise  upon  the  Ijaw  of
Pennsylvania  relative  to  the  Proceedings  bv  For-
eign Attachment  "  (Philadelphia,  1811);  "  fteport
of  Cas«'s  adjud&red  in  the  Sunreme  Court  of  Penn-
sylvania," with  William  itawle,  Jr.  (17  vols.,
1814-'29);  '-Constitutional  Law  "(1822);  "Sketch
of  the  National  Judiciary  Powers  exercised  in  the
United  States  Prior  to  the  Adoption  of  the  Present
Federal  Constitution"  (1824);  and  "View  of  the
Land  Laws  of  Peimsylvania  "  (1838).

SERNA,  Jo86  do"  la  (sair-nah),  last  viceroy  of
Peru,  b,  in  Jerez  de  la  Frontera,  Spain,  in  1770;  d.
in  Cadiz  iti  1832.  At  an  early  age  he  entered  the
army,  s«'eing  his  ftrst  service  as  a  cadet  in  the  de-
fence of  Ceuta  against  the  Moors  in  1784.  He
served  afterward  against  the  French  in  Catalonia
in  179.').  under  Admiral  Mazarredo  against  the
British  in  1797,  and  in  the  second  siege  of  Sara-
gossa  in  1809,  where  he  was  captured  and  carrie<l
to  France  as  a  j)risoner.  S<x)n  he  escaped,  and.
after  travi-lling  for  some  time  in  Switzerland  and
the  Orit'nt.  returned  in  1811  to  Spain,  and  serveil
under  Wellington  till  the  expulsion  of  the  French


in  1813.  In  IHIO  ho  held  the  rank  of  major-gen-
eral and  was  appointiMl  to  take  command  in  IVru.
He  arrivetl  on  22  .S««pt.  in  Callao,  and.  i)ro<tfding
at  once  to  upf)or  Peru,  took  charge  of  tne  army  in
Cotagaita  on  12  Nov.  The  viceroy  urged  Serna  to
liegin  offi-nsive  o|M-rations  against  the  province  of
Tucuman,  which  was  occupied  by  the  .Argentine
patriots.  .Serna  objected  to  the' insufficiency  of
nis  forces,  but  Pezuela  insiste<i.  when  suddenly
they  were  surprised  by  the  victorious  march  of  San
Martin  across  the  Andes  an<l  the  recotujuest  of
Chili.  The  army  of  upfwr  Peru  was  henceforth
reduced  to  a  defensive  warfare  against  the  insur-
rectionary movements  in  several  parts  of  the  coun-
try. Soma's  op|>osition  to  the  viceroy  increaso<l,
and  at  last  he  asked  for  iK-rmission  to  retire  to
Si)ain.  His  leave  of  aljsence  arrived  in  Mav,  1819.
and  in  SeiJteml)er  he  resigned  the  command  of  the
army  to  Uen.  Canterac  On  his  arrival  in  Lima  in
December,  his  pariisans  made  a  demonstration  in
favor  of  not  allowing  Serna  to  leave  Peru  on  the
eve  of  a  threatened  invasion  from  Chili,  and  the
viceroy,  to  avoid  disagreement,  promoted  him  lieu-
tenant-^neral  and  api>ointed  nim  president  of  a
consulting  council  of  war.  After  the  landing  of
San  Martin  in  Pisco,  8  .Sept.,  1820,  Serna.  through
secret  machinations,  obtained  an  appointment  as
commander-in-chief  of  the  army  that  was  gathered
at  Aznapuquio,  to  protect  the  capital  against  the
advance  of  San  Martin,  and  was  ordered  by  the
viceroy  to  march  to  Chancay.  On  29  Jan..  1821.
the  principal  officers  of  the  camp,  partisans  of
Serna.  presented  a  petition  to  the  viceroy,  re<juest-
ing  him  to  resiirn  in  favor  of  the  latter.  Pezuela
refused,  and  oitTered  Serna  to  subtlue  the  mutiny ;
but  the  latter  pretended  to  lie  unable  to  do  so,  and,
after  vain  resistance,  the  viceroy  delivere<l  to  him
the  executive  on  the  evening  of  the  same  day.
When  San  Martin  threatened  the  capital,  a  SitanLsh
commissioner.  Cant.  Manuel  Abreu,  arrived  from
Europe  with  orders  to  negotiate  for  a  pacific
arrangement,  and  Soma  sent  him  to  make  propo-
sals to  San  Martin.  The  negotiations  lasteu  from
3  May  till  24  June,  but  pro«luced  no  result,  and  on
the  next  day  hostilities  began  again.  As  the  situ-
ation became  daily  more  dangerous.  Serna  altan-
doned  the  capital  on  0  July.  1821.  and  retired  to
Jauja,  where  he  reorganized  his  army,  sending
Gen.  Canterac  on  24  Aug.  with  a  force  of  4.00O
men  to  relieve  Callao.  Afterward  Serna  established
his  headouarters  at  Cuzco,  but  after  a  campaign
of  variable  success  there  were  dissensions  in  the
army,  and  Gen.  Olafieta  refused  oljodience  and
maintained  an  independent  jtosition  in  upper  Peru.
Canterac  was  defeatetl  on  C  Aug.,  1824.  by  Bolivar,
at  Junin.  The  viceroy  now  resolve<l  to  crush  the
patriot  army  by  a  supreme  effort,  and  left  Cuzco
in  October  with  a  well-disciplined  army  of  10.000
infantry  and  l.GOO  cavalry.  He  met  the  |»atriot
army  in  the  mountain  plain  of  Ayacucho  on  8
Dec.,  and  on  the  next  day  was  totally  defeated  by
Gen.  Sucre  and  wounded  and  taken  prisoner.  The
Spanish  army  lost  2,000  wounded  and  dead  and
3,000  prisoners,  and  as  the  rest  was  entirely  dis-
persed. Gen.  Canterac.  the  second  in  command,
signed  an  honorable  capitulation  the  next  dav.  and
the  viceroy,  who  on  the  date  of  the  Iwttle  had  l»een
created  bv  the  king  Count  de  los  Andes,  was  s<x>n
aftorwanl  jiermittod  to  sail  for  Europe.  He  was
honorably  rei-eiveil  at  court,  his  administration  was
approved,  and  he  was  appointed  captain-general  of
several  provinces.

SERRA,  Angpl  (sair-rah).  Mexican  linguist,  b.
in  Zitaciwro.  Michoacan,  about  1040;  d.  in  t^uere-
taro  about  1700. He  entered  the  Franciscan  ordei


464


SERRANO Y DOMINOUEZ


SERVOSS


in  Mexico,  and  became  guardian  of  the  Convent  of
San  Pedro  y  San  Pablo,  wiiere  he  studied  the  Ta-
rasco  language,  in  which  he  soon  became  the  recog-
nized authority  in  Mexico.  Wishing  to  utilize  his
knowledge,  he  was  sent  to  the  Sierra  Gorda  as  mis-
sionary to  the  Indians,  and  was  appointed  parish
Rriest  of  Charapan.  and  afterward  of  Queretaro.
le  wrote  "Manual  TrilingUe,  Latino,  Castellano  y
Tarasco,  para  adniinistrar  los  Sacramentos  il  los
Espafioles  v  a  los  Indios"  (Mexico,  1097);  "El
Catecismo  del  P.  Bartolom6  Castailo.  traducido  al'
Tarasco"  (Queretaro,  1699);  and  "Arte,  Diccion-
ario  y  Confesionario  en  Tarasco,"  which  was  ready
for  publication  at  the  author's  death.

SERRANO  Y  I)(>MIN(iUEZ,  Francisco,  Duke
(Ic  la  Torre,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  at  San  Fernando,
near  Cadiz,  17  Oct.,  1810;  d.  in  Madrid.  26  Nov..
1885.  lie  was  the  son  of  a  Spanish  general,  entered
the  military  college  as  a  cadet  in  1822,  and  in  1825
became  ensign.  lie  served  till  iSS'S  in  the  coast-
guard, but  after  the  death  of  Ferdinand  VII,  he
espoused  the  cause  of  the  child-queen,  Isabella  II.
He  was  promoted  in  1840  major-general  and  second
chief  of  the  captaincy-general  of  Valencia,  and  in
1843  elected  to  the  cortes,  of  which  he  became  vice-
president.  He  joined  in  the  overthrow  of  the  re-
gency of  Espartero  on  24  July,  and  the  declaration
that  Queen  Isabella  was  of  age.  In  Noveml)er  of
the  same  year  he  was  for  ten  days  minister  of  war,
in  1845  he  became  lieutenant-general  and  senator,
and  after  the  young  queen's  marriage  in  1846  he
obtained  such  influence  over  her  that  a  public
scandal  followed,  and  he  was  appointed  captain-
general  of  Granada.  In  order  to  bring  him  to
Madrid  again,  the  queen  appointed  him  inspector-
general  of  cavalry  and  captain-general  of  New  Cas-
tile; he  took  part  in  several  short-lived  ministries
and  many  military  pronunciamientos,  and  in  Feb-
ruary, 1854,  was  exiled  for  participation  in  the  in-
surrection of  Saragossa.  In  June  he  returned  to
tjike  part  in  the  successful  revolution  under  Espar-
tero and  O'Donnell,  and  in  July,  1856,  he  joined
the  latter  in  his  successful  coup  d'etat,  and  was
sent  in  1857  as  ambassador  to  Paris.  In  1860  he
went  as  captain-general  to  Cuba,  and  during  his
administration  the  annexation  of  Santo  Domingo
to  the  Spanish  crown  was  brought  about.  For  this,
although  it  cost  the  nation  millions  of  money  and
thousands  of  lives,  he  was  created  Duke  de  la  'forre
on  his  return  to  Spain,  and  made  captain-general
of  the  army.  In  1866  he  was  imprisoned  in  Ali-
cante for  his  protest,  as  president  of  the  senate,
against  the  illegal  dissolution  of  the  cortes,  and  in
July,  1868,  was  exiled  to  the  Canary  islands,  but
on  19  Sept.  he  landed  at  Cadiz,  and  aided  in  over-
throwing the  government  of  Queen  Isabella,  van-
quishing the  royal  troops  at  Alcotea  on  28  Sept.
On  8  Oct.  he  became  chief  of  the  provisional  gov-
ernment, and  on  16  June,  1869,  he  was  elected  re-
gent of  the  kingdom,  which  place  he  occupied  till
the  acceptation  of  the  crown  by  Prince  Amadeo,
who  in  January,  1871,  made  him  prime  minister.
In  1872  he  took  the  field  as  commander-in-chief
against  the  Carlists,  and,  after  the  proclamation  of
the  republic  in  1873,  he  retired  to  France.  He  re-
turned to  Spain  toward  the  end  of  the  year,  and
after  the  coup  d'etat  of  Gen.  Pavia  was  miwle  chief
of  the  executive,  4  Jan.,  1874.  negotiating  private-
ly, it  is  thought,  with  Martinez  Campos  the  resto-
ration of  the  monarchy  under  Alfonso  XII.  on  9
Jan.,  1875.  He  continued  to  take  an  active  pan  in
politics  as  chief  of  the  right  centre,  and  in  1883
was  appointed  ambassador  of  Spain  to  France.  He
married  a  Cuban  lady  of  great  beauty,  and  left
a  son  and  two  daughters.


8ERRELL,  Edward  Wellman,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  New  York  city,  5  Nov.,  1826.  He  was  edu-
cated at  schools  in  his  native  city,  and  then  studied
surveying  and  civil  engineering  under  the  direction
of  an  elder  brother.  In  1845  he  l)ecame  assistant
engineer  in  charge  of  the  Central  railroad  of  New
Jei-sey,  and  he  subsequently  served  in  a  similar
capacity  on  the  construction  of  other  roads.  He
accompanied  the  expedition  that  in  1848  located
the  route  of  the  railroad  between  Aspinwall  and
Panama,  and  on  his  return,  a  year  later,  was  en-
gaged in  building  the  suspension-bridge  across
the  Niagara  river  at  Lewiston ;  also  that  at  St.
Johns,  New  Brunswick.  Mr.  Serrell  was  in  charge
of  the  Hoosac  tunnel  in  1858,  and  was  concerned
in  the  constniction  of  the  Bristol  bridge  over  Avon
river,  in  England,  which  had  the  largest  span  of
any  bridge  in  that  country  at  the  time  it  was  built.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the
1st  New  \  ork  volunteers  as  lieutenant-colonel,  soon
became  its  colonel,  and  served  as  chief  engineer  of
the  10th  army  corps  in  1863.  He  was  chief  engineer
and  chief  of  staff  under  Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler  in
1864,and  designed  and  personallysuperintended  the
construction  of  the  "  Swamp-angel "  battery  that
bombarded  Charleston.  Many  valuable  improve-
ments of  guns  and  processes,  that  proved  of  practical
service  during  the  war,  were  suggested  by  nim,  and
the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  was
conferred  on  him  on  13  March.  1865.  After  1865
he  settled  in  New  York,  and  engaged  principally  in
the  building  of  railroads,  becoming  in  1887  presi-
dent and  consulting  engineer  of  the  Washington
County  railroad.  In  addition  to  papers  on  scientific
and  technical  subjects,  he  has  puolished  nearly  fifty
reports  on  railroads  and  bridges.

SERVIEN,  Claude  (sair-ve-ang),  Flemish  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Tournay  in  1493 ;  d.  in  Mexico  in
1549.  After  finishing  his  studies  in  Brussels,  he
went  to  the  New  World  in  quest  of  fortune,  and
served  in  Cuba  and  Mexico.  But  the  cruelty
of  the  conquerors  to  the  Indians  so  affected  him
that  he  resolved  to  devote  his  life  to  their  re-
lief, and  in  1527  entered  the  Dominican  order  in
Mexico.  Later  he  became  secretary  of  Las  Casas,
whom  he  accompanied  to  Guatemala.  In  1539  he
established  in  northern  Guatemala  a  model  farm
and  garden  for  the  benefit  of  Indians  that  he
had  persuaded  to  lead  an  agricultural  life.  But,  as
he  refused,  after  the  dejiarture  of  Las  Casas,  to  em-
ploy them  in  work  for  the  benefit  of  the  order,  he
was  sent  in  1545  to  Seville.  The  vessel  that  carried
him  was  taken  by  French  corsairs,  and  he  was
brought  to  La  Rochelle,  whence  he  set  out  for
Rome.  There  he  presented  to  the  holy  see  a  memoir
in  which  he  exposed  the  evils  that  had  resulted
from  the  course  of  the  Spanish  conquerors  toward
the  Indians.  The  pope  ordered  inquiries  to  be
made,  and  sent  a  commission  of  two  priests  to  visit
the South American missions. Servien  accom-

Sanied  them,  and  they  proceeded  immediately  to
lexico.  On  their  arrival  he  was  arfested  by  the
authorities,  and  imprisoned  in  the  main  convent
of  the  Dominican  order,  whore  he  died.

SERVOSS,  Thomas  Lowery,  merchant,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  Oct.,.1786;  d.  in  New  York
city,  30  Nov.,  1866.  He  was  educated  in  his  native
city,  and  then  engaged  in  the  shipping  business.
In  1808  he  settled  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  where  he  pur-
chased cotton  and  sold  goods  that  were  consigned
to  him  from  the  north,  and  in  1817  he  moved  to
New  Orleans,  where  he  continued  his  mercantile
career.  Meanwhile,  in  1814,  when  the  seaports  of
the  United  States  were  threatened  bv  the  British
navy,  Mr.  Servoss  was  in  New  York,  and,  on  learning


SKTON


SKTOX


466


that  New  Orleans  wa<<  nttoitt  to  \tt>  attA<-k<'<1,  he  Irft
At  once  for  that  city  by  way  of  PiltshurK,  where  he
fouml  two  kci'l-lMuttM  laden  with  muskets.  He  t«)ok
{Nuu<a{;e  on  one  of  these,  and  h\  his  knowUvljje  of
river  naviptttion  ho  place<l  his  ^K)at  in  a<lvance  of
others,  in  conM^iuence  of  which  the  I'.  .S.  tnnnts
receive*!  the  arms;  otherwise,  as  has  In'en  sjiid  ov
John  11.  Knton  in  his  "Life  of  Antlrew  Jackson.''
New  Orleans  woultl  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of
the  Hritish.  In  1827  Mr.  Servoss settle<l  {M>nnanent-
ly  in  New  York.  He  built,  in  1K31.  the  first  five
fiacket  shi|»s  that  ran  rejfularly  Ijctween  New  York
and  New  Orleans,  and  was  a>;ent  of  the  line.  Mr.
Servoss  wjus  active  in  charitable  ente^prises,  and
held  office  in  various  l)enevole!jt  s(K'ieties.  He  con-
tribute*!  articles  on  |M)jmlar  topics  to  journals,  and

S resented  a  series  of  historical  renuniscences  to  the
[ew  York  historical  s<K-iety  in  1858. He  nmrried
a  <lauj;hter  of  .John  IMntard.

SKTON,  EHzabeth  Ann,  philanthropist,  b.  in
New  York  citv,  28  Aug.,  1774 ;  d.  in  Eminettsburg,
Md.,  4  Jan.,  1821.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Dr.
Richard  IJavlev,  a  physician  of  New  York,  and
nmrried  William  Seton,  of  the  same  citv.  Her  hus-
band's father,  William  Seton  (174«-17»8),  Ijelonged
to  an  imnoverishe<l  noble  Scottish  family,  emigrated
to  New  York  in  1758,  and  Uvame  su|)erintendent
and  part  owner  of  the  iron-works  of  Kingwood,  N.J.
He  was  a  loyalist,  and  the  last  royal  public  notary
for  the  city  and  province  of  New  York  duriiije^  the
war.  His  silver  notarial  seal,  dated  1779,  is  still  in
the  mssession  of  his  family.  He  was  ruined  finan-
cially at  the  close  of  the  Revolution,  but  remained  in
New  York,  where  he  founded  the  once  famous  mer-
cantile house  of  Se-
ton, Maitlandand  Co,
In  180;J  she  went  to
Italy  with  her  fam-
ily. On  the  death  of
her  husband  she  re-
turneil  to  the  United
States,  and  in  1H()5
she  was  received  in-
to the  Roman  Cath-
olic church.  To  sup-
port her  five  chil-
dren she  opened  a
school  in  New  York,
but,not  meetingwith
success,  shewasalx)ut
to  remove  to  Cana-
da, when  she  made
the  acquaintance  of
Dr.  William  Louis
Dubourg.  then  presi-
dent of  St.  Mary's
college,  who  invited
her  to  reside  in  Bal-
timore and  onen  a  school  for  girls.  Hefore  this  she
had  formed  the  design  of  founding  a  congregation
of  women  for  the  service  of  children  and  orphans,
and  $8,000,  given  by  a  young  convert  to  Dr.  Du-
bourg for  charitable  uses  and  transferred  by  the  lat-
ter to  Mrs.  Seton,  enabled  her  to  carry  out  this  pur-
pose. A  farm  was  purchased  at  Emmettsburg,  Md.,
and  on  22  June,  1809,  Mrs.  Seton  moved  thither,
with  thr»H>  companions,  forming  the  nucleus  of  an
order  that  afterward  spread  over  the  Unitetl  States.
The  community  increased  rapidly  in  numl>ers.  and
pupils  fl(x;ked  to  the  sch(H)l.  In  1811  Mother  Seton
adopteil  the  rules  and  constitution  of  St.  Vincent
de  Paul,  with  some  modifications,  and  the  institu-
tion, having  received  the  sanction  of  the  highest
ecclesiastical  authority,  became  a  religious  order.
Afterward  a  group  of  buildings,  embracing  a  resi-
TOL.  V. — 30


<3^^€^^:^


denco  for  the  Sisters,  a  novitiate,  a  lK>anling-scho«i|
for  young  girls,  a  M-hool  for  [Mior  children,  and
an  orphan  asylum,  was  erccte«l.  In  1814  Mother
Seton  sent  a  colony  of  Sisters  to  Philwlelphia
to  take  charge  of  the  orphan  asylum.  In  1817.
in  resjK)ns4'  to  another  aii|>li<-atii>n  from  New
York,  another  Ixnly  came  to  that  city.  At  her
death  there  were  more  than  twenty  communities  of
.Sisters of  Charity,  conducting  fn.*  schofils,  orphan-
ages, boarding-sch(H>ls,  and  hosiiitals,  in  the  states
of  Pennsylvania,  New  York.  Oliio,  Delaware,  Ma.**-
sachusetts.Virginia,  Missouri. and  Ix>uisiana,and  in
the  District  of  Columbia.  Although,  wcording  to
the  constitution  of  her  ortler.  no  one  coul«l  In-  electetl
to  the  office  of  mother-superior  for  more  than  two
terms  successively,  an  exception  was  made  in  her
favor  by  the  unanimous  desire  of  her  comimnions.
and  she  held  the  office  during  life. See  "  Memoirs

of  Mrs.  S .  written  bv  Herself:  A  Fragment  of

Ileal  History"  (Elizaljethtown.  N.  J..  1817);  "Life
of  Mrs.  Seton,  Foundress  and  First  Superior  of  the
Sisters  of  Charitv  in  the  Unite*l  .States,"  bv  Rev.
Charles  L  White,  I).  I).  (7th  revised  e<l.,'  Balti-
more, 1872):  and  "Vie  de  Madame  Elizabeth
Seton."  by  Mwlaine  de  liarbary  (Paris.  18«8).  A
collection  of  her  letters  and  {mpers,  edited  by  her
grandson,  Monsignor  Seton,  has  lieen  publishinl  (2
vols..  New  York,  1869).— Her  grandson.  WUliani,
author,  b.  in  New  York  city,  28  Jan..  1835,  is  mju
of  William  Seton, an  officer  in  the  U.S.  navy.  He
is  recognized  by  Burke's  "  Peerage  "  as  the  head  of
the  ancient  familv  of  the  Setons  of  Parbroath,
senior  ca<lets  of  the  Earls  of  Winton  in  .Scotland.
He  was  educated  at  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  Em-
mettsburg, Md.,  and  bv  private  tutors,  and  served
as  captain  of  the  4th  >rew  York  volunteers,  during
the  first  part  of  the  civil  war,  until  he  was  disabled
by  wounds  that  he  received  at  Antietam.  He  is  a
fre(iuent  contributor  to  {)erio<licals  and  journals,
and  has  published  "  Romance  of  the  Charter  Oak  "
(New  York.  1870):  "The  Pride  of  Lexington  ;  a
Tnleof  the  American  Revolution  "(1871) ;  "  Rachel's
Fate  and  Other  Tales "(1882);  "The  Poor  Million-
aire, a  Tale  of  New  York  Life  "  (1884) :  and  "The
Shamrock  gone  West,  and  Moida,  a  Tale  of  the
Tvrol  '  (New  York,  1884).  He  is  also  the  author
of  "  The  Pioneer,"  a  poem  ( 1874).— Robert,  another

frandson  of  Elizabeth  Ann,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pisa,
taly,  28  Aug.,  1839,  was  educate<l  in  Motint  St,
Mary's  college,  Emmettsburg,  Md.,  and  in  the
Academia  ecclesiastica.  Rome,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated with  the  degree  of  D.  D.  In  18G<)  he  was  rai.sed
to  the  rank  of  private  chamlierlain  to  Pope  Pius  IX.
He  is  the  first  American  that  was  honore<l  with  the
Roman  Prelatura,  and  is  the  dean  of  all  the  mon-
signori  in  the  Unite<l  States.  He  was  made  pro-
thonotary  apostolic  in  18G7,  and  rector  of  St.  Jo-
seph's churcn,  Jersey  City,  in  187G.  He  has  written
"Memoirs,  Letters,  and  Journal  of  Elizabeth  Se-
ton "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1809)  and  "  Essavs  on  Va-
rious Subjects,  chiefly  Roman  "  (1882).  anJ  is  also  a
fre(nieiit  contributor  to  Roman  Catholic  |K>ri(Mli(9ilsi.
SETON,  Samuel  Waddlngton,  wlucator.  b.  in
New  York  city.  23  Jan.,  1789;  d.  there.  20  Nov.,
1869.  He  was  educate<l  in  the  sch«K)ls  of  New
York,  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,  and  made  a
voyage  to  China  After  his  return  to  New  York
he'  was  a  tianker  till  1827.  when  he  was  elected
agent  of  the  Public  sch<x)l  s<K-ieiy.  in  which  ca-
pacity he  was  visitor  of  their  sch<K)ls,  and  had
charge  of  their  extensive  svstem  of  supplies  and
libraries.  He  held  the  oftice  until  the  stwiety
was  merged  in  the  prest'Ut  Inwrd  of  etlucation  in
1853.  He  was  then  ap|)ointe<l  assistant  sui>erin-
tendent,  which  (Mjst  he  held  till  his  death. He  also


466


SETTLE


SEVIER


took  a  warm  interest  in  relipious  matters,  and  dur-
ing the  forty-eight  years  in  which  lie  held  the  office
of  Sunday-school  sujwrintendent  was  absent  from
his  post  only  twelve  times.

SETTLE,  Thomas,  jurist,  b,  in  Rockingham
county,  N.  C,  in  1791 ;  d.  there.  5  Aug..  1857.  He
received  a  common-school  education,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  practised  at  Wentworth,  N.  C.  He
entered  public  life  in  1816  as  a  member  of  the  house
of  commons,  and  was  in  congress  in  1817-'21,  hav-
ing been  elected  as  a  Democrat.  He  was  again  in
the  legislature  in  182()-'8,  the  last  year  wass{)eaker
of  the  house,  and  in  1832-'54  was  a  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  of  North  Carolina,  and  eminent  for  his
virtues  and  legal  ability. — Hisson,  Thomas,  jurist,
b.  in  Rockingham  county.  N.  C,  28  Jan.,  1831 ;  d.
in  Rjvleigh,  N.  C,  1  Dec,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1850,  read  law,
served  in  the  legislature  in  1854-'9,  was  speaker  of
the  house  the  latter  year,  and  a  presidential  elector
in  185G,  casting  his  vote  for  James  Buchanan.  He
supported  Stephen  A.  Dougla.s  for  the  presidency
in  1860,  and  used  his  influence  to  prevent  secession,
but,  when  the  civil  war  began,  entered  the  Confed-
erate army  as  captain  in  the  3d  North  Carolina
regiment.  After  a  service  of  twelve  months  he
returned  to  civil  life  and  became  solicitor  of  the
4th  judicial  district.  He  united  with  the  Repub-
lican party  in  1865,  was  elected  to  the  state  senate
in  that  year,  became  its  speaker,  and  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  reconstruction  measures.  He  was  a
judge  of  the  state  supreme  court  in  1868-'71,  and
resigned  to  become  U.  S.  minister  to  Peru,  but  held
office  for  only  a  few  months  on  account  of  the  fail-
ure of  his  health,  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate
for  congress  in  1872,  and  in  June  of  that  year
was  president  of  the  National  Republican  con-
vention, held  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  reappoint-
ed a  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court  in  1873,
and  was  defeated  for  governor  in  1876.  In  1877
he  became  United  States  district  judge  of  the
northern  district  of  Florida.

SEUSEMAN,  Joachim,  missionarj-,  b.  in  Hesse-
Cassel ;  d.  in  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  in  1772.  He  came  to
Pennsylvania  with  the  first  Moravian  colony  in
1742,  and  between  1743  and  1755  served  in  the  In-
dian mission.  In  the  attack  on  Gnadenhuetten,
Pa.,  24  Nov.,  1755,  his  wife  was  murdered  by  Indians
in  the  French  service.  Subsequently  he  was  sent
to  labor  among  the  negro  slaves  in  Jamaica,  W.  I.,
where  he  died. — His  son,  Oottlob,  missionary,  b.
in  1742  ;  d.  in  Fairfield,  Canada,  4  Jan.,  1808,  for
about  forty  years  was  employed  in  the  Moravian
mission  among  the  Indians  in  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,
Michigan,  and  Canada.  He  was  an  eloquent
preacher,  well  conversant  with  the  Delaware  lan-
guage, and  a  man  of  great  energy.

SEVER,  Anne  Elizabeth  Parsons,  benefac-
tor, b,  in  Boston,  Mass.,  29  May,  1810;  d.  there,
15  Dec,  1879.  She  was  educated  in  Boston,  and
married  James  Warren  Sever,  who  at  his  death  left
a  note  or  memorandum  requesting  his  wife  to  give
certain  sums  to  Harvard  university  after  her  de-
cease. Accordingly,  she  bequeathed  f  100,000  to
Harvard  to  build  a  hall  for  undergraduates,  which
should  be  called  by  her  name,  $20,000  for  the  pur-
chase of  books  for  its  library,  and  $20,000  for  the
general  use  of  the  corporation  without  restriction
as  to  its  use.  She  also  willed  $10,000  to  the  Bos-
ton children's  hospital,  and  $5,000  each  to  five
benevolent  institutions  in  that  city,  $5,000  to  the
New  England  historic-genealogical  society,  and  an
equal  sum  to  the  General  theological  library,  to  the
Boston  training-schools  for  nurses,  and  the  Con-
necticut retreat  for  the  insane.


SEVERANCE,  Luther,  editor,  b.  in  Montague,
Mass.,  28  Oct.,  1797;  d.  in  Augusta.  Me.,  25  Jan.,
1855.  After  learning  the  printer's  trade  in  Pe-
terboro,  N.  Y.,  he  worked  in  Washington,  Phila-
delphia, and  several  other  cities,  and  in  1825  set-
tleu  ill  Augusta,  Me.,  and  established  the  "  Ken-
nebec Journal."  He  served  in  the  legislature  in
1830-'l,  in  the  state  senate  in  1835,  and  again  in
the  legislature  in  1839-'42.  He  was  in  congress  in
1843-'7,  having  been  elected  as  a  Whig,  and  in
1850  was  appointed  United  States  minister  to  the
Sandwich  islands,  which  post  he  held  four  years.
See  a  "Memoir"  of  him  by  James  G.  Blaine  (Au-
gusta, Me.,  1856).

SEVIER,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  Rockingham
county,  Va.,  23  Sept.,  1745 ;  d.  near  Fort  Decatur,
Ga.,  24  Sept.,  1815.  He  was  descended  from  an
ancient  French  fa'haily  who  spelled  their  name
Xavier.  His  father,  Valentine,  emigrated  to  this
country  from
London  about
1740,  and,  set-
tling in  Rock-
ingham county,
John  was  edu-
cated, until  he
was  sixteen
years  of  age,
at  the  academy
in  Fredericks-
burg, Va.,  mar-
ried the  next
year,  and  found-
ed the  village  of
Newmarket  in
the  valley  of
the  Shenan-
doah. He  there
became  cele-
brated as  an  In-
dian fighter,
was  a  victor  in
many  battles  with  the  neighboring  tribes,  and  in
1772  was  appointed  captain  in  the  Virginia  line.  In
the  spring  of  that  year  he  removed  to  Watauga,  a
settlement  on  the  western  slope  of  the  Alleghanies,
and,  by  his  courage,  address,  and  military  ability,
became  one  of  the  principal  men  in  the  colony.
When  Lord  Dunraore's  war  began  in  1773  against
the  Shawnee  and  other  Indian  tribes,  he  resumed
his  rank  in  the  Virginia  line,  served  throughout  the
campaign,  and  on  10  Oct.,  1774,  took  part  in  the
battle  of  Point  Pleasant.  At  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution  he  drew  up  the  memorial  of  the  citizens
of  Watauga  to  the  North  Carolina  legislature  ask-
ing to  be  annexed  to  that  colony,  that  "  they  might
aid  in  the  unhappy  contest,  and  bear  their  full  pro-
portion of  the  expenses  of  the  war."  Their  peti-
tion was  granted  and  the  whole  of  what  is  now
Tennessee  was  organized  into  a  county  of  North
Carolina,  then  known  as  Washington  district.  Se-
vier was  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  State  convention,
and  in  the  "  declaration  of  rights "  introduced  a
clause  thus  defining  the  limits  of  the  state:  "That
it  shall  not  be  so  construed  as  to  prevent  the  es-
tablishment of  one  or  more  governments  westward
of  this  state,  by  consent  of  the  legislature,"  show-
ing that  he  had  already  in  mind  the  establishment
of  a  separate  commonwealtli  l)eyond  the  Allegha-
nies. In  the  spring  of  1777  the  legislature  of
North  Carolina  met,  and  Sevier  was  again  a  rep-
resentative from  Watauga,  and  procured  for  the
settlement  the  establishment  of  courts  and  the
extension  of  state  laws.  On  his  return  he  was
appointed  clerk  of  the  county  aud  district  judge.


<i^^^^-U^u-


^jt^ceA.^


SEVIER


SEW  ALL


467


and  with  Jamrs  Robertson  wm  in  reality  in  oon-
trul  of  all  judicial  and  a<lHiinii<trHtiv«  fuiictionii  in
the  w>ttlt>int'iit.  Hi'  was  t'Iw;t«l  colonel  by  the
over-tnoiuitaiii  |m>o|)1o  in  th«  same  ye«r,  enlistwl
every  able-b<Mliod  male  betwtH?n  the  ap-s  of  Hixteen
and  fifty  in  the  militia,  and  comman(re<l  that  force
in  innumerable  Indian  fl^ht.s.  lie  ent«>red  the  ter-
ritory of  the  savaf^'s  in  1779,  bununl  their  towns,
and  fought  the  successful  battle  of  Iktvd's  ('r(H>k.
With  ('<)I.  IsMiu!  Shelby,  in  17H(),  he  planne<l  the
imttlo  of  Kin|;'s  Mountain,  raised  4H()  men,  was  a|>-
pointwl  their  colonel,  and  in  a  critical  moment  of
the  action  rushed  on  the  eneniy,  up  the  »1o|k'  of
the  niountAin,  within  short  ran^c  of  their  muskets,
and  turned  the  fortunes  of  the  day.  For  this  ser-
vice he  received  thanks  and  aswonl  and  pistol  from
the  North  Carolina  legislature.  A  fellow-soldier
says  of  him,  in  that  battle:  "  His  eyes  were  flames
of  fire,  and  his  wonls  were  electric  l)olts  crashing
down  the  ranks  of  the  enemy."  He  subsequent-
ly renderetl  im|K)rtant  services  at  Musgmves  mill
and  in  defending  the  frontier  against  the  ravages
of  the  Indians.  In  1781  he  conducted  several  ex|>e-
ditions  against  the  Chickamauga  towns,  was  fore-
most in  many  skirmishes  as  well  as  treaties  and
negotiations  with  the  Indians,  and  was  revered
and  loved  by  the  settlers  as  their  father  and  friend.
At  the  close  of  the  war  the  Watauga  settlement
ha<l  widely  extended  its  lx)rders,  and  contained  a
large  and  active  population.  But  the  vast  terri-
tory which  is  now  the  state  of  Tennessee,  compris-
ing about  29,000,000  acres,  brought  with  its  pos-
session the  obligation  to  l)ear  a  correspondingly
large  part  of  the  Federal  debt. Therefore,  in  June,

1784,  the  legislature  of  North  Carolina  ceded  it  to
the  general  government.  When  the  news  of  this
act  reached  the  settlers  they  determined  to  form
a  government  of  their  own.  and  then  apply  for  ad-
mission into  the  Union.  They  were  the  more  ready
todo  this  as  they  considered  themselves  neglected  by
the  North  Carolina  government.  Accordingly,  on
23  Aug.,  1784,  they  called  a  convention,  organized  a
constitution  and  state  government,  elected  John
Sevier  governor,  and  named  their  state  Franklin,  in
honor  of  Benjamin  Franklin.  In  the  mean  time,  be-
fore the  cession  hiul  been  legally  concluded,  the  leg-
islature of  North  Carolina  met  again  and  made  haste
to  undo  what  hiwl  Ix-en  done  at  the  former  session.
They  gave  the  Watauga  settlers  a  superior  court,
formea  the  militia  into  a  brigade,  and  appointed
Sevier  brigadier  -  general.  After  this  Sevier  ear-
nestly opposed  the  scheme  of  a  sejwirate  govern-
ment, ana  advised  all  his  compatriots  to  take  no
further  steps  toward  it ;  but  public  opinion  was
strongly  against  a  return  to  North  Carolina,  and
he  finally  consented  to  accept  the  governorship  of
the  new  state,  taking  the  oath  of  olnc«  on  1  Man-h,

1785.  Within  sixty  days  he  established  a  superior
court,  reorganized  the  militia,  and  founded  Wash-
ington college,  the  first  institution  of  classical  learn-
ing west  of  the  Alleghanies.  He  also  entered  into
treaties  of  peace  with  the  Cherokee  Indians  after
continued  warfare  for  fifteen  years,  and  for  two
years  governed  with  unbroken  prosperity.  But
dissatisfaction  arose  in  North  Carolina,  and  at  the
end  of  that  time  Gov.  Ilichanl  Caswell  issued  a
proclamation  declaring  the  new  government  to  be
a  revolt  and  ordering  that  it  be  at  onc-e  abandoned.
Violence  followe*!  the  attempt  to  subdue  it.  but
the  settlers  finally  submitted  to  a  suiwrior  force.
Sevier  was  captured  and  itnprisoned.  out  rescue<l,
and  the  country  was  cede<l  to  the  U.  S.  government
under  the  title  of  the  "  territory  south  of  the  Ohio  '
river."  Sevier  then  took  an  oath  of  allegiance  to  j
the  United  States,  was  oommissionc<l  brigadier-  {


general  of  that  section  in  1789,  and  in  1790  chomn

to  congress  as  the  first  representative  from  the  val-
ley of  the  Mississippi.  He  conducte<l  the  Ktowah
caniiMiign  against  the  Creeks  and  Cheroke(>s  in
1793,  which  completely  broke  the  spirit  of  the  In-
dians, so  that  they  did  not  attai-k  the  French  Brmui
and  Holston  si'ttlements  again  during  .Sevier's  life-
time, and  in  1790,  when  the  territory  was  admitted
into  the  Union  as  the  state  of  l'enni*ssee,  ho  was
chosen  its  first  governor.  He  serve<l  three consccu-
tive  terms,  was  re-electe«l  three  successive  titneti
after  180^3,  atid  was  chosen  a  memlM-r  of  congress
m  1811,  and  was  returned  to  that  Unly  for  a
third  term  in  1815,  but  died  before  he  could
take  his  seat.  Near  the  close  of  his  congressional
career  he  was  ai)pointed  by  President  Monroe  to
act  as  U.  S.  commissioner  to  settle  the  Imundary-
line  between  Georgia  and  the  Cre««k  territory  in
Alabama.  But  the  lalxjr  was  too  great,  and  he  died
in  his  tent,  attended  only  by  a  few  soldiers  and  In-
dians. His  biographer,  James  R.  Gilmore,  says  of
him  :  "  He  was  in  the  active  service  of  hLs  country
from  a  boy  of  eighteen  till  he  died  at  the  age  of
seventy  years.  Duriu)^  all  this  period  he  was  a
leader  of  men,  and  a  prune  mover  in  the  important
events  which  occurred  beyond  the  Alleghanies.
His  sway  was  potent  and  undisputed  in  civil  as
well  as  militar>'  affairs.  As  long  as  he  lived  he  was
the  real  seat  of  fxjwer.  A  rule  like  his  was  never
before  nor  since  known  in  this  country."  A  monu-
ment to  his  honor  is  erected  in  Nashville,  and  .Se-
vier county,  Tenn.,  is  named  for  him.  See  ''The
Rear- Guard  of  the  Revolution,"  bv  James  R.
Gilmore  (New  York,  188G),  and  "  L"ife  of  John
Sevier,"  by  the  same  author  (1887). — His  nephew,
Ambrose  Hundley,  senator,  b.  in  Greene  county,
Tenn.,  4  Nov..  1801 ;  d.  in  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  31
Dec.,  1848.  received  little  early  education,  removed
to  Arkansas  territory  in  1822,  studie<l  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1823.  He  was  clerk  of  the
territorial  legislature  and  a  meml)er  of  that  body
in  1823-'5,  a  delegate  to  congress  in  1827-*36,  hav-
ing been  chosen  as  a  Democrat,  and  U.  S.  senator
from  the  latter  year  till  1848.  During  this  ser\'ice
he  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  Indian  af-
fairs for  many  years,  of  that  on  foreign  relations,
and  in  1848  was  a  U.  S.  commissioner  to  negotiate
peace  with  Mexico.

SEVILLA,  Jos^,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Peru,  S.
A.,  about  1820;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  March,
1888.  He  settled  in  New  York  city  late  in  life,
and  l)equeathed  his  property,  valued  at  upward  of
$1,000,0(X),  for  the  establishment  of  an  unsectarian
home  for  unfortunate  children.  Bt)th  sexes  were
to  be  freely  admitteil  and  educated  in  such  a  man-
ner as  to  become  self-supporting.

SEWALL,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Bishopstoke,
England,  28  March,  1052 ;  d.  in  Ik)ston,  Mass.,  1
Jan.,  1730.  His  early  education  was  received  in
England  before  his  parents  came  to  New  Flngland.
They  went  to  Newbury,  Mass..  and  his  lessons  were
continued  there.  He  was  fitted  to  enter  Har-
vard in  1G67,  and  took  his  first  degree  in  1G71,  his
second  in  1G75.  He  studied  divinity  and  had
preached  once  before  his  marriage,  but  after
that  event,  which  took  place  <in  28  Feb.,  1G77,
he  left  the  ministry  and  enteretl  public  life.  His
wife  was  Hannah  Hull,  the  daughter  and  only
child  of  John  and  Judith  (Quincy)  Hull.  The
position  which  his  father-in-law  held  as  treas-
urer and  mint-master  undoubtedly  had  some-
what to  do  with  the  change  in  the  young
man's  plans.  One  of  his  first  ventures  after  his
marriage  was  to  a.ssume  charge  of  the  printing-
press  in Boston. This  was under  his manage-


468


SEWALL


SEWALL


ment  for  three  years,  when  other  engaprements
compelled  him  to  relinquish  it.  His  family  con-
nections, Iwth  tlirough  Ills  marriage  and  on  the
maternal  and  paternal  sides,  brought  him  in  con-
tact with  some  of  the  most  prominent  men  of  the
day.  In  1684  he  was  chosen  an  assistant,  serving
for  two  years.  In  1688  he  made  a  voyage  to  Eng-
land, anil  remained  abroad  a  year  in  the  transac-
tion of  business,  visiting  various  points  of  inter-
est. In  1692  he  became  a  member  of  the  council
and  judge  of  the  probate  court.  Judge  Scwall  ap-
peared prominently  in  judging  the  witches  during
the  time  of  the  Salem  witchcraft.  His  character
was  shown  more  clearly  at  that  time  and  immedi-
ately afterward  than  at  any  other  time  during  his
long  life.  He  was  extremely  conscientious  in  the
fulfilment  of  duty,  and  yet,  when  he  found  he
was  in  error,  was  not  too  proud  to  acknowledge
it.  Of  all  the  judges  that  took  part  in  that  his-
toric action,  he  was  the  only  one  that  publicly
confessed  his  error.  The  memory  of  it  haunted
him  for  yeare,  until  in  January,  1697,  he  confessed
in  a  "  bill,"  which  was  read  before  the  congrega-
tion of  the  Old  South  church  in  Boston  by  the
minister.  During  its  reading,  Sewall  remained
standing  in  his  place.  The  action  was  indicative
of  the  man.  During  the  remaining  thirtv-one
years  of  his  life  he  spent  one  day  annually  in
fasting  and  meditation  and  prayer,  to  keep  in
mind  a  sense  of  the  enormity  of  his  offence.  In
1699  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  for  the
English  Society  for  the  propagation  of  the  gos-
pel in  New  England.  Soon  afterward  he  was
appointed  their  secretarj'  and  treasurer.  His
tract,  entitled  "  The  Selling  of  Joseph."  in  which
he  advocated  the  rights  of  the  slaves,  was  pub-
lished in  1700.  He  was  very  benevolent  and
charitable,  and  his  sympathies  were  always  with
the  down-trodden  races  of  humanity.  In  1718  he
was  appointed  chief  justice,  and  served  till  1728,
when  ne  retired  on  account  of  the  increasing  in-
firmities of  old  age.  He  also  published  "  The  Ac-
complishment of  Prophecies  "  (1713) ; "  A  Memorial
Relating  to  the  Kennebec  Indians"  (1721);  "A
Description  of  the  New  Heaven"  (1727).  The
Massachusetts  historical  society  have published

his  diary,  which
covers  the  larger

r)ortion  of  his
ife, in  their  "His-
torical Collec-
tions," and  it  has
also  published
his  letter-book,
in  which  he  kept
copies  of  his  im-
portant letters.
These  throw  light
upon  the  civil
and  social  life  of
the  day  in  a
marked  degree,
and  strengthen
the  opinion  that
he  was  a  man
of  eminent  abil-
ity and  of  sterling  character.  In  addition  to  his
diary,  he  kept  a  "  commonplace  book,"  in  which  he
recorded  quotations  from  various  authors  whose
works  he  had  read.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he
had  also  filled  twelve  manuscript  volumes  with  ab-
stracts of  sermons  and  addresses  that  he  had  heard
at  various  times.  His  funeral  sermon,  by  the  Rev,
Thomas  Prince,  was  highly  eulogistic,  but  evi-
dently a  just  tribute  to  one  of  the  most  remarkable


K Vw^.€.-<A/eiXt


men  of  his  age. — His  son,  Josoph,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  26  Aug.,  1688;  d.  there,  2<  June,  1769,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1707,  studie<l  theology,  and
was  ordained  on  16  Sept.,  1713,  as  Ebenezer  Pem-
bcrton's  colleague  in  the  pastorate  of  the  Old  South
church,  Boston.
He  was  elected
president  of
Harvard  in  1724,
but  declined.
He  was  one  of
the  commission-
ers appointed
by  the  London
corporation  for
propagating  the
gospel  in  New
England,  and
a  corresponding
memlier  of  the
Scottish  society
for  promoting
Christian  knowl-
edge.  The  Uni-
versity of  Glas-
gow gave  him
the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1731.
He  was  a  rigid  Calvinist  and  a  foe  to  free  discus-
sion and  novel  opinions,  but  gave  his  support  and
approval  to  Whitefield's  revival  in  1740.  He  con-
tributed to  the  support  of  indigent  students,  and
gave  many  books  to  replenish  Harvard  college
library  when  it  was  burned  in  1764.  His  benevo-
lence gained  him  the  familiar  epithet  of  "  the
good."  while  his  religious  fervor  caused  him  to  be
sometimes  called  "  the  weeping  prophet."  Many
of  his  sermons  were  published. — Samuel's  nephew,
Stephen,  jurist,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  18  Dec,  1704;
d.  10  Sept.,  1760,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1721,
and  was  librarian  of  the  college  in  1726-'8.  and  then
a  tutor  till  1739,  when  he  was  appointed  a  judge
of  the  supreme  court  of  Massachusetts.  In  1752
he  was  made  chief  justice,  and  he  served  in  that
capacity,  and  also  as  a  member  of  the  council,  till
the  close  of  his  life.  He  expressed  doubt  of  the
legality  of  general  writs  of  assistance,  which  were
demanded  by  the  customs  authorities  for  the  pur-
pose of  suppressing  illicit  trade,  yet  before  he
could  finally  pass  judgment  upon  the  question  he
died,  to  the  general  regret  of  the  patriot  party. —
Samuel's  grandnephew,  Samuel,  engineer,  b.  in
York,  Me.,  in  1724;  d.  there,  28  July,  1815,  was
the  inventor  of  various  useful  improvements.  He
is  said  to  have  been  the  first  to  drive  piles  as
a  foundation  for  bridges,  introducing  this  device
at  York  in  1761.  In  1786  he  erected  the  Charles-
town  bridge  on  this  plan. — Stephen's  nephew,
Jonathan,  lawver,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  24  Aug.,
1728;  d.  in  St."  John,  New  Brunswick,  26  Sept.,
1796,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1748,  taught  in
Salem  till  1756,  studied  law,  and  began  practice  in
Charlestown  in  1758.  He  inclined  to  the  patriotic
side  of  the  disputes  with  Great  Britain  until  he
was  chagrined  by  the  refusal  of  the  legislature  to
pay  the  debts  left  by  his  uncle  and  by  the  opfwsi-
tion  of  James  Otis  and  his  father  to  his  petition.
He  was  rewarded  for  his  subsequent  adhesion  to
the  cause  of  the  crown  with  the  posts  of  solicitor-
general,  attorney-general  (which  appointment  he
received  in  1767).  advocate-general,  and  judge  of
admiralty,  his  emoluments  amounting  to  £6,000  a
year.  He  was  offered  the  appointment  of  judge  of
admiralty  at  Halifax  in  1768,  but  declined.  No
lawyer  in  Massachusetts  surpassed  him  in  elo-


SEW  ALL


8KWALL


409


quonw  or  Hout<Mi<««i,  In  1769.  in  the  Miit  of  .TftniM
sfTHinst  IxH'hmer*',  hi>  !«e<Mm'<l  the  roUiineof  m  nefcro
»lavc  two  years  U^forc  the  pommon-law  ripht  of
friMNloin  was  deflned  in  the  Kn^lish  fourt.s  by  the
dtH-ixion  of  the  Somers«»t  viuv.  He  was  est«*emtHl
one  of  the  ablest  writers  in  New  Knf;lun<l,  and  «le-
fen<led  the  doctrines  of  rmTeion  witli  forre  and
learnint;  in  the  eolnmns  of  the  Torv  news[»a[)ers.
John  Trumbull  satirizes  him  in  " McFingal"  as
"the  summit  of  newspa|)er  wit."  who
••  Drew  proclamations,  works  of  toil.
In  tnie  sublime,  of  soaretTow  stvie  :
Wilh  forces,  too,  'gainst  Sons  of  Freedom.
All  for  your  po<Kl,  and  none  wcnild  read  "em."
The  pa|)ers  in  the  "  M»issachus«'tts  (inzette."  sifjned
"  Massachusettensis,"  were  attributed  to  him  until,
more  than  a  petieration  later.  Daniel  li^'onard,  of
Taunton,  was  discovered  to  have  Uu-n  their  author.
After  Judjje  Sowall  signed  an  address  to  Gov.
Thomas  Hutchinson,  his  mansion  in  Cambridge
was  wre<'ke<l  by  a  mob  in  September.  1774.  He
fled  to  Koston.  and  a  few  months  later  took  ship
for  Kngland.  where  he  live«l  for  a  short  time  in
I^ndon,  and  afterward  mostly  in  Bristol.  His
estate  in  Miiss»i<,'husett4J  was  confiscated  under  the
act  of  1779,  In  1788  he  removetl  to  St.  John,
New  Brunswick,  where  he  resumed  legal  prac-
tice. His  wife  and  the  wife  of  John  Hancock
were  daughters  of  Kdmund  Quincy.  of  Boston. —
The  seconti  Samuel's  brother,  Stephen,  Hebraist,
b.  in  York.  Me,.  4  April.  1734:  d.  in  Boston.  Mass.,
23  July.  1804,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1761,
taught  in  the  grammar-school  at  Cambridge,  and
in  1762  l)ecame  librarian  and  instructor  in  Hebrew
at  Harvard.  Two  years  later  he  was  installed  as
the  first  Hancock  professor  of  Hebrew,  occupying
the  chair  till  1785.  He  was  an  active  Whig  dur-
ing the  Revolution,  and  represented  Cambridge  in
the  general  court  in  1777.  His  wife  wa.s  a  daugh-
ter of  FMwanl  Wigglesworth.  He  published  seven
Greek  and  Latin  poems  in  the  "  rietas  et  gratu-
latio "  (Cambridge,  1761);  a  *' Hebrew  Grammar"
(1763);  a  funeral  oration  in  Latin  on  Edward
Holvoke  (1769);  an  English  oration  on  the  death
of  Prof.  John  Winthrop  (1779);  a  Latin  version
of  the  first  book  of  Edwanl  Young's  "  Night
Thoughts"  (1780);  "Carmina  sacra  qiue  Ijatine
Gneceque  condidit  America"  (1789);  "The  Scrip-
ture Account  of  the  Shechinah"  (1794);  and  "The
Scripture  History  relating  to  the  Overthrow  of
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  "  (1796).  He  left  a  manu-
script Chaldee  and  English  dictionary,  which  is
preserved  in  the  library  of  Harvard  college, — An-
other brother,  David,  jurist,  b,  in  York,  Me.,  7
Oct,.  \TS5;  d.  there.  22  Oct,.  1825.  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1755.  studied  law,  and  established
himself  in  practice  in  York  in  1759.  He  was  ap-
pointed justice  of  the  peace  in  1762.  and  register
of  proliate  in  1766.  Like  his  friend  and  classmate,
John  Adams,  he  was  an  earnest  Whig,  and  was  an
active  patriot  from  the  l)epinning  of  the  Revolu-
tion, lie  wa-s  renresentative  for  York  in  1776,
was  chosen  a  memwr  of  the  council  of  Massachu-
setts, and  was  aptKtintiHi  in  1777  a  justice  of  the
superior  court.  Prom  1789  till  1818  he  was  U.  S.
judge  for  the  district  of  Maine. — Stephen's  nephew.
Jonathan  Mitt^hell,  |Mx>t.  b.  in  Stilcm,  Mass..  in
1748:  d,  in  Portsmouth.  N.  H..  29  Manh,  1808.  was
brought  up  in  the  family  of  his  uncle,  and  edu-
cate<r  at  Harvard.  He  left  college  to  engage  in
mercantile  business,  afterward  8tudie<l  law,  was
admitted  to  the  Iwr,  and  practiseil  with  success.
In  1774  he  was  aitfiointtHi  register  of  prolmte  for
Grafton  countv.  N,  H,  Afterwani  he  settled  in
Portsmouth. In  the  early  |>art  of  the  Revolution


he  wrot«  "  War  and  Washington,"  a  fAvorile  song
of  the  soldiers  of  the  Revolutionary  army. He
produced  other  (tatriotic  lyrics,  l>esidi'>s  fwiraphnuiefl
of  Owtan.  epilogues,  and  enigrams. In  an  "  Ki>i-
logue-to  Cat<»."  written  in  177H.  drawing  a  narallel
lietween  the  characters  and  events  of  the  Revolu-
tion and  those  of  the  play.  o<-<:urs  the  couplet,
"  No  |»ent-un  I'tica  contract.-  your  [xiwers.
But  the  whole  UninclluAs  continent  is  yours."
which  Park  lienjamin  wlofited  as  the  motto  of  hU
paper, "The  New  W<»rld," His  fK>ems.  which  were
mostly  the  prinluctions  of  his  youth,  were  collected
into  a  volume  (P<jrtsmouth.  18^)1). — .Kiseph's  grand-
j  son.  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  11  I>«-c.,
1757;  d.  in  Wi.s<-as.sett.  Me..  8  June.  1H14.  was  gradu-
I  ated  at  Harvard  in  1776.  studied  law.  wasadmitte<l
to  the  bar.  and  practise<l  in  Marblchea«l.  Mass. He
I  was  frequently  a  memlK-r  of  the  legislature,  was
!  elected  lo  congress  for  two  successive  terms,  and
'  served  from  15  May,  1797,  till  10  Jan.,  18(K),  when
j  he  resigned  on  being  appointt>d  a  judge  of  the
'  Massacnusetts  supreme  court. In  the  same  year
he  was  a  member  of  the  electoral  college  of  Massa-
chusetts. He became  chief  judge in 1813,  and
died  while  holding  court  in  Wis<'assett.  where  a
monument  was  erecte<I  to  his  memory  by  the  inem-
I  l)ers  of  the  liar. — The  second  Stepnen's  nephew,
Jotham,  clergyman,  b.  in  Y^ork,  Me.,  1  Jan..  1760:
I  d.  in  Chestervllle,  Me.,  3  Oct..  1850.  was  a  mason
in  his  youth,  and  receive<l  only  a  rudimentary  edu-
I  cation,  yet,  after  a  theological  examination  in  1798,
he  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  on  18  June.  1800.
was  ordained  as  an  evangelist. P'rom  that  time  till
the  close  of  his  life  he  labore<l  as  a  missionarj'.
I  He  was  installed  as  pastor  of  the  Congregational
I  church  in  Chesterville  on  22  June.  1820,  but  con-
j  tinned  his  missionary  tours,  preaching  wherever
a  few  could  be  gathered  together,  on  week  days
I  as  well  as  on  Sundays,  and  organizing  many  new
I  churches. His  ministry  extended  over  a  period  of
I  fifty  years,  and  in  this  time  he  preached  four  and
a  half  times  on  an  average  every  week. His  field
}  was  confined  chiefly  to  Maine  and  parts  of  New
Hampshire  and  Rhode  Island,  though  his  journeys
extended  into  eleven  other  states  and  into  New
I  Bninswick. A  memoir  wjis  publishe<I  by  his  son,
Jotham  (Boston,  1852), — The  third  Samuel's  son,
Samnel,  clergyman,  b, in ^larblehead.  Mass.,  1
June,  1785;  d.  "in  Buriington.  Mass..  18  Feb..  1868,
was  graduate<l  at  Harvard  in  1804,  studied  theol-
ogy in  Cambridge,  an«l  was  pastor  of  the  Congre-
gational church  at  Burlington,  Mass.,  from  1814
till  his  death. He  was  fond  of  anti({uarian  studies,
and  left  a  "  History  of  Wobum,  Mass..  from  the
Grant  of its  Territory  to  Charlestown in 1640
to  1860,"  which  was  publishe<l,  with  a  memorial
sketch, by his brother. Rev. Charles Chauncy
Sewall  (Boston,  1868). — Jotham 's  cousin.  Thomas,
nhysician.  b.  in  Augusta,  Me.,  16  April.  1786;  d.  in
Washington.  D.  (',.  10  Aj)ril.  1845.  was  graduated
in  medicine  at  Ilarvanl  in  1812.  and  practised  in
Essex,  Mass..  till  1820,  when  he  remove<l  to  Wash-
ington. In  1821 he  was  appointed professor  of
anatomy  in  the  National  meuical  college  of  Colum-
bian university. He  began  his  lei>tures  when  the
college  first  o{)ene<l  in  1825.  and  continued  them
till  his  death. He  published,  among  other  works,
"The  Pathology  of  Drunkenness"  (Albany),  which
was  translate<l into  (ierman.  and  establishetl  his
reputation  as  an  original  investigator  in  Europe
as  well  as  in  the  Cnited  .States. — Jotham's  grand-
nephew.  Rnfns King,  author,  b.  in E«lgecomb,
Me.,  21  Jan.,  1814,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in
1887.  and  at  liangor  theological  seminary  in  1840.
He  supplied  pulpits  in  Vermont  and  Massachusetta,


470


SEWARD


SEWARD


but  the  condition  of  his  health  prevented  him  from
accepting  a  permanent  pastorat*.  He  reside<i  for
Ave  years  in  St.  Augustine,  Fia.,  studied  law  with
his  uncle,  Kiah  B.  ii^yewall,  of  Mobile,  Ala.,  returned
to  Maine  Ix'fore  the  civil  war,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1800,  and  has  since  practised  in  Wiscassett.
He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Memoir  of  Joseph  Sewall,
D.  D."  (Boston,  1846);  "Lectures  on  the  Holy
Spirit  and  his  Converting  Power  "  (1846) ;  "  Sketches
of  St.  Augustine  and  its  Advantages  for  Invalids"
(New  York,  1848);  and  "Ancient  Dominions  of
Maine"  (Bath,  1859). — .lotham's  grandson,  John
Smith,  educator,  b.  in  Newcastle,  Me.,  20  March,
1830,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1850,  went  with
the  expedition  of  Com.  Matthew  C.  Perry  on  the
"  Sarataga  "  as  captain's  clerk  to  China  and  Japan,
taught  for  a  year  after  his  return,  then  entered
Bangor  theological  seminary,  and  was  graduated  in
1858.  He  was  pastor  of  the  (Jofigregational  church
at  Wenham,  Mass.,  till  1867,  when  he  became  pro-
fessor of  rhetoric  and  English  literature  at  Bow-
doin. He  exchanged  this  chair  in  1875  for  that  of
homiletics  at  Bangor  theological  seminary.

SEWARD,  Theodore  Frelinghuysen,  musi-
cian, b.  in  Florida,  N.  Y.,  25  Jan.,  1835.  He  is  a
cousin  of  William  H.  Seward.  He  left  his  father's
farm  at  the  age  of  eighteen  to  study  music  under
Lowell  Mason  and  Thomas  Hastings,  became
organist  of  a  church  in  New  London,  Conn.,  in
1857,  and  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in  1859,  removed  to
New  York  city  in  1867,  and  conducted  the  "  Musi-
cal Pioneer,"  and  afterward  the  New  York  "  Musi-
cal Gazette."  He  first  became  interested  in  the
tonic  sol-fa  system  during  a  visit  to  England  in
1869,  and  on  his  return  endeavored  ineffectually  to
introduce  the  method  without  adopting  the  nota-
tion. He  subsequently  took  charge  of  the  perform-
I  ances  of  the  "  Jubilee  singers,"  wrote  down  more
than  one  hundred  of  their  plantation  melodies,  and,
while  making  the  tour  of  Europe  with  them,  in
1875-'6,  became  more  impressed  with  the  advan-
tages of  the  new  system  of  musical  instruction.
After  a  course  of  study  at  the  Tonic  sol-fa  college
in  London,  he  returned  to  the  United  States  in
1877,  intending  to  make  the  establishment  of  the
system  his  sole  purpose.  Besides  writing  on  the
subject  for  many  religious  and  educational  jour-
nals, and  lecturing  before  gatherings  of  teachers,
he  has  edited  the  "  Tonic  Sol-Fa  Advocate "  and
the  '•  Musical  Reform,"  taught  the  system  in
classes  and  public  schools,  and  prepared  a  series  of
text- books.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  American
tonic  sol-fa  association,  and  of  the  American  vocal
music  association.  In  conjunction  with  Lowell
Mason,  he  prepared  "The  Pestalozzian  Music-
Teacher"  (New  York,  1871).  Among  his  other  pub-
lications are  "  The  Sunnyside  Glee-Book "  (New
York,  1866);  "The  Temple  Choir"  (1867);  and
"  Coronation  "  (1872).

SEWARD,  William  Henry,  statesman,  b.  in
Florida,  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  May,  1801  ;  d.  in  Au-
burn, N.  Y.,  10  Oct.,  1872.  His  father.  Dr.  Sam-
uel S.  Seward,  descended  from  a  Welsh  emigrant
to  Connecticut,  combined  medical  practice  with  a
large  mercantile  business.  His  mother  was  of  Irish
extraction.  The  son  was  fond  of  study,  and  in  1816
entered  Union,  after  due  preparation  at  Farmers'
Hall  academy,  Goshen,  N.  V.  He  withdrew  from
college  in  1819,  taught  for  six  months  in  the
south,  and  after  a  year's  absence  returned,  and  was
graduated  in  1820.  After  reading  law  with  John
Anthon  in  New  York  city,  and  John  Duer  and
Ogden  HofiEman  in  Goshen,  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar  at  Utica  in  1822,  and  in  January,  1823,  settled
in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  as  the  partner  of  Elijah  Miller,


the  first  judge  of  Cayuga  county,  whose  daughter,
Frances  Adeline,  he  married  in  the  following  year.
His  industry  and  his  acumen  and  power  of  logical

[)resentation  soon  gave  him  a  place  among  the
eaders  of  the  bar.  In  1824  he  nrst  met  Thurlow
Weed  at  Rochester,  and  a  close  friendship  between
them,  personal  and  political,  continued  through
life.  In  that  year  also  he  entered  earnestly  into
the  political  contest  as  an  advocate  of  the  election
of  John  Quincy  Adams,  and  in  October  of  that  year
drew  up  an  address  of  the  Republican  convention
of  Cayuga  county,  in  which  he  arraigned  the  "  Al-
bany regency  "  and  denounced  the  methods  of  Mar-
tin Van  Buren's  supporters.  He  delivered  an  an-
niversary address  at  Auburn  on  4  July,  1825.  He
was  one  of  the  committee  to  welcome  Lafayette,
and  in  February,  1827,  delivered  an  oration  expres-
sive of  sympathy  for  the  Greek  revolutionists.  On
12  Aug.,  1827,  he  presided  at  Utica  over  a  great
convention  of  young  men  of  New  York  in  support
of  the  re-election  of  John  Q.  Adams.  He  decjined
the  anti-Masonic  nomination  for  congress  in  1828,
but  joined  that  party  on  the  dissolution  of  the
National  Republican  party,  with  which  he  had  pre-
viously acteu,  consequent  upon  the  setting  a-side  of
its  candidate  for  Andrew  Jackson.  In  1830  he  was
elected  as  the  anti-Masonic  candidate  for  the  state
senate,  in  which  body  he  took  the  lead  in  the  oppo-
sition to  the  dominant  party,  and  labored  in  behalf
of  the  common  schools  and  of  railroad  and  canal
construction.  He  proposed  the  collection  of  docu-
ments in  the  archives  of  European  governments  for
the  "Colonial  History  of  New  York,"  advocated
the  election  of  the  mayor  of  New  York  by  the  direct
popular  vote,  and  furthered  the  passage  of  the  bill
to  abolish  imprisonment  for  debt.  At  the  close  of
the  session  he  was  chosen  to  draw  up  an  address  of
the  minority  of  the  legislature  to  the  people.  On
4  July,  1831,  he  gave  an  address  to  the  citizens  of
Syracuse  on  the  "  Prospects  of  the  United  States."
On  31  Jan.,  1832,  he  defended  the  U.  S.  bank  in  an
elaborate  speech  in  the  state  senate,  and  at  the  close
of  that  session  again  prepared  an  address  of  the
minority  to  their  constituents.  In  1833  he  travelled
through  JCurope,  writing  home  letters,  which  were
afterward  published  in  the  "Albany  Evening  Jour-
nal." In  January,  1834,  he  denounced  the  removal
of  the  U.  S.  bank  deposits  in  a  brilliant  and  ex-
haustive speech.  He  drew  up  a  third  minority
address  at  the  close  of  this  his  last  session  in  the
legislature.  On  1 6  J  uly,  1834,.he  delivered  a  eulogy
of  Lafayette  at  Aubura.

The  Whig  party,  which  had  originated  in  the
opposition  to  the  Jackson  administration  and  the
"Albany  regency,"  nominated  him  for  governor
on  13  Sept.,  1834,  in  the  convention  at  Utica.  He
was  defeated  by  William  L.  Marcv,  and  returned  to
the  practice  of  law  in  the  beginning  of  1835.  On  3
Oct.  of  that  year  he  made  a  speech  at  Auburn  on
education  and  internal  improvements.  In  July,
1836,  he  quitted  Auburn  for  a  time  in  order  to  as-
sume an  agency  at  Westfield  to  settle  the  differences
between  the  Holland  land  company  and  its  tenants.
While  there  he  wrote  some  political  essays,  and  in
July,  1837,  delivered  an  address  in  favor  of  universal
education.  He  took  an  activp  part  in  the  political
canvass  of  1837,  which  resulted  in  a  triumph  of  the
Whigs.  He  was  again  placed  in  nomination  for  gov-
ernor in  1838,  and  after  a  warm  canvass,  in  whicn  he
was  charged  with  having  oppressed  settlers  for  the
benefitof  the  landcompany,aiKl  was  assailed  byanti-
slavery  men.  who  had  failed  to  draw  from  him  an
expression  of  alK)litionist  principles,  he  was  elected
by  a  majority  of  10,421.  The  first  Whig  governor
was  hampered  in  his  administration  by  rivalries  and


--t-  -y /:  H  l--'s.


^^^^ /!h/^


D.  APPLBTOM  k  C


SEWARD


SKWARD


471


diMension  within  the  fmrtr.  He  Mcurml  more  hu-
mane and  lilx-nil  provision!*  for  the  trratinent  of
tht'  inf^antMi  iiiiti),''Hlion  of  the  niethiMlxof  diiM-inline
in  the  [K'nitfiitiary.  an«l  the  impruvi-nH-nt  of  the
common  ttchoola. llis  proposition  to  ailniil  Konian

('Htholi(r  anil  for-
eijfn  -  Iwrn  teat'h-
er»  into  the  pulv
lie  wh«x>l»,  while
it  WHS  up|)lau<le<l
by  the  op|Kmite
party,  drew  u|K)n
nim'the.reprowh-
w  of  ntany  of  the
I'rotestant  clergy
and  laity,  and  sulv
jectetl  him  to  sus-

ricion  and  abuse,
lis  recommenda-
tions to  remove
disabilities  from
foreijjners  and  to
encourage,  rather
than  restrict,  em-
igration, likewise
^  //  //-^  y provoked  the  hos-

rK  Un —  //  /^.A^ — t^.  tility  of  native-
born  citizens.  His
proposition  to  alwlish  the  court  of  chancery  and
make  the  judiciary  elective  was  opposed  bv  the
bench  and  the  l)af,  yet  within  a  few  years  the  re-
form was  eflfecte<l.  At  his  suggestion,  specimens
of  the  natural  history  of  the  state  were  collected,
and,  when  the  geological  survey  was  completed,  he
prepared  an  elalwrate  introduction  to  the  report,
reviewing  the  settlement,  development,  and  condi-
tion of  the  state,  which  apin-areil  in  the  work  under
the  title  of  "  Notes  on  New  York."  In  the  conflict
between  the  proprietors  and  the  tenants  of  Rens-
selaerwyck  he  advocated  the  claims  of  the  latter,  but
firmly  suppressed  their  violent  outbreaks.  He  was
re-electwl,  with  a  diminished  majority,  in  1840.  A
contest  over  the  enlargement  of  the  Erie  canal  and
the  completion  of  the  lateral  canals,  which  the
Democrats  prophesied  would  plunge  the  state  into
a  debt  of  forty  millions,  grew  sharf)er  during  Gov.
Seward's  second  term,  and  near  its  close  the  legis-
lature 8to[)|>ed  the  public  works.  His  projects  for
building  railroads  were  in  like  manner  op()osed
by  that  party.

In  Januiify,  1843,  Seward  retired  to  private  life,
resuming  the  practice  of  law  at  Auburn.  He
continue<l  an  active  worker  for  his  party  during
the  {wrifHl  of  its  decline,  and  wjis  a  friMjuent  s|)eak-
er  at  |>olitical  meetings.  In  1H4;}  he  delivere<l  an
address  before  the  Phi  licta  Kappa  society  at  Union
college  on  tiie  "  Elements  of  Empire  in  America."
He  entcrwl  largely  into  the  practice  of  patent  law,
and  in  criminal  ca.ses  his  services  wen*  in  constant
demand.  Fn'quently  he  not  only  defencled  m-ciised
p«'rsons  gratuitously,  but  ^ve  iK'cuniary  assistance
to  his  clients.  Among  his  most  majiferly  forensic
efforts  were  an  argument  for  freedom  of  the  j)n>ss
in  a  libel  .nuit  brought  by  J.  Fenimore  C\K)|)er
against  Horace  Greeley  in  1845,  and  the  defence  of
John  Van  Zandt,  in  1847,  against  a  criminal  charge
of  aiding  fugitive  .slaves  to  escaf)e.  At  the  risk  of
riolence.  and  with  a  certainty  of  opprobrium,  he
defende<l  the  dementetl  negro  Fre«'man,  who  had
committeil  a  revolting  murder,  emU>ldened,  many
8up|M>se4l,  by  .Seward's  eloi^ueiit  pivseiitation  of  the
doctrine  of  moral  insanitv  in  another  cnse.  In  Scj>-
temUfr,  1847,  Seward  tleliventl  a  eulogy  on  Daniel
O'C'onnell  U'fore  the  Irish  citizens  of  New  York,
And  ill  1848  a  eulogy  on  John  Quiiicjr  Adams  be-


fore the  New  York  legiitlature.  He  took  an  actiTC
part  in  the  presidential  canvajm.  and  in  a  nfieech  at
rlev«-lan<I  ilescrilMHl  the  conflict  U-twwn  freedom
and  siavi'ry.  saying  of  the  latter:  "It  mu«t  be
alK>lishe4l,  and  you  and  I  must  do  it."

In  February,  IH4U.  S-wanl  waselect«l  U.S.  M>n»-
tor.  His  profKisal,  while  governor,  to  extend  suf-
frage to  the  negnjes  of  New  York,  and  many  pub-
lic utterances,  placed  him  in  the  |M»sition  of  the
foreiiuwt  op|)onent  of  slnvcrj-  within  the  Whig
|)arty.  President  Tavlor  selw-ted  .Seward  as  his
most  intimate  counsellor  among  the  senatfirs,  and
the  latter  de<!line<l  to  lie  |ilacf<l  on  any  iniftor-
tant  committee,  lest  his  proiiounc<-4l  views  should
compromise  the  administration.  In  a  s|ieech  de-
livered on  11  March,  1850,  in  favor  of  the  admis-
sion of  California,  he  s|K>ke  of  the  exclusion  of
slavery  as  determine<l  by  "the  higher  law,"  a  iihrase
that  was  denounce<l  lis  treasfmable  bv  the  sr>uthern
Democrats.  On  2  July,  1850,  he  defivere<l  a  great
siieech  on  the  compromise  bill.  He  supfjortiMl  the
trench  spoliation  bill,  and  in  Febniary.  1K51.  a<I-
vocatwl  the  principles  that  wen^  afterward  em-
IxKlied  in  the  homestead  law.  His  s(»eei-hes  cov-
ered a  wide  ground,  ranging  from  a jtractical  and
statistical  analysis  of  the  questions  anecting  steam
navigation.  dee{>-sea  exploration,  the  American
fisheries,  the  duty  on  rails,  and  the  Texas  «l»'bt,  to
flights  of  |iassionate  elo«juence  in  favor  of  extend-
ing sympathy  to  the  exiled  Irish  ttat riots,  and  moral
support  to  stniggles  for  lilicrty.  like  the  Hungarian
revolution,  which  he  reviewwl  in  a  sf»eech  on  "  Free-
dom in  Europe,"  deliveretl  in  March,  1852.  After
the  death  of  Zachary  Taylor  many  Whig  senators
and  representatives  accepted  the  j»ro-slavery  (>olicv
of  President  Fillmore,  but  Seward  resiste<l  it  with
all  his  energy.  He  approve<l  the  nomination  of
Winfleld  Scott  for  the  presidency  in  1852,  but
would  not  sanction  the  platfonn,  which  upheld  the
compromise  of  1850.  In  1853  he  delivere<l  an  ad-
dress at  Columbus,  Ohio,  on  "The  Destinv  of
America,"  and  one  in  New  York  city  on  "The  'Frue
Rasis  of  American  Inde{)endence."  In  18.54  he
made  an  oration  on  "The  Physical.  Moral,  and  In-
tellectual Development  of  the  American  People"
In'fore  the  literary  societies  of  Yale  college,  wnich
gave  him  the  de^jree  of  LL.  D.  His  speeches  on
the  rejK-al  of  the  Missouri  compromise  and  on  the
ailmission  of  Kansas  inatle  a  profound  impression.
He  was  re-elected  to  the  senate  in  1855,  in  spite  of
the  vigorous  opi>osition  of  l)oth  the  Native  Ameri-
can party  and  tne  Whigs  of  southern  sympathies.
In  tne  presidential  canvass  of  IKi^i  he  zealously
sunporte<l  John  C.  Fn'-mont,  the  Rei)ublican  can-
diuate.  In  1857  he  journey«'<l  through  ( 'anada.  and
ma<lc  a  voyage  to  I^brador  in  a  fishing-sch<H)ner.
the  "  Ix>g"  of  which  was  afterward  publishe<i.  In
a  speech  at  Rochester,  N.  Y..  in  OctotH>r.  1858.  he
alludeil  to  the  "  irrepressible  (Huiflict."  which  c«»uld
only  terminate  in  the  Cnittnl  .States  l»e<-oming
either  entirely  a  slave-holding  nation  or  entirt'ly  a
fre«>-lal)or  nation.  He  travelleil  in  Europe,  Egypt,
an<l  Palestine  in  18.')9.

In  IKttO,  as  in  1H5«J.  S^'wanl's  jtnwminent  posi-
tion in  the  Republican  party  made  him  the  most
conspicuous  candidate  for  the  presitleiitial  nomi-
nation. He  received  173^  votes  in  the  first  ballot
at  the  cimvention.  against  102  given  to  Abraham
Lincoln,  who  was  eventually  nominated,  and  in
whos<'  l)ehalf  he  actively  canvasso<I  the  w»»stem
slates.  Liiuoln  ap|M)inte4l  him  s<><-n'tary  of  state,
and  U'fore  lt>aving  the  senate  to  enter  on  the  du-
ties of  this  oflUct"  he  ma<le  a  speech  in  which  he
disap|)ointed  s<mie  of  his  (larty  by  advising  p»-
tience  and  moderation  in  debate,  and  harmony  of


472


SEWARD


SEWARD


action  for  the  sake  of  maintaining?  the  Union.  lie
cherished  hopes  of  a  peaceful  solution  of  tlie  na-
tional tmubles,  and,  while  declining  in  March,
1861,  to  enter  into  negotiations  with  commission-
ers of  the  Confederate  government,  he  was  in  favor
of  evacuating  Fort  Sumter  as  a  military  necessity
and  politic  measure,  while  re-enforcing  Fort  Pick-
ens, and  holding  every  other  post  then  remaining
in  the  hands  of  the  National  government.  He  is-
sued a  circular  note  to  the  ministers  abroad  on
9  March,  1861,  deprecating  foreign  intervention,
and  another  on  24  April,  defining  the  position  of
the  United  States  in  regard  to  the  rights  of  neu-
trals. Negotiations  were  carried  on  with  Euro-
pean governments  for  conventions  determining
such  rights.  He  protested  against  the  unofficial  in-
tercourse between  the  British  cabinet  and  agents  of
the  Confederate  states,  and  refused  to  receive  de-
spatches from  the  British  and  French  governments
in  which  they  assumed  the  attitude  of  neutrals  be-
tween belligerent  powers.  On  21  July  he  sent  a
despatch  to  Charles  F.  Adams,  minister  at  Lon-
don, defending  the  decision  of  congress  to  close  the
ports  of  the  seceded  states.  When  the  Confederate
commissioners  were  captured  on  board  the  British
steamer  "Trent"  he  argued  that  the  seizure  was
in  accordance  with  the  British  doctrine  of  the
"  right  of  search,"  which  the  United  States  had
resisted  by  the  war  of  1812.  The  release  of  these
prisoners,  at  the  demand  of  the  British  govern-
ment, would now  commit  both  governments  to


the  maintenance  of  the  American  doctrine ;  so
they  would  be  "  cheerfully  given  up."  He  firmly
rejected  and  opposed  the  proposal  of  the  French
emperor  to  unite  with  the  English  and  Russian
governments  in  mediating  between  the  United
States  and  the  Confederate  government.  He  made
the  Seward-Lyons  treaty  with  Great  Britain  for
the  extinction  of  the  African  slave-trade.  The
diplomatic  service  was  thoroughly  reorganized  by
Sec.  Seward ;  and  by  his  lucid  despatches  and  the
unceasing  presentation  of  his  views  and  argu-
ments, through  able  ministers,  to  the  European
cabinets,  the  respect  of  Europe  was  retained,  and
the  efforts  of  the  Confederates  to  secure  recogni-
tion and  support  were  frustrated.  In  the  summer
of  1862,  the  army  having  become  greatly  depleted,
and  public  proclamation  of  the  fjictt  being  deemed
unwise,  he  went  to  the  north  with  letters  from
the  president  and  secretary  of  war,  met  and  con-
ferred with  the  governors  of  the  loyal  states,  and
arranged  for  their  joint  proffer  of  re-enforce-
ments, to  which  the  president  responded  by  the
caII  for  300,000  more  troops.  Mr.  Seward  firmly
insisted  on  the  right  of  American  citizens  to  re-
dress for  the  depredations  of  the  "  Alabama, '  and
with  equal  determination  asserted  the  Monroe  doc-
trine in  relation  to  the  French  invasion  of  Mexico,
but,byavoidinga  provocative  attitude,  which  might
have  involved  his  government  in  foreign  war,  was


able  to  defer  the  decision  of  both  questions  till  a
more  favorable  time.  Before  the  close  of  the  civil
war  he  intimated  to  the  French  government  the
irritation  felt  in  the  United  States  in  regard  to  its
armed  intervention  in  Mexico.  Many  despatches
on  this  subject  were  sent  during  1865  and  1866,
which  gradually  became  more  urgent,  until  the
French  forces  were  withdrawn  and  the  Mexican
empire  fell.  He  supported  President  Lincoln's
proclamation  lil)erating  the  slaves  in  all  localities
in  rebellion,  and  three  years  later  announced  by
proclamation  the  abolition  of  slavery  throughout
the  Union  by  constitutional  amendment.  In  the
spring  of  1865  Mr.  Seward  was  thrown  from  his
carriage,  and  his  arm  and  jaw  were  fractured.
While  he  was  confined  to  his  couch  with  these  in-
juries President  Lincoln  was  murdered  and  on  the
same  evening,  14  April,  one  of  the  conspirators
gained  access  to  the  chamber  of  the  secretary,  in-
flicted severe  wounds  with  a  knife  in  his  face  and
neck,  and  struck  down  his  son,  Frederick  W.,  who
came  to  his  rescue.  His  recovery  was  slow  and  his
sufferings  were  severe.  He  concluded  a  treaty
with  Russia  for  the  cession  of  Ala.ska  in  1867.  He
negotiated  treaties  for  the  purchase  of  the  Danish
West  India  islands  and  the  Bay  of  Saniana,  which
failed  of  approval  by  the  senate,  and  made  a  treaty
with  Colombia  to  secure  American  control  of  the
Lsthmus  of  Panama,  which  had  a  similar  fate.

Sec.  Seward  sustained  the  reconstruction  policy
of  President  Johnson,  and  thereby  alienated  the
more  powerful  section  of  the  Republican  party
and  subjected  himself  to  bitter  censure  ana  un-
generous imputations.  He  opposed  the  impeach-
ment of  President  Johnson  in  1868,  and  sup-
Bjrted  the  election  of  Gen.  Grant  in  that  year,
e  retired  from  office  at  the  end  of  eight  years
of  tenure  in  March,  1869.  After  a  brief  stay
in  Auburn,  he  journeyed  across  the  continent  to
California,  Oregon,  British  Columbia,  and  Alaska^
returning  through  Mexico  as  the  guest  of  its
government  and  people.  In  August,  1870,  he  set
out  on  a  tour  of  the  world,  accompanied  by  several
members  of  his  family.  He  visited  the  principal
countries  of  Asia,  northern  Africa,  and  Europe,
being  received  everywhere  with  great  honor.  He
studied  their  political  institutions,  their  social  and
ethnological  cJiaracteristics,  and  their  commercial
capabilities.  Returning  home  on  9  Oct.,  1871,  he
devoted  himself  to  the  preparation  of  a  narrative
of  his  journey,  and  after  its  completion  to  a  history
of  his  life  and  times,  which  was  not  half  finished
at  the  time  of  his  death.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.
was  given  him  by  Union  in  1866.  He  published,
besides  occasional  addresses  and  numerous  politi-
cal speeches,  a  volume  on  the  "  Life  and  Public
Services  of  John  Quincy  Adams  "  (Auburn,  1849).
An  edition  of  his  "Works  "  was  published,  which
contains  many  of  his  earlier  essays,  speeches,  and
addresses,  with  a  memoir  by  George  E.  Baker,
reaching  down  to  1853  (3  vols..  New  York,  1853).
To  this  a  fourth  volume  was  added  in  1862,  and  a
fifth  in  1884,  containing  his  later  speeches  and  ex-
tracts from  his  diplomatic  corresjiondence.  His
official  correspondence  during  the  eight  years  was
published  by  order  of  congress.  The  relation  of
nis  "  Travels  Around  the  World  "  was  edited  and
published  by  his  adopted  daughter,  Olive  Risley
Seward  (New  York,  1873).  Charles  F.  Adams  pukJ-
lishetl  an  "Address  on  the  Life,  Character,  and
Services  of  Seward "  (Albany,  1873),  which  was
thought  by  some  to  have  extolled  him  at  the  ex-
pense of  President  Lincoln's  fame,  and  elicite<l  re-
plies from  Gideon  Welles  and  others.  Jlr.  Seward's
"  Autobiography,"  which  extends  to  1834,  has  been


SEWARD


SKWELL


478


continued  to  1840  in  a  memoir  by  hiii  son,  Fred-
erick W..  with  !M'ltvtinn»  fnun  his  lettcre  (New
York,  1H77).  Tlif  vijfiiotto  |M>rtrait  rt'pruscntjt  Gov.
Scwurtl  in  enrly  life,  nnd  tlie  other  iiluiitnilion  is  a
riew  o(  his  residence  at  Auburn.  There  is  a  \mmxc
statue  of  Mr.  Seward,  by  Handulph  Ko^ers,  in
Madison  s({iutro.  New  York. — His  son,  Aug'tistas
Henry,  wddier,  b.  in  Aubuni.  N.  Y.,  1  Oct..  182«i;  d.
in  Montrose,  N.  Y.,  11  Sept.,  1870,  was  };radimttHi  at
the  U.S.  military  academy  in  1H47, served  through
the  .Mexican  war  as  lieutenant  of  infantry,  aftcr-
wanl  in  Indian  territory  till  1851,  and  then  on
the  coast  survey  till  IHT)!*,  when  he  joined  the  Vuih
expedition,  lie  was  made  a  captain  on  li>  Jan.,
18oU,  and  on  27  March,  18U1,  a  maior  on  the  staff.
He  served  as  paymaster  during  the  civil  war,  re-
ceiving the  brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel  and  colo-
nel at  its  close. — Another  son.  Frederick  Will-
iam, lawver,  b.  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  8  July,  18^0.  wjls
graduateii  at  Unitm  in  1849,  and  after  he  was  a<l-
mitted  to  the  Iwir  at  Rt)chester,  N.  Y.,  in  1851,  was
assix-iate  editor  of  the  Albany  "  Evening  Journal "
till  1861,  when  he  was  appointed  assistant  secretary
of  state,  which  oflice  he  held  for  the  eight  years
that  his  father  was  secretary.  In  1867  he  went  on
a  special  mission  to  Santo  Domingo.  He  was  a
memlicr  of  the  New  York  legislature  in  1875,  and
intnxluciHl  the  bill  to  incorporate  the  New  York
elevated  railroad  and  the  amendments  to  the
constitution  providing  for  a  reorganization  of  the
state  canal  and  prison  systems,  placing  each  under
responsible  heaus,  and  abolishing  the  old  boards.
He  was  assistant  secretary  of  state  again  in  1877-'81,
while  William  M.  Evarts  was  secretary.  Union  con-
ferred on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1878.  His
[mncipal  publication  is  the  "  Life  and  Letters"  of
>is  father  (New  York,  1877),  of  which  the  second
volume  is  now  (1888)  in  preparation. — Another  son,
William  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  18
June,  1839.  was  educated  by  a  private  tutor,  and
in  1861  engaged  in  banking  at  Auburn.  He  en-
teretl  the  volunteer  service  as  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  i;J8th  New  York  infantry,  and  was  afterward
matle  colonel  of  the  9th  New  York  heavy  artillery.
In  18fti  he  was  sent  on  a  special  mission  to  Louisi-
ana. Col.  Seward  was  engaged  at  Cold  Ilarlwr
and  the  other  Imttles  of  the  Wilderness  campaign.
He  afterward  commanded  at  Fort  Foote.  Mu.,  and
took  part  in  the  battle  of  Monocacy,  where  he  was
wounded,  but  retained  his  command.  He  was
commissioned  as  brigadier-general  on  13  Sept.,
1864,  was  commandant  for  some  time  at  Mar-
tinsburg,  Va.,  and  ri'signed  his  commission  on
1  June,  1865,  returning  to  the  banking  busi-
ness at  Auburn.  He  is  president  of  the  Au-
burn city  hospital,  and  an  officer  in  various
financial  and  charitable  a.ssociations. — William
Henry's  nephew,  (Clarence  Armstrong,  lawyer,  b.
in  New  York  city,  7  Oct.,  1828,  was  brought  up  as
a  memljer  of  his  uncle's  familv,  his  f)arents  having
died  when  he  was  a  child.  He  was  graduated  at
Hobart  in  1848,  studied  law,  and  Ix^gan  practice  in
Auburn  as  a  partner  of  Samuel  Blatchford.  whom
he  assiste<l  in  the  compilation  of  the  "  New  York
Civil  and  Criminal  Justice"  (Auburn,  1850).  In
1854  he  established  himself  in  New  York  citv.
He  was  judge-advocate-general  of  the  state  Jn
1856-'60.  A fter  the  attemptetl  assassination  of  Sec.
Seward  and  his  son,  Frederick  W.,  he  was  ap-
pointe<l  acting  assistant  secretary  of  state.  He  wjis
a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican  convention
of  1878.  and  a  presidential  elector  in  1880.  His
practice  has  especially  relatetl  to  railroads,  express
companies,  tuitents,  and  extraditions.  —  Another
nepliew  of  William  Henry,  tieor^e  Frederick,


diplomatist,  b.  in  Florida,  N.  Y..  8  Nov..  1840,  was
pre|)are4l  fur  (H)llege  at  Seward  institute  in  liis
native  village,  and  enterc*<l  Union  with  the  class  of
I860,  but  was  not  gra<luate<i.  In  1861  he  was  ap-
[H)inttHl  U.  S.  consul  at  Shanghai,  China.  In  the
exercise  of  extra-territorial  jurimliction  he  had
to  pass  judgment  on  river  pirates  claiming  to  be
Americans,  who  infeste<l  the  Yang-tsc-Kiang  dur-
ing the  Taeping  reU'llion,  and  by  his  energy  and
determination  (■hecke<l  the  evil.  In  18(»:)  he  was
made  consul-general,  and  intnxluced  reforms  in
the  consular  service  in  China.  He  returned  to  the
United  States  in  18WJ  to  urge  legislation  for  the
correction  of  abu.ses  in  the  American  judicial  estab-
lishment in  China,  which  he  was  only  able  to  effect
on  a  second  visit  to  the  Utiited  States  in  1869.  He
went  to  Siam  in  1868  to  arrange  a  difficulty  that
had  arisen  in  regard  to  the  inter|)retation  «if  the
treaty  with  that  country.  He  was  ap{Miinted  U.  S.
minister  to  Corea  in  1869,  but  at  his  suggestion  the
sending  of  a  mission  to  that  country  was  deferred,
and  he  did  not  enter  on  the  duties  of  the  office.
In  1873  he  landed  the  crews  of  two  American  ve«-
sels-of-war,  and,  as  dean  of  the  consular  corps,
summoned  a  force  of  voluntwrs  for  the  suppres-
sion of  a  riot  which  endangered  the  Eumpean
quarter.  On  7  Jan.,  1876,  he  was  commissioned
as  minister  to  China.  During  his  mission  he  was
called  home  to  answer  charges  against  his  adminis-
tration, in  congress,  and  was  completely  excul[)ated
after  a  long  investigation.  He  (iecline<l  to  under-
take the  task  of  negotiating  a  treaty  for  the  re-
striction of  Chinese  immigration,  and,  in  order  to
carry  out  the  views  that  prevailed  in  congress,  he
was  recalled,  and  James  11.  Angell  was  appointed
his  succes«)r  on  9  April,  1880.  After  his  return  to
the  United  States,  Mr.  Seward  became  a  broker  in
New  York  city.  He  was  president  of  the  North
China  branch  of  the  Hoval  Asiatic  society  in
1865-'6.  Besides  his  official  reports  and  diplomat-
ic correspondence,  he  has  written  a  lx)ok  on  "  Chi-
nese Immigration  in  its  Social  and  Fk-onomical  As-
pects," containing  arguments  against  anti-Chinese
legislation  (New  York.  1881).

SEWELL,  Jonatlian,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Cambridge,  Mass..  in  1766:  d.  in  yuewc,  Canada,
12  Nov.,  1839.  He  was  thes<^m  of  Jonathan  Sewall.
attorney-general  of  Massachusetts,  who,  about
1777,  adopted  the
English  form  of
the  name.  He  was
educated  in  the
grammar  -  school
at  Bristol,  Eng-
land, and  was  sent
to  New  Bruns-
wick in  1785  to
study  law  with
Ward  Chipman.
After  his  admis-  ■
sion  to  the  bar  he
practised  for  a
year  in  St.  John,
and  then  removed
to  Quebec,  where
he  soon  attained
a  high  profession-
al {K)sition.  In
1793  he  becjime
solicitor- general,
in  1795  attorney-
general  and  jiillge  of  the  c-ourt  of  Tice-admiralty,
and  from  1808  till  1838  chief  justice  of  Ix>wer
Canada.  The  question  of  btmndaries  lietween  the
Dominion  government  and  Ontario  was  settled  in


7/Jf/Z


474


SEWELL


SEYPPARTH


accordance  with  a  decision  renaerea  t)y
1818.  He  held  the  office  of  president  of  the  execu-
tive council  from  18()8  till  1829,  and  that  of  speaker
of  the  legislative  council  from  9  Jan.,  1809,  till  his
death.  He  went  to  England  in  1814  to  answer
complaints  that  were  made  against  the  rules  of
practice  that  he  enforced  in  his  court,  which  charges
wore  dismissed  by  the  privy  council.  While  there
Judge  Sewell  was  the  original  proposer  of  Canadian
federation,  publishing  a  "Plan  for  a  General  Federal
Union  of  the  British  Provinces  in  North  America"
(London,  1815).  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  by  Harvard  in  1832.  He  was  the  author  of
an  "  Essay  on  the  Judicial  History  of  France  so  far
as  it  relates  to  the  Law  of  the  Province  of  Lower
Canada"  (Quebec,  1824). — His  son,  Edmund  Wil-
loiighby,  clergyman,  b.  in  Quel)ec,  Canada,  3  Sept.,
1800,  received  a  classical  education  in  Quebec  and
in  English  schools,  studied  for  clerical  orders,  and
was  ordained  a  priest  of  the  Church  of  England  on
27  Dec,  1827.  lie  was  incumbent  of  the  Church
of  the  Holy  Trinity  at  Quebec,  and  an  assistant
minister  of  the  cathedral  till  1868. — Jonathan's
grandson,  WHUam  Grant,  journalist,  b.  in  Que-
bec in  1829 :  d.  there,  8  Aug.,  1862,  was  educated
for  the  bar,  but  preferred  journalism,  and  in  1853
removed  to  New  York  citv  and  became  translator
and  law  reporter  for  the  "  Herald."  He  was  after-
ward connected  for  six  years  with  the  New  York
"Times,"  becoming  one  of  its  principal  editors.
Infirmity  of  health  compelled  hmi  to  pass  three
winters  in  the  West  Indies,  and,  while  there,  he
studied  the  results  of  emancipation,  which  he  re-
viewed dispassionately  in  "The  Ordeal  of  Free
Labor  in  the  West  Indies"  (New  York,  1861).

SEWELL,  William  Joyce,  senator,  b.  in  Cas-
tlebar,  Ireland,  6  Dec,  1835.  He  was  left  an  or-
phan, came  to  the  United  States  in  1851,  was  for
a  time  employed  in  mercantile  business  in  New
York  city,  made  several  voyages  as  a  sailor  on  mer-
chant vessels,  afterward  engaged  in  business  in
Chicago,  111.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,
being  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  country,  he  entered
the  army  as  a  captain  in  the  5th  New  Jersey  regi-
ment, lie  rose  to  be  colonel  in  October,  1862,  and
commanded  a  brigade  at  Chancellorsville,  where  he
led  a  brilliant  charge  and  was  badly  wounded.  He
was  wounded  also  at  Gettysburg,  and  served  cred-
itably on  other  battle-fields.  On  13  March,  1865,
he  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers for  bravery  at  Chancellorsville,  and  that  of
major-general  for  his  services  during  the  war.  He
served  for  nine  years  in  the  New  Jersey  senate,  of
which  he  was  president  for  three  years.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Republican  national  conventions  of
1876, 1880. 1884,  and  1888.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  sen-
ate on  4  March,  1881,  and  served  till  3  March,  1887.
SEYBERT,  Adam,  chemist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  16  May,  1773 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  2  May,  1825.
He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1793,  and  then  spent
some  time  at  the  ficole  des  mines  in  Paris,  also
studying  at  the  universities  of  London,  Edinburgh,
and  Gottingen.  On  his  return  he  settled  in  Phila-
delphia, and,  acquiring  a  collection  of  minerals,
devoted  his  attention  specially  to  the  practice  and
study  of  chemistry  and  mineralogy.  In  1805  he
was  called  on  by  the  elder  Silliman  to  name  the
few  specimens  that  at  that  time  constituted  the
collection  belonging  to  Yale.  Dr.  Seybert  was
elected  as  a  Democrat  to  congress,  and  served  from
27  Nov.,  1809,  till  2  March,  1815,  and  again  from
1  Dec,  1817,  till  3  Dec,  1819.  He  was  chosen  a
member  of  the  American  philosophical  society  in
1797,  and  contributed  his  papers  on  "  Experiments


and  Observations  on  Land  and  Sea  Air"  and  "On
the  Atmosphere  of  Marshes"  to  its  transactions
during  that  year.  His  publication  of  "The  Statis-
tical Annals  of  the  United  States  from  1789  till
1818  "(Philadelphia,  1818)  was  reviewed  by  Sydney
Smith  in  the  "  Edinburgh  Review "  for  January,
1821.  In  this  article  occurs  the  oft-quoted  ques-
tion, "  Who  reads  an  American  bookf"  He  be-
queathed $1,000  for  educating  the  deaf  and  dumb,
and  $500  for  the  Philadelphia  orphan  asylum. —
His  son,  Henry  (1802-1883),  was  also  educated  at
the  Ecole  des  mines,  and  achieved  considerable  rep-
utation by  his  analyses  of  American  minerals.
Shortly  after  the  death  of  his  father  his  attention
became  diverted  from  science.

SEYFFARTH,  Gustavns,  clergyman,  b.  in
Ubigau,  Saxony,  13  July,  1796;  d.  m  New  York
city,  17  Nov.,  1885.  He  studied  in  the  gymnasium
at  Leipsic,  afterward  in  the  university,  and  in  1820
in  Paris  under  the  direction  of  Champollion,  the
celebrated  French  Egyptologist.  He  became  well
known  as  a  scientist  and  archaeologist  and  a  de-
cipherer of  Egyptian  hieroglyphics.  In  1823  he
published  his  "Clavis  Hieroglyphicum  Eg>'ptia-
corura."  In  1825-'55  he  was  professor  of  Oriental
archaeology  in  the  University  of  Leipsic.  during
which  time  he  published  the  most  important  of  his
numerous  scientific  and  archa?ologicaI  works.  In
1855  he  emigrated  to  the  United  States,  and  was
elected  professor  of  archa-ology  and  exegesis  in
Concordia  Lutheran  theological  seminary.  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  where  he  remained  until  1871. .  From  this
date  until  his  death  he  resided  in  New  York  in
retirement.  In  1873  he  celebrated  the  fiftieth  an-
niversary of  his  doctorate,  and  he  received  from
the  University  of  Leipsic  an  annual  pension,  in
recognition  of  original  investigations  in  archae-
ology. He  claims  to  have  been  the  first  to  decipher
the  hieroglyphics  on  the  celebrated  Rosetta  stone;
and  he  translated  numerous  Egyptian  manuscripts
in  the  collection  of  the  New  York  historical  so-
ciety, and  the  characters  on  the  obelisk  in  Central
park.  New  York.  He  published  numerous  treatises,
both  in  Germany  ana  in  the  United  States,  many
of  which  have  been  translated  into  different  lan-
guages. Among  his  published  works  are  "  De
Sonis  literarum  gnecarum  tum  genuinis  tum
adoptivis  libri  duo  "  (Leipsic,  1823) ;  "  Rudimenta
hieroglyphica,  ace  explicationes,  xvii.  speciminum
hieroglyphicum  "  (1826);  "  Beitrfige  zur  Kenntniss
der  Literatur,  Kunst,  Mythologie  und  Geschichte
des  alten  Aegyptens "  (1826) ;  "  Brevis  Defensio
hieroglyphices  inventaj  a  Fr.  Aug.  Spohn  et  G.
Syfarth  (1827) ;  "  Replique  aux  objections  de
Mon.  Champollion  contre  le  meme  systeme"
(1827) ; "  Systema  Astronomiae  ^gyptiaceaj "  (1833);
"Chronologia  Sacra:  eine  Untersuchung  tlber
das  Geburtsjahr  Christi "  (1846) ;  "  Theologische
Schriften  der  alten  Aegypter,  nach  dem  Turiner
Papyrus,  zum  ersten  Male  tibersetzt "  (Gotha,  1855) ;
"Grammatica  jEgyptiacae:  erste  Abtheilung  zur
Uebersetzung  alt-a>gvptischen  Literatur-Werken,
nebst  Geschichte  des  Hieroglyphisches  SchlQssels"
(1855);  "Summary  of  Recent  Discoveries  in  Bibli-
cal Chronology,  iJniversal  History,  and  Biblical
Archajology,  with  Special  Refprence  to  Dr.  Abbott's
Egyptian  JViuseum,  together  with  a  Translation  of
the'  First  Sacred  Books  of  the  Ancient  Egyptians  "
(New  York,  1857) ;  "  Die  wahre  Zeitrechnung  des
alten  Testaments,  nebst  einer  Zeittafel  zum  neuen
Testamente  "  (St.  Louis,  Mo.,  1858) :  "  An  Astro-
nomical Inscription  concerning  the  Year  22,  B.  C."
(1860);  "  Amerikanischer  Kalendermann  "  (1869);
"  Chronologia  Yeterum  "  (1871) ;  and  "  Die  Allge-
meinheit  der  SUndfluth."


8EYPFERT


SKYMOUR


476


SEYFFERT,  Anton,  Moravian  tniHsionary,  b.
in  Kriilicli,  (iortnaii  liohoniiH,  15  Auf;..  1712;  «1.  in
Zoist,  Holland.  lU  Juno,  \7M.  lU-  unitfil  with  the
Moravians  in  172-S.  In  1734  he  wa«  writ  t<>  (Icor^iH
with  thu  Unit  colony  of  Momvianii,  U>  establish  a
mission  among  tho  Croek  and  ChorokiH'  Indiansi.
but,  owing  to  hostilitioM  Ittrtwwn  Florida  and  Ueor-
gia.  the  ont«Tpris<<  was  al>andone<i.  In  1740  ho  n»-
movtHl  to  IVnnsylvania,  whore  he  served  in  the
chun-h  schools  and  in  the  ministry  till  April,  1745,
when  he  returne«l  to  KuroiHS.

SEYM<irR,  Charles  B.,  ediU)r,  b.  in  I»ndon,
Kngland.  in  1829 ;  d.  in  Now  York  city,  2  May,
180U.  Ho  came  to  New  York  in  1849,  and  l)ecame
oonmvto«l  with  the  "  Times,"  serving  as  musi-
cal and  dramatic  editor  until  his  death.  From
January  to  July.  18(15.  he  was  ass<HMati><l  with
The«xlore  Ilagen  in  editing  the  New  York  "  Weeklv
Review."  He  was  eorresiwndent  for  the  " Times'*
at  the  Paris  cxixjsilion  of  1807,  where  his  services
as  one  of  the  American  commission  procured  him
a  me«lal  fn)m  the  emperor.  He  was  the  author  of
"SIf-Maile  Men"  (New  York,  IHTiH).

SEYMOIR.  iicorge  Franklin,  P.  K.  bishop,
b.  in  New  York  city.  5  Jan.,  1829.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1850,  at  the  head  of  his  cltiss,
and  at  the  Kpiscopal  general  theological  seminary

in  New  York  in

1854.  He  was  or-
daine<I  deacon  in
New  York  city,
17  Dec.,  1854,  by
Bishop  Horatio
Potter,  and  priest
in  Greenburg
(Dobb's  Ferrv),
N.  Y..  28  .Sept.,

1855.  by  the  same
bishop.  His  first
field  of  labor
was  as  mission-
aryat  Annandale,
Dutchess  county,
N.  Y..  from  Janu-
ary. 1855,tiIlJulv.
1861.  As  f)art  of
the  result  of  his
activity  a  church

was  built,  and  a  training  institution  for  candidates
for  ortlers  was  founded.  The  latter  was  chartered
by  the  legislature  of  New  York,  under  the  title  of
St.  Stephen's  college,  and  Mr.  Seymour  was  chosen
to  be  first  wanlen.  He  l)ecame  in  November,  1801.
rector  of  St.  Mary's  church,  Manhattanville.  New
York  city,  in  October,  1802.  of  Christ  church.  Hud-
son, N.  Y.,  and  a  year  later  of  St.  John's  church,
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In  1865  he  was  electeil  professor
of  ecclesiastical  historv  in  the  General  theological
seminar)',  and  in  1875  fio  became  dean  of  the  same
institution,  in  conjunction  with  his  professorship.
During  his  connecticm  with  the  seminary  he  was
invited  to  rectorships  of  churches  in  Chicago,  San
Francisco,  and  Trov,  N.  Y..  but  declined,  lie  was
also  active  in  securing  #80.000  for  new  chapel  and
library  buildings,  and  earnestly  opposed  the  re-
moval of  the  seminary  from  the  city  into  the  coun-
try. From  18«7  till  1879  he  serveil  as  chaplain  to
the  House  of  mercy.  New  York,  without  salary.
He  was  al:so  superintendent  of  the  Society  for  pro-
moting religion  and  learning  in  the  state  of  New
York  until  1878.  He  nt-^'ived  the  decree  of  S.  T.  I),
from  Racine  in  1867,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Co-
lumbia in  1878.  Dr.  Seymour  was  elected  in  1874
bishop  of  Illinois  in  succession  to  Bishop  White-
house  ;  but  the  house  of  deputies,  in  general  con-


(/.J^^Y?nrZ4^


I  vent  ion  then  aMM>mbl«>d,  owing,  it  is  underxtooil,  to
strong  feeling  against  ritualism  and  its  ramifica-

i  tions,  refused  to  confirm  tho  ehn-tion.  lie  waa
unanimously  chosen  bishop  of  the  new  diocctfe  of
Springfield.' III.,  19  IKh.,  1877.  This  election  was
confirmed  bv  the  standing  committc««  and  the
bisho|)s.  but  l)r.  Seymour  dm-lineil  in  April,  1878.
At  the  diocesan  convention  in  May,  18(8.  he  was
again  unanimouslv  choM-n  bishop,  and  ho  felt  con-
strained to  withtlraw  his  letter  and  accent  the
bishoiiric.  He  was  coiisecrate«l  in  Trinity  church.
New  York,  11  June,  1878.  The  Kpisco[>al  church
under  his  care  has  largely  increiLstnl,  and  is  well
supplied  with  schools  and  other  agencies  for
promoting  the  spread  of  the  go8|iel.  He  attended
the  third  Pan-Anglican  council  held  at  Ijaniljeth
palace,  London,  in  the  first  week  i)f  July,  1888,
and  during  the  conference  mailc  an  ad<lress  that
was  much  admired.  Bishop  Seymour  has  contrib-
uted freely  to  church  literature  in  annual  addresses
to  his  convention,  and  he  has  advocated  the
change  of  the  name  Protestant  Kpisc-opal  church
to  "Church  of  the  United  States."  His  latest
work  is  "  Modern  Romanism  not  Catholicity  "  (Mil-
waukee. Wis.,  1888).

SEYMOUR,  Horatio,  statesman,  b.  in  Pompey
Hill,  Onondaga  co..  N.  Y.,  31  May,  1810;  d.  in
UticA,  N.  Y'.,  12  Feb..  1886.  He  attende<i  school
in  his  native  village  until  he  was  ten  years  of  age,
when  he  was  sent  to  Oxfonl  academy.  In  the
spring  of  1824  he  entered  Geneva  academy  (now
Iiobart  college),  and  remained  there  a  year,  going
thence  to  Partridge's  military  school  at  Middle-
town,  Conn.  He  studied  law  with  Greene  C.  Bron-
son  and  Samuel  Beardsley,  and  was  mlmittexl  to
the  bar  in  1832,  but  he  never  practise*!  his  profes-
sion, the  care  of  the  property  he  had  inherited  tak-
ing up  much  of  his  time.  He  lx>came  military
secretary  of  Gov.  William  L.  Marcy  in  18^^,  anil
held  the  place  until  1839.  In  1841  he  was  elected
to  the  state  assembly  as  a  DemcK-rat,  and  in  1842
was  electetl  mavor  of  Utica  bv  a  majority  of  130
over  Spencer  Kellogg,  the  Whig  candi<late.  In
184^i  he  was  renominate<l.  but  was  l)eaten  by
Frederick  Hollister  by  sixteen  votes.  In  the  au-
tumn of  the  same  year  he  was  elected  again  to
the  assembly,  and  in  the  session  that  began  in
1844  he  distinguished  himself  among  men  like
John  A.  Dix,  Sanford  E.  Church,  and  Michael
Hoffman.  He  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on
canals,  and  presented  an  elaborate  report,  which
was  the  basis  of  the  canal  policy  of  the  state  for
manv  years.  He  advocated  the  employment  of  the
surplus  revenue  to  enlarge  the  liK-ks  of  the  Erie
canal  and  proceed  with  the  construction  of  the
Black  river  and  Genesee  valley  canals,  and  he
showed  thorough  confidence  in  the  development  of
trade  with  the  west.  He  was  once  more  elected  to
the  assembly  in  the  autumn  of  1844,  and  was
chosen  speaker  in  the  legislature  of  1845.  In  1850
he  became  the  candidate  of  the  Democratic  jwirty
for  governor,  as  a  man  acceptable  to  all  its  fm-tions ;
but  ne  was  defeated  by  the  Whig  candidate.  Wash-
ington Hunt,  by  a  majority  of  262,  though  San-
ford E.  Church,  his  ass<H'iate  on  the  Democratic
ticket,  was  electeii  lieutenant-governor.  In  1852
he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Democratic  national  con-
vention at  lialtimore.  and  did  all  in  his  ^»ower  to
have  the  vote  of  the  New  Y'ork  delegation  cast
wholly  for  William  L.  Marcv,  but  faile«l.  The
same  year  he  was  again  nominatt'd  as  the  Demo-
cratic'candidate  for  governor,  and  was  electwl  by
a  majority  of  22.596  over  his  former  competitor,
Washington  Hunt.  During  his  term  there  was  a
strong  temperance  movement  in  the  state,  and  the


476


SEYMOUR


SEYMOUR


Ju>^-^rii,/i2  y'-ok^.


legislature  passed  a  prohibitory  law,  which  Gov,
Seymour  vetoed,  declaring  its  provisions  to  be  un-
constitutional, and  denying  its  good  policy.  In
1854  he  was  renominated  for  tne  governorship,
and  received  156,495  votes,  to  156,804  cast  for
Myron  II.  Clark,  the  Whig  and  temperance  candi-
date, 122,282  for  Daniel  Ullnian,  the  "  Know-Noth-
ing  "  candidate,  and  33,500  for  Greene  C.  Bron-
son,  the  candidate  of  the  *'  Hard-shell "  Democrats.

The  vetoed  law
was  again  passed
by  the  legislature,
approved  by  Gov.
Clark,  and  after-
ward declared  un-
constitutional by
the  court  of  ap-
neals.  In  1856
Mr.  Seymour  was
a  delegate  to  the
Democratic  na-
tional convention
at  Cincinnati,  and
he  supported  the
Democratic  can-
didates, Buchan-
an and  Breckin-
ridge, actively  in
the  presidential
canvass  of  that
year.  In  a  speech
delivered  at  Springfield,  Mass.,  4  July,  1856,  he  set
forth  the  political  principles  that  he  had  previous-
ly followed  and  afterward  adhered  to.  It  gives
the  key  to  his  whole  political  career.  He  argued
against  centralization  and  for  local  authority :
"That  government  is  most  wise  which  is  in  the
hands  of  those  best  informed  about  the  particular
questions  on  which  they  legislate,  most  economical
and  honest  when  controlled  by  those  most  interest-
ed in  preserving  frugality  and  virtue,  most  strong
when  it  only  exercises  authority  which  is  beneficial
to  the  governed."  He  argued  against  the  attempt
to  reform  by  legislative  restraint,  instancing  a
prison  as  a  type  of  society  perfectly  regulated  and
yet  vicious.  He  argued  for  a  liberal  policy  in  re-
gard to  immigration,  saying  that  it  was  bringing
acquisitions  of  power,  peacefully  and  easily,  such
as  no  conqueror  had  ever  won  in  war:  but  he  did
not  deny  the  right  of  the  people  of  this  country  to
regulate  immigration  or  even  to  forbid  it  altogether,
which  he  asserted  many  years  afterward  in  regard
to  the  importation  of  Chinese.  He  argued  that
the  growth  of  the  north  was  so  much  more  rapid
than  that  of  the  south  that  political  supremacy
had  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  free  states.  He
argued  for  the  right  of  the  people  of  the  territories
to  settle  the  slavery  question  for  themselves,  as-
suming that  under  such  a  policy  there  would  be  a
rapid  increase  of  free  states.

In  1857  Mr.  Seymour  received  from  President
Buchanan  the  ofifer  of  a  first-class  foreign  mis-
sion, but  declined  it ;  and  he  took  no  prominent
Eart  in  politics  again  until  the  secession  movement
egan.  He  was  a  member  of  the  committee  on
resolutions  at  the  convention  held  in  Tweddle  hall,
Albany,  31  Jan.,  1861,  after  the  secession  of  six
states,  to  consider  the  feasibility  of  compromise
measures;  and  he  delivered  a  speech  designed
raamly  to  show  the  peculiar  dangers  of  civil  war.
When  the  war  began  in  1861,  Mr.  Seymour  was  in
Madison,  Wis.,  and  the  Democratic  members  of  the
legislature,  then  in  session,  called  him  into  con-
sultation as  to  the  proper  course  of  political  action.
He  counselled  the  simple  duty  of  loyalty,  to  obey


the laws,  and maintain  the  national  authority,
and  he  was  active  in  raising  one  of  the  first  com-

Eanies  of  Wisconsin  volunteers.  When  he  returned
ome  in  the  autumn  he  spoke  at  a  Democratic
ratification  meeting  held  in  Utica,  28  Oct.,  1861,
saying :  "  In  common  with  the  majority  of  the
American  people,  I  deplored  the  election  of  Mr.
Lincoln  as  a  great  calamity;  yet  he  was  chosen  in
a  constitutional  manner,  and  we.wish,as  a  defeated
organization,  to  show  our  lovalty  by  giving  him
a  just  and  generous  support.''  lie  was  an  active
member  of  the  committee  appointed  by  Gov.  Ed-
win D.  Morgan  to  raise  troops  in  OneiJla  county,
and  he  contributed  liberally  to  the  fund  for  the
volunteers.  In  the  following  winter  he  delivered
at  Albany  an  address  on  the  state  and  national
defences ;  at  a  meeting  of  representative  Demo-
crats, held  in  the  state  capital  in  the  disastrous
summer  of  1862,  he  introduced  a  resolution  that
"  we  were  bound  in  honor  and  patriotism  to  send
immediate  relief  to  our  brethren  in  the  field  " ;  and,
at  the  request  of  the  atljutant-gencral  of  the  state,
he  became  chairman  of  the  committee  to  take
charge  of  recruiting  in  his  own  neighborhood.
On  10  Sept.,  1862,  the  Democratic  state  convention
nominated  him  for  governor.  In  his  address  to
that  body,  accepting  the  nomination,  he  intimated
that  compromise  measures  might  have  prevented
the  war,  justified  the  maintenance  of  party  organi-
zation, criticised  the  spirit  of  congress  as  con-
trasted with  that  of  the  army  as  he  had  found  both
during  a  visit  to  the  national  capitol  and  the  camps,
and  argued  that  the  Republican  party  could  not,
in  the  nature  of  things,  save  the  nation.  After  a
canvass  in  which  he  asserted  on  all  occasions  the
right  of  criticising  the  administration  and  the
duty  of  sustaining  the  government,  he  was  elected,
defeating  Gen.  James  S.  Wadsworth  by  a  majority
of  10,752  votes.  Perhaps  the  fairest  statement  of
his  position  in  regard  to  the  war  at  that  period  is
to  be  found  in  the  following  passage  from  his  in-
augural message  of  7  Jan.,  1863 :  *'  The  assertion
that  this  war  was  the  unavoidable  result  of  slavery
is  not  only  erroneous,  but  it  has  led  to  a  disastrous
policy  in  its  prosecution.  The  opinion  that  slavery
must  be  abolished  to  restore  our  Union  creates  an
antagonism  between  the  free  and  the  slave  states
which  ought  not  to  exist.  If  it  is  true  that  slavery
must  be  abolished  by  the  force  of  the  Federal  gov-
ernment, that  the  south  must  be  held  in  military
subjection,  that  four  millions  of  negroes  must  for
many  years  be  under  the  direct  management  of  the
authorities  at  Washington  at  the  public  expense,
then,  indeed,  we  must  endure  the  waste  of  our
armies  in  the  field,  further  drains  upon  our  popu-
lation, and  still  greater  burdens  of  debt.  We  must
convert  our  government  into  a  military  despotism.
The  mischievous  opinion  that  in  this  contest  the
north  must  subjugate  and  destroy  the  south  to
save  our  Union  has  weakened  the  hopes  of  our
citizens  at  home  and  destroyed  confidence  in  our
success  abroad."  This  argument  against  the  prob-
ability of  success  along  the  path  that  finally  led
to  it  was  of  course  supplemented  by  an  unequivocal
declaration  in  favor  of  the  restoration  of  the  Union
and  the  supremacy  of  thp  constitutioiL  On  23
March,  1863,  President  Lincoln  wrote  to  Gov.
Seymour  a  letter  seeming  to  suggest  a  personal

E ledge  of  co-operation,  and  the  governor  sent  his
rother  to  Washington  to  convey  assurances  of
loyal  support,  but  along  with  them  a  protest
against  the  policy  of  arbitrary  arrests.  On  13
April,  1863,  Gov.  Seymour  sent  to  the  legislature
a  message  suggesting  a  constitutional  amendment
as  a  necessary  preliminary  to  a  law  allowing  sol-


SEYMOITR


SEYMOUR


477


diere  in  the  Add  to  vote:  and  on  24  April  he
vetowl  a  bill  "  to  swuri'  the  ••lootive  franenino  to
qitnliflcHl  voters  of  the  army  niul  imvy  of  the  state
of  New  York."  on  the  f^round  timl  It  was  uneon-
stitiitional.  The  amendment  that  he  hiul  recom-
mended was  afterwanl  adopted.  In  everything
pertiiinin);  to  the  raising;  of  tr(M>ps  (Jov.  Seymour's
ndminislrHtion  showwl  conspiiuous  enertjy  and
abilitv,  but  es|HK.Mally  in  the  elTorl  to  meet  I^ee's
inviusjon  of  the  north  in  the  early  summer  of  IWKJ.
On  15  June  the  s«H'retary  of  war  teje^rniphe*!  to
Uov.  Seymour  asking  for  help,  and  within  thnn?
days  ISiuou  state  militia,  "  well  iHpiipiM'<l  and  in
ffood  spirits,"  were  on  their  way  to  llarrisburg.
The  pood-will  for  such  an  achievement  was  not
rare  during  the  war,  but  it  was  not  often  joine<l
with  the  necessary  executive  ability,  and  Presi-
dent Lincoln  and  Sec.  Stanton  lM)th  si'iit  their
thanks  to  (iov.  Sevmour  for  his  promptitude.  On
2  Julv.  Ciov.  ('urtln,  of  Pcnnsvlvania,  telegraphed
for  aid.  and  on  the  two  following  days  troops
were  sent  to  his  assistance.

During  the  absence  of  the  New  York  militia
the  draft  riotj*  began.  They  hml  their  pretext,
if  not  their  origin,  in  two  grievances,  which  were
afterward  abolished.  One  was  the  commutation
clause  in  the  draft  law,  which  provideil  that  any
drafted  man  might  obtain  exemption  bv  paying
the  government  three  hundred  dollars.  The  poor
reganled  this  as  a  fraud  uiKin  them  in  the  desper-
ate lottery  of  life  and  death.  The  other  was  a
discrimination  against  New  York  state,  and  espe-
cially New  York  city,  in  the  allotment  of  quotas.
Gov.  Seymour  had  been  anxious  to  have  this  in-
justice corrected,  and  to  have  the  draft  postponed ;
but  it  Ix'gan  in  the  metropfilis  on  Saturuay,  11
July.  186:3.  On  Sunday  the  names  of  those  drawn
were  published,  and  on  Monday  the  rioting  be-
gan. The  rioters  stopped  at  no  outrage,  not  even
the  munler  of  the  innocent  and  helpless.  That
night  the  governor  reached  the  city,  and  the  next
day  he  issued  two  proclamations,  the  first  calling
upon  all  citizens  to  retire  to  their  homes  and  pre-
serve the  iH>ace.  and  the  second  declaring  the  citv
in  a  state  of  insurrection.  The  same  day  he  took
measuri's  for  enrolling  volunteers  and  gathering
all  available  troops.  On  Tuesday  he  also  sjH)ke  to
a  mob  in  front  of  the  city-hall.  Then,  and  ever
afterward,  his  impromptu  speech  was  the  subject
of  bitter  criticism.  It  seems  clear,  from  vari-
ous conflicting  and  imperfect  reports  of  it,  that  he
promised  the  crowd  that  if  they  had  grievances
they  would  lie  redressed,  declared  himself  their
friend,  and  urged  the  necessity  of  ol)e«lience  to
law  and  the  restoration  of  order.  The  design  of
the  sptH'ch  was  twofold — to  (*ersuade  the  crowd  to
disperse,  and,  in  any  event,  to  eain  time  for  the
concentration  of  the  forces  within  reach  to  sup-
press the  riot.  Under  the  direction  of  Gen.  John
E.  Wool,  with  but  slight  aid  from  the  National
forces,  onler  was  restored  within  forty-eight  hours.
The  rioting  la>*led  from  Monday  afternoon  until
Thursday  evening,  cost  about  a  thousand  lives,
and  inv«)lved  the  destruction  of  prowrty  estimatwl
at  from  half  a  million  to  threes  million  dollars  in
value.  Shortly  afterwanl  Gov.  Seymour  wrote  to
President  Lincoln,  pointing  out  the  injustice  done
in  the  enrolment,  and  askinc:  to  have  the  draft
8topiK>d.  in  order  that  New  York  might  fill  her
quota  with  volunteers.  The  president  conce«led
tnat  there  was  an  apparent  unfainu'ss  in  the  en-
rolment, but  rt'fuseil  to  stop  the  draft.  A  com-
mission. ap|)ointed  by  the  war  department  to  in-
vestigate the  matter,  declarwl  that  the  enrolment
under  the  act  of  8  March,  IHOH,  was  imperfect,  er-


roneous, and  excessive,  especiallv  with  reference  tu
the  cities  of  New  York  and  llrooklyn.  On  10
April,  1N<;4,  a  Republican  legislature  ita.sse<l  a  reso-
lution thanking  (f«»v.  .Seymour  for  his  "  prr>mpt
and  efllcient  efforts"  in  |Miinting  out  the  errom
of  the  enrolment  and  pnicuring  their  correction,
lie  t<M)k  an  active  fuirt  in  the  state  canvass  of
1H(W,  making  many  sjHH*«h<'s  in  defence  of  his  own
reconl  and  the  principles  of  his  parly,  and  altju.-k-
ing  the  |)olicy  of  the  lulministration ;  but  in  the
election  the  state  gave  a  Hepublican  majoritv  of
about  29.000.  On  22  April,  IHW,  the  governor
sent  to  the  legislature  a  message  urging  the  i>ay-
mcnt  of  interest  on  the  state  debt  in  gold ;  and  this
action  was  construed  by  jtolitical  op{N>nents  as  a
covert  attack  on  the  national  credit.  On  3  Aug.,
ISM,  the  Democratic  national  convention  met  in
Chicago,  and  Gov.  Seymour  presidwl,  refusing  to
Im)  a  candidate  for  the  presidential  mmiination.
But  he  became  a  candidate  for  the  governorship
that  year,  and  was  defeateil  by  Reuben  E.  Kenton,
Republican,  by  a  majority  of  8,2JW.

After  the  close  of  the  war  Mr.  Seymour  re-
mained a  leader  in  politics.  lie  made  s[»eeches  in
the  state  canvasses  of  1865,  l>HHi.  and  1867,  op[)08-
ing  strongly  the  reconstruction  |X)licy  of  the  Re-
piiblican  party,  and  criticising  sharply  its  finan-
cial methods.  He  presided  over  the  state. conven-
tions of  his  ftarty,  3  Oct.,  1867, and  11  March,  1868,
and  over  the  National  convention  that  met  in  New
York  city,  4  July,  1868.  In  spite  of  previous  dec-
larations that  be  would  not  be  a  candidate  before


that  body,  and  in  spite  of  his  protestations  during
its  proceedings,  the  convention  nominated  him  for
the  presidency,  and  he  allowed  himself,  against
his  better  judgment,  to  be  over|)ersuaded  into  ac-
cepting the  nomination.  In  the  election  of  3  Nov.,
1868.  he  carried  the  states  of  Delaware.  Georgia,
Kentucky,  Louisiana,  Maryland.  New  Jersey,  New
York,  and  Oregon:  Mississippi,  Virginia,  and
Texas  did  not  vote:  and  the  rest  of  the  states
voted  for  Gen.  Grant,  the  Republican  candidate.
The  electoral  vote  stood  214  for  Grant  and  80  for
Seymour;  the  popular  vote,  3,015.071  for  Grant
and  2,709.213  for  Seymour.  This  defeat  virtually
closed  Mr.  Seymour's  (wlitical  career,  for.  though
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  presidency  regu-
larly every  four  years,  offertnl  the  senatorsh'ip.  and
nominate<l  for  the  governorship,  he  ri'fnsed  steatlily
to  have  anything  more  to  do  with  public  oflice.
The  remote  origin  of  his  last  illness  was  a  sun-
stroke, which  he  suffered  in  1876  while  overseeing
the  repairing  of  the  romls  in  Deerfleld.  near  Utica,
where  he  had  settlwl  in  1864.  See  the  accom-
panying view  of  his  I'esidence  at  Deerfield  on  the
left  Iwink  of  the  Mohawk  river.  Mr.  Seymour
was  of  fair  stature,  lithelv  and  gracefully' built,
and  hatl  a  reflneil  face,  ligliteil  up  by  dark,  glow-
ing eyes.  In  stK'ial  intercourse  he  was  simple  in
manner  and  considerate  ui  spirit. As  an  orator


478


SEYMOUR


SEYMOUR


he  was  easy,  agreeable,  and  powerful,  plausible
and  candid  in  ordinary  aro^ument,  and  yet  rising
often  into  true  eloquence.  lie  made  many  speeches
on  other  than  political  occasions;  he  loveci  farm-
ing, and  often  delivered  addresses  at  agricultural
fatherings;  he  was  a  member  of  the  rrotestant
Ipiscopal  church,  and  frequently  took  part  in  its
conventions  as  a  lay  delegate;  he  was  a  member  of
the  commission  for  the  state  survey,  and  was  in
an  especial  way  the  champion  of  the  canal  sys-
tem. It  may  be  said  broadly  that  he  was  master
of  everything  connected  with  the  history,  topog-
raphy, and  institutions  of  New  York.  Mr.  Sey-
mour married,  31  Mav,  1835,  Mary  Bleecker,  of
Albany,  who  survived  him  only  twenty  days.
Thev  had  no  children.

StlYMOUR,  Moses,  soldier,  b.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  23  July,  1742;  d.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  17
Sept.,  1826.  He  was  fifth  in  descent  from  Richard,
the  ancestor  of  all  of  his  name  in  the  United
States,  who  settled  in  Hartford  in  1635.  Richard
is  supposed  to  be  the  son  of  Chaplain  Richard  of
Popham's  expedition,  who  was  the  first  to  preatjh
the  gospel  to  the  Indians  in  this  country.  Moses
removed  to  Litchfield  in  early  life,  became  cap-
tain of  a  troop  of  horse  in  the  17th  Connecticut
militia  regiment,  and  in  1776  was  given  the  same
rank  in  the  5th  cavalry,  with  which  he  served  in  re-

Selling  Tryon's  invasion  in  1777,  and  at  the  surren-
er  of  Burgoyne.  He  also  did  good  service  as  com-
missary of  supplies  at  Litchfield,  which  was  then  a
depot  for  military  stores.  In  1783  he  retired  with
the  rank  of  major.  Maj.  Seymour  held  the  office
of  town-clerk  for  thirty-seven  years  consecutively
from  1789  till  his  death,  was  elected  annually  to
the  legislature  from  1795  till  1811,  and  was  active
in  the  affairs  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.
He  was  greatly  instrumental  in  securing  the  pro-
ceeds of  the  sale  of  the  Western  Reserve  for  the
promotion  of  common-school  education,  and  is  said
to  have  originated  the  plan.  He  is  one  of  the  fig-
ures in  Col.  Trumbull's  painting  of  the  surrender  of
IJurgovne. — Moses's  son,  Horatio,  senator,  b.  in
Litchfield,  Conn.,  31  May,  1778;  d.  in  Middlebury,
Vt.,  21  Nov.,  1857,  was  grmluated  at  Yale  in  1797,
studied  law  at  Litchfield  law-school,  and  removed
in  October,  1799,  to  Middlebury,  Vt.,  where  he  con-
tinued his  studies  with  Daniel  Chipman,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1800.  He  was  a  member  of  the
state  council  from  1809  till  1817,  and  in  October,
1820,  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Clay  Demo-
crat, serving  two  terms,  from  1821  till  1833.  While
in  the  senate  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on
agriculture.  At  the  expiration  of  his  second  term
he  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  was
the  Whig  candidate  for  governor  of  the  state  in
1836.  but  was  defeated  by  Silas  H.  Jennison.  In
October,  1847,  he  was  appointed  by  the  legislature
judge  of  probate  for  the  district  of  Addison.  Mr.
Seymour  had  acquired  a  comf)etency.  but  lost  it,
chiefly  through  becoming  surety  for  others.  Yale
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL,  D.  in  1847. — Another
son,  Henry,  merchant,  b.  in  Litchfield.  Conn..  30
May,  1780 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  26  Aug.,  1837,  settled
as  a  merchant  in  Poinpey,  Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,
accumulated  a  fortune,  and  afterward  removed  to
Utica.  He  served  in  both  branches  of  the  New
York  legislature,  and  was  mayor  of  Utica,  canal
commissioner,  and  president  of  the  Farmers'  loan
and  trust  company.— Henry's  son,  Horatio,  gov-
ernor of  New  York,  is  noticed  elsewhere. — Moses's
grandson,  Ori&ren  Storrs,  jurist,  b.  in  Litch-
field, Conn.,  9  Feb.,  1804;  d.  there,  12  Aug.,  1881,
was  the  son  of  Ozias  Seymour,  who  was  for
many  years  sheriff  of  Litchfield  county. He  was


placed  in  a  mercantile  house  in  New  York  at  the
age  of  fourteen,  but  illness  forced  him  to  return
home,  and  he  then  entered  Yale.  An  affection  of
the  eyes  compelled  him  to  learn  his  lessons  by  hear-
ing them  read  to  him,  and  the  training  that  this
gave  to  his  memory  had  much  influence  on  his
subsequent  career.  He  was  graduated  in  1824,
read  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1826,  and  en-
gaged in  active  practice.  He  was  countv  clerk  in
1836-'44,  served  in  the  legislature  in  1842,  1849,
and  1850,  and  in  the  last  year  was  speaker  of  the
house.  In  the  same  year  he  was  chosen  to  congress
as  a  Democrat,  serving  two  terms.  He  was  one  of
the  small  number  of  anti  -  Nebraska  Democrats
whose  oiiposition  nearly  defeated  the  Kansas-Ne-
braska bill,  but  in  the  contest  that  followed  he
adhered  to  the  Democratic  party.  In  1855  he  be-
came a  judge  of  the  state  superior  court,  but  in
1863  the  Republican  legislature  refused  tore-elect
him  and  his  Democratic  colleague,  through  fear
that  they  might  interfere  with  the  National  draft
by  writs  of  habeas  corpus,  though  they  had  been
War  Democrats.  In  1864  he  was  an  unsuccessful
candidate  for  governor,  and  in  1870  a  legislature
whose  majority  was  Republican  chose  him  to  the
bench  of  the  state  supreme  court.  In  1873  he
succeeded  to  the  chief  justiceship,  and  in  1874,  by
constitutional  limitation  of  age,  he  retired.  After
that  he  was  employed  chiefly  as  committee  and
arbitrator  in  the  trial  of  causes.  In  one  county
the  majority  of  the  cases  on  the  superior  court
docket  were  referred  to  him  by  agreement  for  de-
cision. In  1876  he  was  chairman  of  the  commis-
sion that  settled  the  long-standing  boundary  dis-
pute between  Connecticut  and  New  York,  and  in
1878  he  was  at  the  head  of  the  one  that  prepared
the  new  state  practice  act.  From  1876  till  his
death  he  delivered  an  annual  course  of  lectures
at  Yale  law -school.  He  was  elected  to  oflSce
for  the  last  time  in  1881,  when  he  was  again  a
member  of  the  legislature.  Judge  Seymour  was  an
active  member  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church
and  a  delegate  to  every  general  convention  from
1868  till  his  death.  Trinity  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1866,  and  Yale  in  1873.  A  memorial
of  him  was  printed  privately  (Hartford.  1882). —
Origen  Storrs's  son,  Edward  Woodrnff,  congress-
man, b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  30  Aug.,  1832,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1853,  studied  law,  and  has
attained  reputation  at  the  bar.  He  served  in  the
lower  house  of  the  Connecticut  legislature  four
times  between  1859  and  1871,  was  in  the  senate  in
1876,  and  in  1882  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  serving  two  terms.  —  Origen  Storrs's
daughter-in-law,  Mary  Harrison,  author,  b.  in
Oxford,  Conn.,  7  Sept.,  1835,  is  the  wife  of  Rev.
Storrs  O.  Seymour,  of  Hartford,  Conn.  She  was
educated  in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  and  Baltimore,  Md.,
and,  besides  many  contributions  to  periodicals,
chiefly  for  children,  has  published  "  Mollie's
Christmas  Stocking  "  (New  York,  1865) ;  "  Sun-
shine and  Starlight "  (Boston,  18(58 ;  London,
1879);  "Posv  Vinton's  Picnic"  (Boston,  1869);
"Ned,  Nellie,  and  Amy"  (1870);  "Recompense"
(New  York,  1877);  "Every  Day "(1877;  repub-
lished as  "  A  Year  of  Promi^.  Praise,  and  Prayer,"
London,  1879) ;  and  "  Through  the  Darkness  "  (New
York,  1884).

SEYMOUR,  Tliomas  Hart,  governor  of  Con-
necticut, b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  in  1808 ;  d.  there,
3  Sept.,  1868.  His  early  education  was  obtained
in  the  schools  of  his  native  city,  and  he  was  gradu-
ated at  Capt.  Alden  Partridge's  military  institute
at  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1829.  He  was,  for  some
time  after  his  return  to  Hartford,  the  command-


SEYMOUR


SHAPPNER


479


ing  officer  of  the  Hartford  liKht-guanl.  He  then
sluditfU  law,  and  was  admit t(><i  to  tliv  lutr  in  llart-
fonlalM)ut  IKiJi.  IIu  Mtoit  attaim-d  to  a  fair  prac-
tice, but  never  aspired  to  a  high  |M>!<ition  in  his
profejwion.  In  18;i7-'8  he  Ixvame  etlitor  of  a
Democratic  ita|>cr,  "  Ttie  Jefferwinian,"  and  alraut
the  same  time  waa  jud|^  of  prolmto  for  the  dis-
trict. His  popular  maiiners  and  a<ldrt>ss  s<K)n  threw
him  into  iMjIitics,  an<l  in  IMii  \u'  was  electitl  to
fonjfri'ss  from  thi-  Hartford  district.  At  the  expi-
ration of  his  term  he  declined  a  renomination.  in
March,  1840,  he  was  commissione<l  major  of  the  0th
or  New  England  regiment  of  volujiteers  in  the
Mexican  war.  On  iJ  Oct.,  1847,  Col.  Hansom,  its
commander,  having  fallen  in  the  a.ssault  on  Cha-

Eulte{H>c.  Maj.  Seymour  led  the  tr<K»t»s,  waled  the
eight,  and  with  his  command  was  the  first  to  en-
ter that  fortress.  He  wjis  promoted  to  the  com-
mand of  the  regiment,  and  t<M)k  part  in  the  capture
of  Mexico.  In  1849  he  was  nominated  for  gover-
nor, Imt,  though  gaining  largely  over  the  vote  of
the  preceding  year,  he  was  not  electe<l.  The  next
year  he  was  again  a  candidate,  and  was  chosim  by
a  handsome  majority,  and  re-elected  in  1851,  1852,
and  1853.  In  1852  he  was  nresidential  elector.  In
the  autumn  of  185JJ  Presiuent  Pierce  appointed
him  U.  S.  minister  to  Russia,  and.  ri'signmg  the
governorship,  he  fllleil  the  offlce  for  four  years.  He
forme<l  a  warm  r)ersonal  friendship  for  lx)th  the
Czar  Nicholas  ana  his  son,  and  receivetl  from  them
many  costly  tokens  of  their  regard.  After  nearly
a  year  of  European  travel  he  returned  to  the
Unit«d  States  in  1858.  When  the  civil  war  began,
his  sympathies  were  largely  with  the  south,  and  he
continued  his  opposition  to  the  war  until  its  close
as  the  leader  of  the  Connecticut  Peace  Democrats.
In  18(>2  the  state  senate  voted  that  his  portrait,
with  that  of  Isaac  Toucey.  should  Ihj  removed  from
the  chamber  till  the  comptroller  should  be  satisfied
of  his  loyalty.  In  1863  he  was  again  a  candidate
for  governor,  but  was  defeated  by  William  A.
Buckingham,  after  an  exciting  contest.

SEYMOUR,  Trnnian,  soldier,  b.  in  Burlington,
Vt.,  25  Sept.,  1824.  His  grandfather  was  first
cousin  to  Moses,  noticed  above.  He  was  gradu-
ate<i  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1840,  as-
signed to  the  1st  artillery,  and  in  the  war  with
Alexico  won  the  brevet  of  1st  lieutenant  for  gal-
lantry at  Cerro  Gordo,  and  that  of  captain  for  Con-
treras  and  Chunibusco.  He  was  promoted  1st
lieutenant,  26  -Vug.,  1847,  and  in  1850-'3  was  as-
sistant professor  of  drawing  at  West  Point.  He
served  against  the  Seminoles  in  Florida  in  1856-'8.
was  made  captain,  22  Nov.,  1860,  and  ttwk  part  in
the  defence  of  Fort  Sumter  in  1861,  for  which  he
receivwl  the  brevet  of  major.  He  commanded  the
5th  artillery  and  the  U.  S.  camp  of  instruction
at  Ilarrisburg,  Pa.,  from  Deceml)er,  1861,  till
March,  1862,  and  was  then  chief  of  artillery  of
Gen.  George  A.  McCall's  division  till  28  April,
1862,  when  he  was  commissi«)ned  brigadier-general
of  volunteers.  He  served  in  the  various  campaigns
in  Virginia  and  Maryland  in  1862,  commanding
the  left  wing  at  Mcclianicsville,  26  .June,  leading  a
division  at  Malvern  Hill,  1  July,  and  gaining  the
brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel  for  South
Mountain  and  Antietam  respectively.  After  18
Nov.,  1862,  he  was  in  the  Department  of  the  South,
serving  as  chief  of  staff  to  the  commanding  general
from  8  Jan.  till  23  Afiril,  18<W,  leading  a  division
on  Folly  island,  S.  ('.,  on  4  Julv.  taking  fmrt  in  the
atta(;k  on  Morris  island  on  10  July,  and  command-
ing the  unsuccessful  assault  on  Fort  Wagner  on
18  July,  when  he  was  severely  wounde<l.  He  was
in  charge  of  an  expedition  to  Florida  in  February,


1804,  and  took  poawwrion  of  Jacksonville  on  7
Feb.  He  left  that  town  with  5.(N)0  men  on  the
18th,  and  <m  the  20th  met  the  enemy  under  Gen.
Jos*'i)h  Finegan  near  Olustee.  After  a  thrw-hours*
battle.  Gen.  St^ymour  was  forced  to  retire  to  Jack-
sonville. He  returned  to  Virginia  after  command-
ing the  district  of  Florida  till  28  March,  1804,  led
a  brigade  in  the  6th  corfts  of  the  Armv  of  the  Po-
tomac, and  was  taken  prisoner  in  the  fuittle  of  the
Wilderness,  6  May.  18<M.  After  U-ing  taken  to
Charleston,  S.  ('.,  where  he  was  eXfHMu-d,  by  order
of  (ion.  Samuel  Jones,  to  the  fire  of  the  National
Iwtleries  on  Morris  island,  he  was  exchangetl  on  9
Aug.,  and  le<l  a  division  in  the  .Shcnan<loah  valley
ami  the  Richmond  campaign,  Iwing  engaged  in
the  assault  on  the  Confederate  picket -lines  at
Petersburg,  on  26  March,  18(W,  and  the  general
attack  of  2  April,  which  ended  the  siege  of  that
place.  He  was  bn* vetted  major-general  of  volim-
teers  "  for  ability  and  energy  in  handling  his  divis-
ion, and  for  gallantry  and  valuable  services  in
action,"  and  briga<lier-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  gal-
lantry at  the  capture  of  Petersburg.  Iwth  commis-
sions to  date  from  13  March,  1805.  He  was  present
at  Ijce's  surrender,  was  mustered  out  of  volunteer
service,  24  Aug.,  1805,  and  became  major  of  the
5th  artillery.  13  Aug.,  1860.  After  the  war  he
commande<i  forts  in  Florida,  Fort  Warren,  Mass.,
in  18t{9-'70,  and  Fort  Preble,  Me.,  in  1870-'5,  and
on  1  Nov.,  1876,  he  was  retired  from  active  service.
Since  his  retirement  he  has  resided  in  Europe,
chiefly  in  Florence.  Williams  college  gave  him
the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1865.

SHACKELFORD,  James  M,  soldier,  b.  in
Lincoln  county,  Ky..  7  July,  1827.  After  receiving
an  educatif)n  in  i>rivate  schools,  he  studietl  law,
was  admitted  to  the  Itar  in  1854.  and  practised  in
Kentucky.  He  served  in  the  war  witn  Mexico  as
a  lieutenant.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  colonel
of  the  25th  Kentucky  volunteers,  and  sul)sequently
of  the  8th  Kentucky  cavalry,  and  was  appointed
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  2  Jan.,  1863.
His  command  captured  Gen.  John  H.  Morgan  in
Columbiana  county,  Ohio,  in  July,  180J1  Since
the  war  he  has  practised  his  profession  in  Kvans-
ville,  Ind.  In  1880  he  was  a  Republican  presi-
dential elector  for  Indiana.

SHAKER,  Helen  Alnilra,  educator,  b.  in  New-
ark, N.  J.,  2ii  Sept.,  lKi9.  After  graduation  at
Oberlin  college  in  1803,  she  was  a  teacher  of  mathe-
matics in  the  Central  high-school  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
from  1865  till  1875.  and  in  1877  became  professor
of  mathematics  at  Welleslev  college,  near  lioston,
Mass.  She  was  made  president  of  this  institution
in  January.  1HH8.

SHAFKNER,  TaUaferro  Preston,  inventor,
b.  in  Smithfield,  Fau<iuier  co..  Va.,  in  1818:  d.  in
Troy,  N.  Y.,  11  Dec.,  1881.  He  was  chiefly  self-
educated,  studied  law,  and  was  a<lmitted  to  the
bar,  but  gave  much  time  to  invention.  He  was
an  associate  of  Samuel  F.  B.  Morse  in  the  in-
troduction of  the  telegraph,  built  the  line  fn^ra
Ijouisville,  Ky.,  to  New  Orleans,  and  that  from  St,
Ijouis  to  Jefferson  City  in  1851.  ami  held  office  in
various  telegraph  companies.  He  was  a  projector
of  a  North  Atlantic  cable  via  Ijabrador,  Greenland,
Iceland,  the  Faroe  islands,  and  Scotlan«l,  and  was
the  inventor  of  several  m«>thmls  of  blasting  with
nitroglycerine  and  other  high  explosives,  for  which
twelve  patents  were  issuetl.  In  1864  he  was  in  the
service  of  Denmark  during  the  Dano- Prussian  war.
He  was  a  meml)er  of  viirious  scientific  societies  of
Kurf>jH\  Mr.  Shaffner  published  the  "Telegraph
C^ompanion  :  devote*!  to  the  Science  and  Art  of  tne
Morse  American  Telegraph "  (2  vela..  New  York,


480


SHAFTER


SHANAHAN


1855);  "The  Telegraph  Manual" (1859);  "The Se-
cession War  in  America"  (London,  1862);  "His-
tory of  America"  (2  vols.,  1863);  and  "Odd-Fel-
lowship "  (New  York,  1875).

SHAFTER,  Oscar  Lovell,  jurist,  b.  in  Athens,
Vt.,  19  Oct.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Florence,  Italy,  23  Jan..
1873.  His  grandfather,  James  Shafter.  fought  at
Bunker  Hill,  Bennington,  and  Saratoga,  and  for
twenty-five  years  served  in  the  Vermont  legisla-
ture; and  his  father  was  county  judge,  a  member
of  the  Constitutional  convention  of  1836,  and  of
the  legislature.  After  graduation  at  Wesleyan
university.  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1834.  Oscar
studied  law  at  Harvard,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  began  to  practise  in  Wilmington,  Vt.,  in  1836.
In  1854  he  removed  to  California,  and  practised
his  profession  there  until  1864,  when  he  became
associate  justice  of  the  state  supreme  court  for  a
term  of  ten  years ;  but  he  resignea  this  post  in  1867,
owing  to  impaired  health,  and  resided  in  Europe
until  his  death. — His  brother,  James  McMillan,
lawyer,  b.  in  Athens,  Windham  co.,  Vt.,  27  May,
1816,  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  university  in
1837,  and  at  Yale  law-school  in  1839.  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840,  practised  law  in  Town-
send  and  Burlington,  Vt..  served  in  the  legislature,
and  in  1842-'9  was  secretary  of  state.  Removing
to  Wisconsin  in  1849,  he  served  in  the  legislature,
was  its  speaker,  and  in  1852  was  a  defeated  candi-
date for  congress.  In  1852  he  removed  to  Cali-
fornia, ami,  in  connection  with  his  brother  and
others,  formed  the  law-partnership  of  Shafters,
Park,  and  Heydenfeldt,  and  subsequently  became
associated  with  James  M.  Seawell.  He  served  in
the  California  senate  in  1861-'2  and  again  in
1863-'4,  when  he  was  made  president  pro  tempore.
He  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  adopted
the  present  constitution  of  California.  Mr.  Shafter
owns  twelve  of  the  finest  dairy  ranches  in  the  state.
He  is  a  trustee  of  the  Leland  Stanford,  Jr.,  uni-
versitv  at  Palo  Alto,  California.

SHAKESPEARE,  Edward  Oram,  physician,
b.  in  Dover,  Del.,  19  May,  1846.  He  is  descended
from  Edmund,  one  of  the  brothers  of  the  poet,
William  Shakespeare.  After  receiving  his  bache-
lor's degree  at  Dickinson  college,  Carlisle,  Pa.,  in
1867.  he  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1869.  At
first  he  settled  in  Dover,  Del.,  but  in  1874  removed
to  Philadelphia.  He  makes  a  specialty  of  oph-
thalmic surgery,  and  is  lecturer  on  refraction  and
accommodation  of  the  eye,  and  operative  ophthal-
mic surgery  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  In
1885  he  was  sent  as  the  representative  of  the  Unit-
ed States  to  Spain  and  other  countries  in  Europe
where  cholera  existed,  in  order  to  investigate  the
causes,  progress,  and  proper  prevention  and  cure
of  that  disease.  He  spent  six  months  in  studying
the  subject,  and  made  his  report  to  congress.  Dr.
Shakespeare  is  a  member  of  several  medical  socie-
ties, and  hai*  devised  for  clinical  purposes  a  new
ophthalmoscope  and  ophthalmometre.

SHALER,  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  Haddam,
Conn.,  19  March,  1827.  He  was  educated  in  pri-
vate schools,  entered  the  New  York  militia  as  a
Private  in  1845,  and  became  major  of  the  7th  New
'ork  regiment,  13  Dec,  1860.  He  was  appointed
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  65th  New  York  volunteei*s
in  June,  1861,  l)ecame  c6lonel,  17  July,  1862,  and
commanded  the  military  pris^on  at  Johnson's  isl-
and, Ohio,  during  the  winter  of  1863-'4.  He  served
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  participating  in
all  its  battles,  until  6  May,  1864,  when  he  was  taken

Erisoner  at  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness,  and  was
eld  in  Charleston,  S,  C,  during  the  summer  of


that  year.  After  his  exchange,  he  commanded  a
division  in  the  7th  corps  and  the  post  of  Duval's
Bluffs,  Ark.,  serving  in  the  southwest  until  he
was  mustered  out  on  24  Aug.,  1865.  He  was  com-
missioned brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  26
May,  1863.  and  brevctted  major-general  of  volun-
teei-s  on  27  July,  1865.  From  1867  till  1870  he
was  president  of  the  board  of  commissioners  of
the  Metropolitan  fire  department,  and  commission-
er of  the  fire  department  of  New  York  city  in
1870-'3.  He  was  consulting  engineer  to  the  Chi-
cago board  of  police  and  fire  in  1874-'5,  being
charged  with  tne  reorganization  and  instruction
of  the  fire  department  m  that  city.  From  1867  till
1886  he  was  major-general  of  the  1st  division  cf
the  national  guard  of  New  York,  and  was  an  organ-
izer and  president  of  the  National  rifle  association
of  the  United  States.  While  a  member  of  the
board  for  the  purchase  of  sites  for  armories,  he  was
accused  of  bribery;  but,  although  he  was  tried
twice,  the  jury  disagreed.  Gen.  Shaler  published
a  "  Manual  of  Arms  for  Light  Infantry  using  the
Rifle  Musket"  (New  York,  1861).

SHALER,  Nathaniel  Sonthgate,  geologist,  b.
in  Newport,  Ky.,  22  Feb.,  1841.  He  was  graduated
in  1862  at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Har-
vard, where  he  received  private  instruction  from
Louis  Agassiz,  and  then  spent  two  years  in  Ken-
tucky, during  the  civil  war,  serving  in  the  Federal
militia  as  an  officer  in  the  artillery  and  on  the  staff.
In  1864  he  was  appointed  assistant  in  paleontology
in  the  Museum  of  comparative  zoOlogy  at  Harvard,
and  in  1865  he  was  given  charge  of  trie  instruction
in  z<k)logy  and  geology  in  the  Lawrence  school,
which  he  continued  until  1872.  Meanwhile  he
received  the  degree  of  S.  D.  for  higher  studies
in  1865,  and  in  1868  was  appointed  professor
of  paleontology  in  Harvard,  which  chair  he  held
till  1887,  when  he  became  professor  of  geology.
Dr.  Shaler  was  appointed  director  of  the  Kentucky
geological  survey  in  1873,  and  devoted  a  part  of
each  year  until  1880  to  that  work,  in  connection
with  which  he  published  reports  entitled  "Geo-
logical Survey  of  Kentucky  (6  vols.,  Frankfort,
1876-'82),  and  "  Memoirs  of  the  Geological  Survey
of  Kentucky"  (1  vol.,  Cambridge,  1876).  In  1884
he  was  appointed  geologist  to  the  U.  S.  geological
survey  in  charge  of  the  Atlantic  division.  He  is
a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and  has  published
upward  of  one  hundred  memoirs,  including  fre-
quent popular  articles  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"
"  Scribner's  Magazine,"  and  similar  periodicals.  Dr.
Shaler  has  published  "  Thoughts  on  the  Nature  of
Intellectual  Property  and  its  Importance  to  the
State  "  (Boston,  1878) ;  with  William  M.  Davis, "  Il-
lustrations of  the  Earth's  Surface ;  Glaciers  "  (1881) ;
"  A  First  Book  in  Geology  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Kentucky,
a  Pioneer  Commonwealth"  (1885),  in  the  "Ameri-
can Commonwealth  Series."

SHALER,  William,  author,  b.  in  1778;  d.  in
Havana,  Cuba,  29  March,  1833.  He  was  U.  S.
consul-general  at  Algiers,  where  he  rendered  ser-
vice to  the  French  during  their  operations  against
that  place,  and  subsequently  held  this  post  at
Havana,  where  he  displayed  ability  in  difficult
circumstances,  and  was  commissioned  to  negotiate
a  treaty  in  1815.  Princeton  gave  him  the  degree
of  A.  M.  in  1828.  He  published  a  paper  on  the
"  Language  of  the  Berbers  in  Africa "  in  the
"  American  Philosophical  Transactions,"  and  was
the  author  of  "  Sketches  of  Algiers,"  highly  com-
mended by  Dr.  Jared  Sparks  (Boston,  1826).

SHANAHAN,  Jeremiah  Francis,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Silver  Lake,  .Susquehanna  co.,  Pa.,  17  July,
1834 ;  d.  in  Uarrisburg,  Pa.,  24  Sept.,  1886. He


SHANK


SHANNON


481


received  hia  early  cducntion  in  St  Joseph's  college,
near  Sus<|ut>hHnnH.  hihI  «fu»rwifrcl  stu(lie<l  for  tnc

SriesthfHxl  in  St.  ( 'iiiirli»s  It<»rn»ii>f<)  m-minary,  Phila-
plphia.  IIt>  WU.S  onlHiiUMl  a  |iri«'st  on  8  July,
1K>U.  and  t>l»u'i<<l  in  charp-of  tlu'jir«'|mratory  wini-
nary  at  (ilen  Hiclillo.  'Ih«>  «>♦•  of  llarri.Hlm'rg  wa,H
created  in  IHIW,  an«l  Dr.  Shanahan  was  consocrattHi
its  first  bishop  on  IH  July  of  that  year.  He  intro-
«luce<l  many  sisterhoo<ls  into  his  diiK-ew,  and  built
schiMils,  academies,  and  charitable  institution.s.
When  ho  was  raistnl  to  the  epi.sc'<»i)ato  there  were  in
it  3  convents.  7  pann-hial  scIkmiIs,  22  priests,  and
alHHJt  20.(KK)  Konuin  Catholics.  At  his  death  the
numl)er  of  priests  wa-s  .')1  ;  churches,  51  :  cha{>els
and  stations,  75;  academies,  7;  ori)han  asylums,  3;
panK'hial  schools.  29;  while  the  lioraan  Catholic
population  hml  increa.se<l  to  more  than  35,0()0.

sHANK,  DuTid,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia;
d.  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  16  Oct.,  1881.  He  was
appointwl  a  lieutenant  under  Lord  Dunmore  in
\  irginia  in  1775,  partici|>ated  in  the  defence  of
iiwynn's  island  and  other  skirmishes,  ami  served
as  a  volunteer  in  the  battle  of  Ix)ng  Island,  27
Aug.,  1776.  In  March,  1777,  he  became  a  lieuten-
ant in  the  Queen's  rangers,  and  accompanied  Gen.
Howe's  army  into  New  Jersey.  He  was  engagc<l
in  the  l»attle  of  the  Brandy  wine,  11  Sept.,  1777,
commande<l  the  picket  at  Germantown  on  4  Oct.,
and  checked  the  American  column  that  attacked
the  right  of  the  British  army.  He  was  also  pres-
ent at  Monmouth,  and  succeeded  to  the  command
of  a  company  in  October,  1778.  In  August,  1779,
he  led  a  troop  of  dragoons,  and  afterward  the  cav-
alry of  the  (Queen's  rangers  in  Virginia,  with  which
he  sustained  a  severe  action  at  Spencer's  Ordinary.
In  Octolx'r,  1783,  he  returned  to  England,  and  m
1792  jissisted  in  raising,  under  the  patronage  of  the
Marquis  of  Buckingham,  a  light-infantry  corps  of
400  men  called  the  Qiieen's  rangers  for  Canada,  in
which  company  he  was  commissioned  senior  oflicer,
and  he  commanded  the  troops  in  Upper  Canada  in
1796  after  receiving  the  brevet  of  major  on  1  March,
1794.  He  was  mane  lieutenant-colonel  in  January,
1798,  and  in  1799  returned  to  England. He  was  ap-

Eointed  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Canadian  fcnci-
les  on  3  Sept.,  1803,  was  promoted  to  colonel  in
1808,  and  was  commissioned  major-general  in  1811
and  lieutenant-general  in  1821.

SHANKS,  ^lilliani  FrankHn  Gore,  author,
b.  in  Shelby  ville.  Ky.,  20  April,  1837.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Louisville,  and  wrote  for  the  Louisville
"  Journal  "  and  the  "Courier."  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  became  a  correspondent  of  the
New  York  "  Herald."  and  joined  its  staff  in  1865.
In  1866  he  contribute<l  regularly  to  Harper's
*'  Weekly  "  and  "  Monthly,"  and  prepared  an  index
of  the  contents  of  the  latter  for  the  first  forty  vol-
umes. On  the  death  of  Henry  J.  Raymond,  he
transferretl  his  services  from  the  "  Times "  to  the
*'  Tribune,"  remaining  there  until  1880.  While  city
editor  of  the  "  Tribune  "  he  was  imprisoned  for
contempt  of  court  for  refusal  to  divulge  the  name
of  the  writer  of  an  article  in  the  na{>er,  taking  the
eround  that  he  was  a  nrivilegetl  witness.  After
his  release  on  a  writ  of  nal)eas  corpus  he  brought
charges  against  District  Attorney  Winchester  Brit-
ton,  who  was  removed  by  Gov.  Dix.  In  1880  he
instituted  suit,  for  the  first  time  in  this  country,
against  the  vendor  of  a  libel,  recovering  two  judg-
ments, and  the  court  of  ap{)eals  sustaine«l  the  legal
point  at  issue.  In  1885  he  organized  the  National
press  intelligence  comjmny,  of  which  he  Ls  now
(1888)  president,  and  he  is  still  a  contributor  to
various  newspapers.  He  has  published  "  Recollec-
tions of  Distinguished  Generals  "  (New  York,  1865) ;

VOL.  V. — 81


edited  "  Bench  and  Bar  "  (1868);  and  printed  pri-
ratelv  "A  Noble  Trea-wm,"  a  tragedy  (1876).

SHANLY,  CharlPM  DawMin,  itiurnalist,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  9  March,  1811;  d.  in  Arlington,
Kla.,  15  Aug.,  1875.  He  was  graduattnl  at  Trinity
college,  Dublin,  in  18:14,  and.  after  holding  the
ofllce  of  assistant  secretar)'  of  the  de^tariment  of
public  works  in  Canada  in  1842-'57,  went  to  New
York,  and  l)ecame  connecte<l  with  the  prew  of
that  city.  In  18(J0  he  was  one  of  the  chief  oon-
tributorsto  "  Vanity  Fair,"  and  at  one  time  he  was
its  editor.  In  186,5-'6  he  conducted  "  Mrs.  Grun-
dy." His  writings  consisted  of  essays  and  descrip-
tive articles,  poems,  and  l^allads,  some  of  which
were  imaginative  and  pathetic,  while  others  were
satirical  or  humorous.  Thev  were  contributed  to
the  "New  York  Ijeader,"  "Weekly  Review."  "Al-
bion," and  "  Atlantic  Monthly,"  and  other  literary
pai)crs,  while  on  the  daily  journals  he  was  a  regular
writer  on  social  events  and  passing  trifles.  He
was  an  expert  draughtsman  of  comic  sketches,  and
passionately  fond  of  painting.  Of  his  writings,
there  were  published  in  book-form,  illustrated  by
Henrv  L.  Stephens,  "  A  Jolly  Bear  and  his  Friends
(New* York,  1866);  "The  ilonkev of  Porto  Bello"
(1866);  and  "The  Truant  Chicken"  (1866).  His
iiest-known  poems  are  "Civil  War"  and  "The
Walker  of  the  Snow." — His  brother,  Walter,  Ca-
nadian engineer,  b.  at  the  Abbey,  Stradlmlly,
Queen's  county,  Ireland,  11  Oct.,  1819,  was  edu-
cated privately,  afterward  prepared  himself  for
civil  engineering,  and  came  to  Canada  in  1837,  set-
tling in  the  county  of  Middlesex.  He  was  resi-
dent engineer,  under  the  Canada  board  of  works,
on  the  Beauhamois  and  Welland  canals  from
1843  till  1848,  resident  engineer  Northern  New
York  railroad,  1848-'51,  chief  engineer  of  the  Ottawa
and  Prescott  railway  in  1851-'3,  of  the  western
division  of  the  Grand  Trunk  railway  in  1853-'9,
and  general  manager  of  the  same  line  from  1857
till  1862.  His  greatest  achievement  in  engineer-
ing was  the  completion  of  the  Hoosac  Mountain
tunnel,  in  Massachusetts,  in  1869-'75,  in  which  en-
terprise he  was  assisted  by  his  brother,  F'hancis.
He  was  chief  engineer  of  the  Canada  Atlantic  rail-
way, 1879-'85,  and  is  now  (1888)  consulting  engineer
of  that  line.  He  sat  in  the  Canadian  a-sscmbly  in
1863-'7,  when  he  was  re-elected  to  the  Dominion
parliament  as  a  Conservative.  He  was  an  unsuc-
cessful candidate  in  1872  and  1874.  re-elected  by
acclamation  on  the  death  of  the  sitting  member  in
July,  1885,  and  again  electe<l  in  Febniary,  1887.

SHANNON,  Wilson,  governor  of  Ohio  and  of
Kansas,  b.  in  Bt^lmont  county,  Ohio,  24  Feb.,  1802;
d.  in  Lawrence,  Kan.,  31  Aug.,  1877.  He  wasgnul-
uated  at  Athens  college,  Ohio,  and  at  Transyl-
vania university,  Ky.,  and  became  a  lawyer.  He
began  practice  at  St.  Clairsville,  Ohio,  ami  in  1835
was  prosecuting  attorney  for  the  state.  He  was
governor  of  Ohio  in  1838-'40,  and  again  in  1842-'4,
and  in  1844  he  went  as  U.  S.  minister  to  Mexico.
He  was  a  representative  in  congress  in  1853-'5,  and
territorial  governor  of  Kansas  in  1855-'6.  Dur-
ing (tov.  Shannon's  administration  in  Kansas  the
troubles  between  the  free-state  and  pro-slavery
parties  l)egan  to  assume  a  threatening  aspect  The
governor  favored  the  latter,  thoueh  he  tried  to  be
cautious.  He  succee<led  in  peacefully  terminating
the  "Wakarusha  war"  in  1855,  but  hostilities
were  resumed  in  the  following  year,  ending  in  the
buniing  of  the  town  of  Lawrence  by  a  band  of
"border  ruffians"  that  had  been  gathered  as  a
U.  S.  marshal's  posse.  Shannon  was  finally  re-
moved, and  succeeded  by  John  W.  (Seary.  He
subsequently  practised  law  in  Lawrence.


482


SHAPLEIGH


SHARPLESS


SHAPLEIOH,  Frank  Henry,  artist,  h.  in  Bos-
ton. 7  March,  1842.  He  stiulieil  under  ftinile  Lam-
binet  in  Paris,  and  has  spn^nt  his  prDfessional  life
in  his  native  city.  His  paintings  inchide  "  Venice."
"Yosemite  Vafley."  "Mirror  Ijake,*'  "Cathedral
Rociis,"  "  Mount  Wjishineton,"  "  Cohasset  Har-
bor," "Northern  Peaks,'^  "The  White  Moun-
tains," "  Fort  Marion,  St.  Augustine,"  "  Fort  at
Matanzas.  Florida,"  and  "Old  Mill  in  Seabrook."
SHAPLEY,  Rufns  Edmonds,  author,  b.  in
Carlisle,  Pa.,  4  Aug.,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at
Dickinson  college  in  1800,  studied  law.  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar,  and  has  practised  in  Philiulelj)hia
since  1866.  He  has  published  "Solid  for  Mul-
hooly:  a  Political  Satire  on  Boss  Rule"  (New
York,  1881),  and,  in  collaboration  with  Ainsworth
R.  Spoflford,  has  edited  a  "  Library  of  Wit  and  Hu-
mor*' (5  vols..  Philadelphia,  1884).

HHARKEY,  WilHam  Lewis,  senator,  b.  in
Mussel  Shoals,  Tenn.,  in  1797;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C.  29  April,  1873.  He  removed  with  his  par-
ents to  the  territory  of  Mississippi  in  1804,  ana,  as
a  substitute  for  his  uncle,  was  present  at  the  battle
of  New  Orleans.  After  graduating  at  Greenville
college,  Tenn.,  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Mississippi  in  1822,  and  began  practice  at
Warrenton.  He  removed  to  Vieksburg  in  1825,  was
elected  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1827,  and
was  chief  justice  of  the  court  of  errors  and  appeals
in  1832-'50.  In  18G5  he  was  appointed  provisional
governor,  and  in  1866  was  elected  U.  S.  senator.

SHARON,  William,  capitalist,  b.  in  Smith-
field.  Ohio.  9  Jan.,  1821 ;  d.  13  Nov.,  1885.  He  re-
ceived a  good  education  and  studied  law,  but
relinquished  it  to  engage  in  banking  in  Nevada.
He  became  largely  interested  in  silver-mines  in
that  state,  and  amassed  great  wealth.  He  after-
ward became  a  trustee  of  the  Bank  of  California,
in  San  Francisco,  and  during  the  troubles  of  that
institution,  arising  out  of  the  death  of  its  presi-
dent, he  brought  its  affairs  to  a  satisfactory  settle-
ment. He  was  United  States  senator  from  Nevada
from  1875  till  1881.  He  gained  notoriety  as  de-
fendant in  a  case  for  divorce  that  was  instituted
against  him  by  Sarah  Althea  Hill,  who,  claiming
to  be  his  wife,  gained  her  suit,  and  married  Judge
David  S.  Terry,  who  wjis  her  counsel  in  the  case.

SHARP,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Huddersfield,
England,  25  Dec,  1783 ;  d.  near  Baltimore,  Md.,

23  April.  1853.  He
came  to  this  country
in  1805  to  engage  in
commercial  pursuits,
but  soon  abandoned
these  to  devote  him-
self to  the  ministry.
After  a  course  of
study  in  Philadel-
phia, he  became,  in
1809.  pastor  of  the
Baptist  church  in
Newark,  N.  J.  From
1812  until  his  death
he  was  pastor  of  a
church  m  Boston.
For  several  years  he
was  associate  editor
of  the  "  American
Baptist  Magazine."
He  was  president  of
the  Baptist  missionary  board  in  Boston,  the  first
president  of  the  American  Baptist  missionary  union,

f)resident  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  Newton  theo-
ogical  seminary  for  eighteen  years,  a  fellow  of
Brown  university  from  1828  to  the  time  of  his


^AAiAXl  cf^Cu^/


death,  and  an  overseer  of  Harvard.  He  received  the
honorary  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Brown  in  1828,  and
Harvanl  in  1843.  Dr.  Sharp  published  numerous
discourses  and  sermons.  The  "  Recognition  of
Friends  in  Heaven  "  passed  through  four  e<litions.

SHARP,  Jacob,  capitalist,  b.  in  Montgomery
county,  N.  Y.,  in  1817;  d.  in  New  York  city,  5
April,  1888.  He  was  of  humble  parentage  and
worked  on  a  farm  till  1837,  when  he  began  rafting
on  the  Hudson  river.  He  saved  money,  dealt  in
timber,  and  furnished  the  material  for  the  build-
ing of  piers  and  bulkheads  in  New  York  city.  In
1850  he  conceived  the  scheme  of  a  street  railroad
to  lie  constructed  on  Broadway,  and  in  1884,  after
years  of  scheming  against  powerful  opposition,  he
succeeded  in  his  object.  He  was  afterward  ar-
rested on  the  charge  of  bribing  the  New  York
board  of  aldermen  in  connection  with  securing
the  resolution  for  the  construction  of  the  Broad-
way street  railway,  and  on  14  July,  1887,  was  sen-
tenced by  Judge  Barrett  to  confinement  for  four
years  ann  a  half  in  the  state  prison,  and  to  pay  a
fine  of  $5,000.  The  court  of  appeals,  on  29  Nov.,
1887,  set  aside  the  conviction,  and  Sharp  was  re-
leased in  $40,000  bail.  He  never  recovered  from
the  effect  of  his  conviction  and  imprisonment.

SHARPE,  Oeorge  Henry,  lawyer,  b.  in  King-
ston, N.  Y.,  26  Feb.,  1828.  He  was  graduate<l  at
Rutgers  in  1847,  studied  law  at  Yale  college,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1854,  and  practised  until
he  entered  the  army  in  1861  as  captain  in  the  20th
New  York  infantry.  He  became  colonel  of  the
120th  New  York  infantry  in  1862,  and  took  part  in
all  the  battles  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  Tie
served  upon  the  staffs  of  Gens.  Hooker.  Meade,  and
Grant,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in  1864,
and  major-general  in  1865.  He  was  attached  to
the  U.  S.  legation  at  Vienna  in  1851,  and  was  a
special  agent  of  the  state  department  in  Europe  in
1867.  In  1870-'3  he  was  U.  S.  marshal  for  the  south-
ern district  of  New  York,  and  took  the  census  that
demonstrated  the  great  election  frauds  of  1868  in
New  York  city,  which  led  to  the  enforcement  of
the  Federal  election  law  for  the  first  time  in  1871.
He  was  surveyor  of  customs  for  New  York  from
1873  till  1878.  He  was  a  member  of  the  assembly  in
1879-83,  and  in  1880-'l  was  the  speaker.  He  deliv-
ered addresses  at  Kingston  on  the  centennial  anni-
versary of  the  organization  of  the  state  government
in  1877,  and  before  the  Holland  society  on  its  visit
to  Kingston  in  1886.  both  of  which  were  published.

SHARPE,  William,  congressman,  b.  in  Cecil
county,  Md.,  13  Dec,  1742;  d.  in  Iredell  county,
N.  C,  in  July,  1818.  He  received  a  classical  edu-
cation, studied  law,  and  in  1763  began  practice  at
Mecklenburg,  N.  C.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Pro-
vincial congress  that  met  at  New  Berne  in  April,
1775,  at  Hillsborough  in  August  following,  and  at
Halifax  in  1776.  He  was  aide  to  Gen.  Griffith
Rutherford  in  1776  in  his  campaign  against  the
Indians,  and  in  1777  was  appointed  one  of  the  com-
missioners to  treat  with  them.  He  was  a  member
of  the  Continental  congress  in  1779-'82.

SHARPLESS,  James,  artist,  b.  in  England
about  1751:  d.  in  New  York  city,  26  Feb.,  1811.
He  was  intended  for  the  priesthood,  but  studied
art.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1794,  but,  af-
ter remaining  here  several  years,  revisited  Eng-
land, returning  to  this  country  in  1809.  He  i*
buried  in  the  churchyard  of  St.  Peter's  in  Bar-
clay street.  New  York.  The  only  known  work
of  Sharpless  that  is  unquestionably  authentic  is  a
collection  of  small  portraits  in  pastel.  These  are
usually  in  profile,  although  some  give  the  full  face.
Sharpless  used  a  thick  gray  paper,  softly  grainwl


SHARPS


SIIARSWOOD


488


and  of  woolly  texture.  His  colored  crajons,  which
he  manufactiirod  hiiiiwlf,  were  kept  finely  pow-
dered  in  sintill  (^Iilhs  ctiim.  hiiiI  Ik*  H|iplie(l  them  with
a  camel's-hHir  iKMiril.  lie  is  «uid  to  have  worked
with  great  nipidity,  wholly  completing  in  two
hours  a  ix)rlrait  for  which  he  charged  $15  for  a
pn>flle,  and  $2()  for  a  full  face.  He  usually  made
a  rrplira  of  each  {K)rtrait,  which  he  retainul  for
his  own  use.  This  iH>rsonal  colh-clion  came  into
the  |K)ssession  of  a  gentleman  in  Virginia,  it  is  said,
as  a  pl»Mlgc  for  a  loan  of  $150,  which  was  never
repaiu.  an<l  the  |M>rtraits  remaiiuMl  his.  hUwh  one
originallv  ha<l  the  name  of  the  subject  attached  to
it,  but  during  the  civil  war  a  descendant  of  the
owner  reniovm  them  from  his  home,  and  many  of
the  names  were  lost,  out  of  130  only  70  were
namc«l.  Sulwiequently  an  effort  was  made  to
identify  them,  but  with  only  {partial  success.  At
the  Centennial  exhibition  in  1H7(J,  forty  of  them
were  puu-hased  for  the  National  museum  in  Inde-
pendence hnli.  Philadcl|ihia.  where"  thev  now  are.
Among  them  are  portraits  of  (Jeorge  Washington,
John  Adams,  Thomas  Jefferson,  James  Monnie,
Anthony  Wayne,  Horatio  Gates,  James  Wilkins<jn,
Elias  liayton,  James  Clinton.  De  Witt  Clinton,
Charles  Brockton  Brown,  Chancellor  Kent,  Judge
William  Johnson,  Chancellor  Livingston,  Noah
Webster,  Fisher  Ames,  Aaron  Burr,  Alexander
Hamilton,  Benjamin  Rush,  Henry  Cruger,  John
Langdon,  James  McHenry,  and  the  wives  of  James
Madison  and  Richard  Stockton.  Sharpless  took
Washington's  portrait  in  profile  in  179o  in  Phila-
delphia. The  likeness  has  always  been  estimated  as
a  very  correct  one.  He  made  many  copies  in  pastel,
and  his  wife  copied  it  on  ivory  in  miniature.  In
1854  there  were  brought  from  England  what  pur-
ported to  be  three  original  oil-portraits  by  Sharp-
less,  two  of  Washington,  one  profile  and  (he  other
full  face,  and  one  of  Mrs.  Washington.  They  were
exhibited  in  New  York,  and  created  much  interest.
In  188*^'3  they  were  again  brought  to  this  country
and  exhibited  more  widely,  and  again  in  1886-'7.
when  they  were  offered  for  sale  at  an  extravagant
price,  but  an  investigation  threw  doubt  on  their
authenticity  and  caused  their  withdrawal.  Sharp-
less  had  a  turn  for  mechanics  as  well  as  art,  and  in
the  first  volume  of  the  "  Medical  and  Philosophical
Register"  (1811)  is  published  a  pajier  by  him  on
steam-carriages.  His  widow  returned  to  England
and  had  a  sale  of  his  effects  at  Bath,  but  his  two
sons  are  believed  to  have  remainetl  in  this  aiuntry
and  settled  in  the  south.  It  was  prolmbly  from
one  of  them  that  the  Virginia  gentleman  obtained
the  collection  of  pastel  portraits.

SHARPS,  Christian,  inventor,  b.  in  New  Jer-
sey in  Ibll :  d.  in  Vernon,  Conn.,  13  March,  1874.
He  earlv  developed  a  talent  for  mechanics,  became
a  machfnist,  anu  was  conversant  with  every  depart-
ment of  his  trade.  His  principal  invention  was  the
Sharps  breec-h-loading  rifle.  In  1854  he  removed
to  Ilartford.  Conn.,  to  superintend  the  manufac-
ture of  this  rifle,  and  he  subsequently  invente<l
other  fire-arms  of  great  value,  and  patented  many
ingenious  implements  of  various  kinds.

SUARSWOOD,  Weorge.  jurist,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  7  July,  1810 ;  d.  there,  28  May,  1883.  He
was  a  descendant  in  the  sixth  generation  of  George
Sharswo<xI.  of  England,  who  settled  at  New  Lon-
don, Conn.,  before  16<J5.  His  grandfather,  James
(b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  4  April,  1747;  d.  there,
14  Sept.,  \Sii(i),  was  a  lumlx'r  merchant,  servetl  in
the  Revolutionary  war,  and  was  an  original  mem-
ber of  the  Democratic  i«rty,  and  scrve<l  in  the
general  assembly  of  Phdadelphia,  and  also  in  the
select  council. He  was  actively  interested  in  found-


ing the  Farmers'  and  Me<'hanic«'  bank,  and  in
1817  wn>te  numerous  articles  against  the  liank
of  the  United  .States.  His  father  died  at  the
age  of  twenty-two.  and  Iwfore  the  son's  birth,  and
his  early  training  devolved  entirely  on  his  widowed
mother.  He  was  educated  by  his  grandfather.
Cant.  James  .sharswood,  a  wealthy  citizen  of  Phila-
delphia, was  gnuluated  at  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  IH2H  with  the  highest  honors  of  his
class,  and,  after  studying  law  under  Josei)h  R.  In-
gersoll,  was  wlmittiHi  to  the  Imr,  5  Sc[>t.,  1831.  He
did  not  meet  with  marked  success  in  the  early
years  of  his  practice,  and  devoted  himself  to  study.
In  1887-'8  and  1842-'8  he  served  in  the  legislature,
and  in  1845  the  governor  commissioned  him  as
judge  of  the  district  court  of  Philailelphia.  In
1848  he  became  its  president,  which  ]N>st  he  con-
tinued to  hold  until  18({7,  when  he  was  elected  a
justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania.  In
1878  he  U-caine  chief  iustice,  and  he  retire<l  from
the  bench  in  1882,  at  the  expiration  of  his  term  of
office.  In  1850  he  revive<i  the  law  department  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  whicti  had  been
established  in  1790  by  James  Wilson,  but  whose
o[)erations  had  been  susi)ended,  and  he  was  the
senior  professor  of  law  tnere  until  18(J7,  when  he
resigned  his  chair.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor
to  the  literature  of  the  law,  Ix-ginning  in  1834  with
an  article  in  the  "  American  Law  Review  "  on  "  The
Revised  Code  of  Pennsylvania."  He  is  the  author
of  "  Professional  Ethics,  a  Compound  of  Ijectures
on  the  Aims  and  Duties  of  the  Pn^fession  of  the
Law  "  (Philadelphia,  1854) ;  and  "  Popular  Lectures
on  Common  Law  "  (1856).  The  worlc  which  for  a
generation  has  made  his  name  familiar  is  "Shars-
wood's  Blackstone's  Commentaries"  (1859).  In
1853  he  undertook  the  work  of  editing  the  several
volumes  of  English  common-law  rejwrts,  repub-
lished for  the  use  of  the  American  l>ar.  His  e<litions
of  flnglish  text-writers  were  numerous.  "Adams
on  Equity,"  "  Russell  on  Crimes,"  "  Byles  on  Bills,"
"Leigh's  Nisi  Prius,"  and  "Starkieon  Evidence"
are  a  few  of  the  works  that  received  his  attention.
In  1856  he  published  his  "  Ijectures  on  Commercial
Ijaw."  While  he  was  a  judge  of  the  district  court
his  written  opinions  numbered  more  than  5,000.
His  opinions  in  the  supreme  court  are  to  be  found
in  the  "  Pennsylvania  State  Reixirts  "  from  volumes
Ivii.  to  cii.,  inclusive.  His  juuicial  career  won  for
him  the  reputation  of  being  one  of  the  most  eminent
jurists  that  had  ever  sat  on  the  bench  in  Pennsyl-
vania, and  his  urbanity  toward  the  bar  gave  him  a
popularity  that  has  never  been  surpasseu  in  the  life
of  any  jurist.  These  were  in  j>art  made  manifest
by  a  dinner  which  was  tendered  him  by  the  bar  of
Philadelphia,  in  the  Academy  of  music,  on  his  re-
tirement from  the  bench,  by  the  attendance  of
more  than  500  lawyers  at  the  meeting  of  the  bar,
held  a  few  days  after  his  death,  and  by  a  memorial
tablet  that  they  caused  to  be  placed  in  the  supreme
court-room.  lie  was  electett  vice-j)rovost  of  the
Ijaw  academy  of  Philtulelphia  in  1835,  and  served
in  this  ofllce  until  lH5^i,  when  he  was  electetl  pro-
vost, which  iKJSt  he  coiitinuetl  to  fill  until  a  short
time  before  his  death.  He  was  chosen  a  trustee  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  18?2,  and  was  a
member  of  the  Philosophical  stx-iety.  The  Uni-
versity of  the  city  of  New  York  and  Columbia  col-
lege, in  1856,  conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
See  an  a<ldress  by  (Jeorge  W.  Biddle  on  the  "Pro-
fessional and  Judicial  Character  of  Chief-Justice
Sharswooil." — His  «>usin,  >VIIUam,  author,  b.  in
Philatlelphia,  Pa.,  in  1836,  was  graduate*!  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1S.56,  and  then  stud-
ied at  Jena,  Germany,  where  he  received  the  degree


484


SHATTUCK


SHAW


of  Ph.D.  in  1859.  He  has  published  "Studia
Physica,"  a  series  of  monogmpiis  (Vienna) ;  "  Ele-
nore,  a  Drama"  (Philadelphia,  lb02 ;  reissued  as
"The  Betrothed,"  18«5);  and  "The  Miscellaneous
Writings  of  William  Sharswood"  (vol.  i.,  1862),  lie-
sides  c'ontril)utions  to  scientific  journals.

SHATTUCK,  Aaron  Draper,  artist,  b.  in
Francestown,  N.  II.,  9  March,  1832.  He  became
in  1850  the  pupil  of  Alexander  Ransom  in  Bos-
ton, and  two  years  later  entered  the  schools  of  the
Academy  of  design.  New  York.  The  first  picture
that  he  exhibited  at  the  academy  was  a  "Study
of  Grasses  and  Flowers"  (185G).  The  following
year  he  was  elected  an  associate,  and  he  became  an
academician  in  1801.  In  18G7  he  held  the  post  of
recording  secretary.  His  works  include  "  White
Mountains  in  October"  (1868);  "Sunday  Morning
in  New  England"  (1873);  "Sheep  and  Cattle  in
Landscape  (1874);  "Autumn  near  Stockbridge"
(1876);  "Granbv  Pastures"  (1877);  "Cows  by  the
Meadow  Brook'"  (1881);  "Cattle"  (1882);  and
"Peaceful  Days"  (1884).  He  invented  in  1883-'5
a  stretcher-frame  with  keys,  a  grreat  improvement
on  the  old  methods  of  tightening  canvases.

SHATTUCK,  George  Cheyiie,  physician,  b.  in
Templeton,  Mass.,  17  July,  1783;  d.  in  Boston,  18
March,  1854.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1803  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1807,  and  became  a  suc-
cessful physician  in  Boston.  He  was  at  one  time
E resident  of  the  Massachusetts  medical  society,
•r.  Shattuck,  by  his  will,  devised  more  than  $60,-
000  to  charitable  objects.  He  contributed  largely
to  Dartmouth  college,  and  built  its  observatory,
which  he  furnished  with  valuable  instruments.
"Shattuck  school,"  at  Faribault,  Minn.,  a  collegiate
boarding-school  under  the  auspices  of  the  Protest-
ant Episcopal  church,  of  which  Dr.  Shattuck  was
a  liberal  patron,  was  named  for  him.  He  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1853.
Dr.  Shattuck  published  two  Boylston  prize  disser-
tations, entitled  "  Structure  and  Physiology  of  the
Skin  "  (Boston,  1808)  and  "  Causes  of  Biliary  Secre-
tions" (1808),  and  "Yellow  Fever  of  Gibraltar  in
1828,"  from  the  French  (1839).

SHATTUCK,  Lemuel,  author,  b.  in  Ashbv,
Mass.,  15  Oct.,  1793;  d.  in  Boston,  17  Jan.,  1859.
He  taught  in  various  places,  and  was  a  merchant
in  Concord,  Mass.,  from  1823  till  1833.  He  was
afterward  a  bookseller  and  publisher  in  Boston,  a
member  of  the  common  council  of  that  city,  and
for  several  years  a  representative  in  the  legislature.
In  1844  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New
England  historic-genealogical  society,  and  he  was
its  vice-president  for  five  years.  lie  was  also  a
member  of  various  similar  societies.  He  pub-
lished "History  of  Concord,  Mass."  (Boston,  1835);
"  Vital  Statistics  of  Boston  "  (1841) ;  "  The  Census
of  Boston  "  (1845) ;  "  Report  on  the  Sanitary  Con-
dition of  Massachusetts  *'  (1850) ;  and  "  Memorials
of  the  Descendants  of  William  Shattuck  "  (1855).

SHAUBENA,  Ottawa  chief,  b.  near  Mauraee
river,  Ohio,  about  1775;  d.  near  Morris,  HI.,  27
July,  1859.  His  name  is  also  spelled  Shabonee,
Chab-o-neh,  Shab-eh-ney,  Chamblee,  and  in  other
ways.  He  served  under  Tecumseh  from  1807
till  the  battle  of  the  Thames  in  1813.  In  1810  he
accompanied  Tecumseh  and  Capt.  Billy  Caldwell
(see  Sauganash)  to  the  homes  of  tne  Pottawattamies
and  other  tribes  residing  in  what  are  now  Illinois
and  Wisconsin,  with  the  hope  of  securing  the  co-
operation of  Indian  braves  in  driving  the  white
settlers  out  of  the  country.  At  the  battle  of  the
Thames  he  was  by  the  side  of  Tecumseh  when  he
fell,  and  at  the  death  of  their  leader  Shaubena  and


Caldwell  both  lost  faith  in  their  British  allies,  and
never  again  took  sides  with  them.  They  soon  after-
ward met  Gen.  Lewis  Cass  at  Detroit,  and  agreed
to  submit  to  the  United  States.  In  the  efifort  made
by  Black  Hawk  in  February,  1832,  to  incite  the
Pottawattamies  and  Ottawas  to  make  war  against
the  whites,  Shaubena  frustrated  his  plans,  and  thus
incurred  the  hatred  of  the  Sac  cnief.  In  early
manhood  Shaubena  married  the  daughter  of  a  Pot-
tawattamie chief,  whose  village  was  on  the  Illinois
river  east  of  the  present  city  of  Ottawa.  Here  he
lived  a  few  years,  but  removed  about  twenty-five
miles  north,  to  what  is  known  as  Shaubena's  grove,
in  DeKalb  county.  There  he  and  his  family  re-
sided till  1837,  when  he  was  removed  to  western
Missouri.  Unfortunately,  his  tribe  and  that  of
Black  Hawk  had  reservations  near  each  other.
War  began  between  them.  His  eldest  son  and  a
nephew  were  killed,  and  Shaubena  went  back  to
his  old  home  in  IllinoLs.  After  spending  three
years  in  Kansas  on  a  new  reser\'ation,  he  returned
again  to  Illinois,  but  found  his  land  occupied  by
strangers,  who  rudely  drove  him  from  the  grove
that  bore  his  name.  The  Washington  officials  had
decided  that  he  forfeited  his  title  when  he  moved
from  his  land.  Some  of  his  friends  subseouently
bought  twenty  acres  for  him  on  Mazon  creek,  near
Morris,  111.,  where  he  died.  He  was  a  superb  speci-
men of  an  Indian,  See  "  Life  of  Shaubena,"  by  N.
Matson  (Chicago,  1878).

SHAVER,  Oeorge  Frederick,  inventor,  b.  in
Ripley,  Chautauoua  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  Nov.,  1855.  He
was  educated  at  tne  high-school  of  his  native  town,
and  from  1875  till  1879  was  in  the  employ  of  the
Lake  Shore  and  Michigan  Southern  railroad.  He
has  recently  been  engaged  in  the  introduction  of
his  improved  mechanical  telephone,  was  president
of  the  Consolidated  telephone  company  in  1883-'6,
and  since  1887  has  been  vice-president  and  general
manager  of  the  Shaver  corporation,  which  has
charge  of  that  and  other  of  his  inventions.  The
principal  features  of  Mr.  Shaver's  telephone  are
the  manner  of  carrying  the  line  around  curves,
and  the  way  in  which  it  is  fastened  to  the  dia-
phragm. His  other  devices  include  a  self-righting
and  self-bailing  life-boat,  which  has  been  used  by
the  U.  S.  and  Canadian  governments,  a  compound
automatic  mail-catcher,  a  dynamophone  to  enable
deaf  persons  to  hear,  a  type-writer,  and  an,  auto-
matic screw-driver.

SHAW,  Albert,  journalist,  b.  in  New  London,
Butler  CO.,  Ohio,  23  July,  1857.  He  was  graduated
at  Iowa  college  in  1879,  and  then  studied  history
and  political  science  at  Johns  Hopkins,  where  he
took  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  1884.  Since  1883  he
has  been  an  editor  of  the  Minneapolis  "  Tribune."
He  has  published  "  Local  Government  in  Illinois  "
(Baltimore,  1883);  "Icaria;  a  Chapter  in  the  His-
tory of  Communism"  (New  York,  1884);  "Co-
operation in  a  Western  City "  (Baltimore.  1886) ;
and  "The  National  Revenue  (Chicago,  1888),  and
is  a  frequent  contributor  to  periodicals.

SHAW,  Albert  Duane,  consul,  b.  in  Lyme,
Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  27  Dec.,  1841.  He  was  edu-
cated at  St.  Lawrence  university.  Canton,  N.  Y.,
served  in  the  35th  New  York  regiment  in  1861-'3,
and  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1867.  He  was
appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Toronto,  Canada,  in  1868,
and  in  1878  promoted  to  Manchester,  England,
where  he  served  till  1885.  Mr.  Shaw  is  known
for  his  valuable  consular  reports  to  the  state  depart-
ment, on  foreign  manufactures,  and  tariff  and  reve-
nue reform.  On  his  retirement  from  office  in
Manchester  the  citizens  gave  him  a  public  recep-
tion in  the  city-hall,  and  presented  him,  through


8IIAW


SHAW


486


iiAn,  Annie  tjorneiia,  anist,  n.  in  wesi
y,  N.  Y.,  1«  S«<pt.,  1852.  She  .studied  in  C'hi-
3,  antl  wa-s  (>lecto<l  an  a.'vsociate  of  the  Chicaijo
lemv  of  (lesicn  in  \HT>i,  and  an  aca<lomician  in


the  mayor,  with  s  silver  casket  and  address. He
has  iK'en  active  in  politics  as  a  Republican  orator.

SHAW,  Annie  Cornelia,  artist,  h.  in West
Troy,
cage,

academv  oi  design

1876.  ller  princi{>al  works  are  "  On  the  Calumet
(1874);  "Willow  Island"  and  "  Keeno  Valley.
N.  Y."  (1875):  "  Ebb  Tide  on  the  Coast  of  Maine"
(1876) :  "  Head  of  a  Jersey  Bull "  (1877) ;  "  Return-
ing from  the  Fair  "  (1878) :  "  In  the  Rye-Field  "  and
"  Komi  to  the  Creek  "  (1880) :  "  Close  of  a  Summer
Day  "(1882):  "July  Day  "and  "In  the  Clearing"
(1888);  "Fall  Ploughing."  "Ashen  Days,"  and
"The  Com-Field "  (1884):  and  "  The  Russet  Year  "
(1885).  Her  "  Illinois  Prairie  "  was  at  the  Centen-
nial exhibition  in  1870.

SHAW,  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bath,  Me.,  in
1782:  d.  in  Montgomery,  Ala.,  in  1828.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvan.1  in  1805,  and  practised  law
For  several  years  in  Lincoln  county.  Me.,  but  re-
moved to  Alabama,  and  was  judge  of  a  court  in
Montgomery  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  pub-
lished a  "  Topographical  Historical  Description
of  Boston  frt)m  its  First  Settlement,"  which  was
hiehly  praised  (1817).

SHAW,  Henry,  philanthropist,  b.  in  England,
24  July,  1800.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1819,
and  in  May  of  that  year  established  himself  in  the
hardware  business  in  St.  Louis  with  a  small  stock
of  goods  that  he  brought  with  him.  When  he
was  forty  years  of  age  he  ivtired  from  business
with  what  at  that  time  was  considered  a  large  for-
tune. He  then  spent  nearly  ten  years  in  travel,
and  on  his  return  founded  the  nucleus  of  the
Missouri  botanical  garden.  As  it  grew  more  at-
tractive he  conceived  the  idea  of  making  his  gar-
den a  public  resort,  and  opened  his  gates  to  all
coiners,  maintaining  the  property,  which  covered
about  fifty  acres,  at  his  own  expense,  and  ex-
tending to  all  the  hospitality  of  his  residence.  In
1870  he  gave  to  the  city  of  St.  Louis  a  tract  of  190
acres  of  land  adjoining  his  garden,  on  condition  of
its  maintenance  as  a  public  park  by  the  city.  It
was  laid  out  under  the  su[)ervision  of  Mr.  Shaw,
who  enriched  it  with  many  works  of  art.  In  June,
1885,  he  gave  to  Washington  university  improved
real  estate  that  yields  f  5,000  yearly  income,  which,
in  accordance  with  his  wishes,  was  used  in  organ-
izing and  maintaining  a  school  of  botany  as  a
department  of  the  university.  At  the  same  time
the  Missouri  botanical  garden  and  arboretum  were
plat'ed  in  such  relation  to  the  school  as  to  secure
their  full  uses  for  scientific  study  and  investigation
to  the  professor  and  students  for  all  time  to  come.

SHAW,  Henry  Wheeler,  humorist,  b.  in  Lanes-
borough,  Mass.,  21  April,  1818;  d.  in  Monterey,
Cal.,  14  Oct.,  1885.  His  father,  Henry  Shaw,  was
a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  for
twenty-five  years,  and  was  also  a  member  of
congress  in  1818-'21.  The  son  was  admitted  to
Hainilton  about  1832,  but,  becoming  captivated
with  stories  of  western  life  and  adventure,  aban-
done<l  all  thoughts  of  college  and  turned  his  steps
westwanl.  Ho  worked  on  steamboats  on  Ohio
river,  then  became  a  farmer,  and  afterward  an
auctioneer.  In  1858  he  settleid  in  Poughkeepsie,
N.  Y..  as  an  auctioneer,  and  in  that  year  he  wrote
his  first  article  for  the  senior  editor  of  this  work,
followed  in  1859  by  his  "  Essay  on  the  Mule."  No
attention  wa><  twiid  to  these  or  other  articles  written
by  him.  and  >lr.  Shaw  conelude<l  that  as  an  author
he  was  a  failure.  A  ye^r  later  he  was  induced  to
make  another  effort,  and  decided  to  adopt  a  method
of  spelling  that  more  nearly  represented  his  style


iMu^ULA^  /P.  5^<a


of  enunciation.  The  emay  on  the  mole  became  "An
Essa  on  the  Muel,  bi  Josh  Billings,"  and  wai«  sent
to  a  New  York  [mfier.  It  was  reprinted  in  several
of  the  comic  journals.  an«l  extensively  copi«'<l.  His
most  successful  literary  venture  was  a  travesty
on  the  "Old  Farmers'  Almanac,"  nublishe<l  for
many  years  by  the  Thomas  family,  "Josh  Billings'
Farmers*  Allmi-
nax  "  (New  York,
1870).  Two  thou-
sand copies  were
first  printecl.  and
for  two  months
few  were  disposed
of,  but  during  the
next  three  months
over  90,000  were
printed  and  sold.
For  the  second
yearl27.000copie8
were  distributed,
and  for  the  ten
years  of  its  exist-
ence the  sales  were
very  large.  He  be-
gan to  lecture  in
1863,  his  lectures
being  a  series  of
pithy  sayings  without  care  or  order,  delivered  in
an  apnarently  awkward  manner.  Their  quaintness
and  arollery,  coupled  with  mannerisms  peculiarly
his  own,  macle  him  popular  on  the  nlatform.  For
twenty  years  previous  to  his  death  ne  contributed
regularly  to  the  "  New  York  Weekly."  and  the  arti-
cles appearing  in  the  "  Centurj' "  magazine  under
the  pen-name  of  "  Uncle  Esek  "  are  said  to  be  his.
Besides  the  books  mentioned  above,  he  published
"Josh  Billings,  his  Savings"  (New  York.  1866);
"Josh  Billings  on  Ice''  (1875);  "Every  liotldy's
Friend  "(1876):  "Josh  Billings's  Com  nlete  Works,"
in  one  volume  (1877);  and  "Josh  Billings's  Spice-
Box"  (1881).  See  his  "  Life,"  by  Francis  S.  Smith
(New  York,  1883).

SHAW,  Janips  Boylan.  clergyman,  b.  in  New
York  city.  25  Aug..  1808;  d.  in  Itochester,  N.  Y.,
8  May,  1891.  He  w»is  fittetl  for  the  sophomore  class
at  Vale,  but,  instead  of  entering  college,  Ijegaii  the
study  of  medicine,  then  that  of  law.  and  afterward
prepared  for  the  I'resbyterian  ministry.  Ix-ing  li-
censed t«>  preach  in  1832.  He  was  for  nearly  fifty
years  in  charge  of  the  Brick  church  in  Rochester,
and  then  l)ecame  |)astor  emeritus.  He  receivetl  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Rochester  in
18.52.  Dr.  Shaw  was  ino<lerator  of  the  general  as-
sembly of  his  church  in  1805,  anil  in  1873  chairman
of  the  first  committet!  that  was  sent  by  the  Prt^sby-
terian  church  in  the  Unite<l  States  to  the  estab-
lishe<l  church  of  Scotland.  He  was  a  trustee  of
Genesee  college.  Hamilton  college,  and  Auburn
theological  seminarv.  and  a  corjKjrate  member  of
the  American  Ijoard  of  commissioners  for  foreign
missions. He  published  fK-casional  sermons.

SHAW,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Mount  Mel-
lick,  Queen's  county.  Ireland,  in  1773  ;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  17  Sept.,  182J1.  He  was  the  son  of  an
English  officer,  and,  after  receiving  an  ordinary
education,  came  to  this  country  with  an  elder
brother  in  December,  1790,  and  settled  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.  He  iMx^me  a  sailor  in  the  merchant
marine,  and  in  1797  was  master  of  a  brig  that
sailed  to  the  West  In«lies.  When  hostilities  with
France  begim,  he  enteretl  the  U.  S.  navy  as  a
lieutenant,  3  Aug.,  1798.  In  December  of  the
following  year  he  was  given  command  of  the
"  Enterprise,"  one  of  two  schooners  that  had  been


486


SHAW


SHAW


built  esiwcially  for  chases  and  conflicts  with  small
fast-sailing  privateers.  She  was  of  165  t(nis  bur-
then, carrying  12  light  guns,  and  a  crew  that
varied  from  (50  to  75  men.  In  this  vessel,  during
a  cruise  of  eight  months,  he  captured  eight  French

Srivateers,  and  recovered  eleven  American  prizes,
ghting  five  spirited  actions,  two  of  them  with
vessels  of  superior  force.  His  most  serious  action,
which  was  considered  one  of  the  warmest  comlwts
of  the  war,  was  with  the  "  Flambeau,"  of  14  guns
and  100  men,  which,  after  a  lively  chase,  he  forced
to  fight  and  to  strike  her  colors  after  a  little  more
than  an  hour.  The  French  vessel  lost  about  half
her  crew  in  killed  and  wounded,  to  the  "  Enter-
prise's "  ten.  Lieut.  Shaw  cruised  in  the  Mediter-
ranean in  the  "  George  Washington  "  in  1801,  and
in  the  "  John  Adams  "  in  1805 ;  meanwhile  he  had
been  promoted  to  master-commandant,  22  May,
1804.  He  became  captain,  27  Aug.,  1807,  and  com-
manded the  s«juadron  in  1814  that  was  blockaded
by  the  enemy  m  Thames  river  between  New  Lon-
don and  Norwich,  Conn.  In  1816-'17  he  had
charge  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  and  after-
ward he  commanded  the  navy-yards  at  Boston,
Mass.,  and  Charleston,  S.  C.

SHAW,  John,  poet,  b.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  4
May,  1778 ;  d.  at  sea,  10  Jan.,  1809.  lie  was  gradu-
ated at  St.  John's  college,  Annapolis,  in  1795,
studied  medicine  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and  WHS  appointed  surgeon  in  the  fleet  that
was  sent  to  Algiers  in  December,  1798.  He  also
served  as  secretary  to  Gen.  William  W.  Eaton  in
Tunis,  but  returned  in  1800,  and  then  went,  in
1801,  to  continue  his  studies  in  Edinburgh.  He
went  to  Cannula  with  the  Earl  of  Selkirk  in  1805,
but  removed  to  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1807.  He  died
on  a  voyage  from  C'harleston,  S.  C,  to  the  Bahama
islands.  Dr.  Shaw  was  a  contributor  to  "  The
Portfolio."  His  poems,  with  a  memoir,  and  ex-
tracts from  his  foreign  correspondence  and  jour-
nals, were  published  (Philarlelphia,  1810).

SHAW,  Oliver,  musician,  b.  in  1770;  d.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  1  Jan.,  1849.  He  was  well
known  as  a  singer  and  teacher,  and  composed  nu-
merous ballads,  which  were  very  popular  at  one
time.  They  include  "Mary's  Tears,"  "Nothing
True  but  Heaven,"  "Sweet  Little  Ann,"  and  "The
Death  of  Perry."  Frederic  L.  Ritter  refers  to  him
as  the  "  blind  singer."

SHAW,  Samuel,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
2  Oct..  1754 ;  d.  at  sea,  30  May,  1794.  His  father,
Francis,  a  merchant  of  Boston,  was  associated  with
Robert  Gould  in  1770  in  founding  the  town  of
Gouldsborough,  Me.  Operations  were  begun  on  a
large  scale,  but  the  Revolution  f)ut  a  stop  to  them,
and  Shaw  lost  much  money  in  the  enterprise.
Samuel  early  entered  the  counting-house  of  his
father.  He  was  an  ardent  patriot,  apd  before  the
Revolution  had  a  quarrel  with  Lieut.  Wragg,  of  the
British  army,  who  was  billeted  at  his  father's
house.  A  duel  was  prevented  only  by  the  inter-
position of  Maj.  John  Pitcairn.  Young  Shaw  was
commissioned  a  lieutenant  of  artillery,  1  Jan.,  1776,
served  from  Dorchester  Heights  to  Yorktown,  and
at  the  close  of  the  war  had  attained  the  rank  of
major,  and  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Henry  Knox.  He
went  to  Canton  in  February,  1784,  as  supercargo,
and  on  his  return,  a  year  from  the  following  May,
Gen.  Knox  made  him  first  secretary  of  the  war  de-

Sartment.  He  matle  several  more  voyages  between
few  York  and  Canton,  and  in  February.  1786,  was
appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  the  latter  place.  He  died
on  his  way  from  that  city  to  Boston.  His  friend,
Josiah  Quincy,  published  "  The  Journal  of  Major
Samuel  Shaw,  the  First  American  Consul  at  Can-


ton, with  a  Life  of  the  Author"  (Boston,  1847). —
His  nephew,  Robert  Oould,  merchant,  b.  in
Gouldsborough,  Me.,  4  June,  1776;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  3  May,  1853,  was  the  son  of  Francis  Shaw,
who,  with  his  father,  Francis,  was  interested  in
founding  the  town  of  Gouldsborough.  Me.,  and  lost
much  money  when  the  enterprise  failed.  Robert
went  to  Boston  alx)ut  1789.  and  was  apprenticed
to  his  uncle  William.  When  he  came  of  age  he
entered  into  business  for  himself,  which  he  con-
tinued till  1810  in  various  partnerships.  From  the
latter  year  till  his  death  he  conducted  his  affairs
alone.  He  resided  for  several  years  in  London,
and  in  1807  invested  largely  in'  lands  in  Maine.
He  accumulated  a  fortune,  and  bequeathed  $110,-
000  to  lx»  put  at  interest  until  it  should  amount  to
$400,00().  This  is  to  be  designated  the  "Shaw
fund,"  wid  is  to  be  devoted  to  the  support  of  an
asylum  for  mariners'  children.  He  also  left  $10,-
000  to  purchase  a  site  for  the  institution. — Robert
Gould's  eldest  son.  Francis  Georg'e,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  23  Oct.,  1809;  d.  in  West  New  Brighton.
Staten  island,  N.  Y.,  7  Nov.,  1882,  entered  Harvard
in  1825,  but  left  in  1828  to  enter  his  father's  count-
ing-room, and  engaged  actively  in  business.  In
1841,  his  health  being  impaired,  he  withdrew  to
West  Roxburjr,  near  Brook  Farm,  where  an  experi-
ment in  associative  life,  in  which  he  was  interested,
was  begun  under  the  leadership  of  George  Ripley.
In  1847  he  left  West  Roxbury,  and,  after  living
more  than  three  years  upon  the  north  shore  of
Staten  island,  he  went  to  Europe  with  his  family.
After  four  years  he  returned  in  1855  to  Staten  isl-
and, where  he  resided  until  his  death.  While  liv-
ing at  West  Roxbury  he  was  a  member  of  the
school  committee  and  one  of  the  overseers  of  the
poor,  a  justice  of  the  peace,  and  president  of  the
first  common  council  of  Roxbury  when  that  town
became  a  city.  He  was  also  foreman  of  the  jury
of  Norfolk  county  that  first  proposed  the  establish-
ment of  the  State  reform-school  of  Massachusetts.
During  his  residence  on  Staten  island  he  was  a
trustee  of  the  village  in  which  he  lived,  a  trustee
of  the  Seaman's  retreat  and  of  the  S.  R.  Smith  in-
firmary, treasurer  of  the  American  union  of  asso-
ciationists  and  of  the  Sailor's  fund,  president  of  the
Freedman's  relief  association  and  of  the  New  York
branch  of  the  Freedman's  union  commission,  and
connected  with  various  local  organizations.  He
was  also  a  hereditary  member  of  the  Massachusetts
Society  of  the  Cincinnati.  Possessed  of  an  ample
fortune,  he  held  it  as  a  trust  for  the  unfortunate.
All  good  causes,  the  help  of  the  poor,  the  ignorant,
the  criminal,  and  the  enslaved,  had  alwavs  his
ready  sympathy  and  his  hearty  support,  rfe  was
the  author  of  several  translations  from  George
Sand,  Fourier,  and  Zschokke. — Francis  George's
son,  Robert  Gonld,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  10  Oct.,
1837;  d.  at  Fort  Wagner,  S.  C,  18  July,  1863,
entered  Harvard  in  1856,  but  left  in  March,  1859,
He  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  7th  New  York
regiment  on  19  April,  1861,  became  2d  lieutenant
in  the  2d  Massachusetts  on  28  May,  and  1st  lieu-
tenant on  8  July.  He  was  promoted  to  captain,
10  Aug.,  1862,  and  on  17  April,  1863,  became  colo-
nel of  the  54th  Massachusetts^  the  first  regiment  of
colored  troops  from  a  free  state  that  was  mustered
into  the  U.  o.  service.  He  was  killed  in  the  assault
on  Fort  Wagner  while  leading  the  advance  with
his  regiment.  A  bust  of  him  has  been  made  by
Edmonia  Lewis,  the  colored  sculptor,  a  portrait  by
William  Page  is  in  Memorial  hall  at  Harvard,  and
it  is  proposed  to  place  a  memorial  of  him,  consist-
ing of  an  equestrian  figure  in  hi^h  relief,  on  the
front  wall  of  the  state-house  yard  m  Boston.


SHAW


SHAYS


487


SHAW.  ThnmpHon  Uarrah.  navnl  offlccr.  h.  In
Philinlolphiii.  Vn..  2«  \un..  IMOI  ;  «l.  in  (Ji-rman-
town.  I'll.,  'in  July,  IH74.  lUi  entcrtnl  the  navy  an
«iniil.xlii|in)un,  20  >fav,  1H20.  was  conimiKKioniHl
liciitoimnt.  17  May,  IH'iS,  anil  •wtvwI  in  tht?  Wt^t
In<lit^  in  1h:J1-*2.  He  wa»  t ninsffnv<l  to  the
•*  Natc'hi'Z "  in  April.  IH.'Si,  ami  tlu-n  t<i  the  "  Ijox-
injfton"  an  flnp-Iieutenant  of  the  Hmzil  wjumlrtm.


and  HulMequently  as  nn  officer  of  that  xhiit  until
1^.  Ho  waM  (in  leave  at  I'hiliulelnhia  for  two
years,  ami  was  then  Ist  lieutenant  of  the  fri^te
*' Constitution."  of  the  Paeiflc  tu|uailron.  in  1>CW-'41.
During  the  Mexican  war  he  eomiuandeil  the
schooner  "  Petrel."  and  was  hi);hly  coinpliniented
for  hi?*  condui'l  in  eiipip-uients  at  Tampico,
Vera  Cruz,  and  Tuspan  in  184(l-'7.  UjH)n  his  re-
turn to  PhihuU'lphia  a  coramittoo  of  citizens  pre-
scnte<l  him  with  a  sword  and  e|Miulet8.  He  was
commissioned  commander,  7  Aujj.,  IB-W,  hmi
charge  of  the  naval  rendezvous  at  Philadelphia  in
18.')2-*4,  and  in  1854-'5  connnanded  the  sloop
"  Falmouth  "  in  the  Home  stjumlnm.  He  was  placed
on  the  reservwi  list  in  18.").'>,  but  claimed  that  this
did  him  an  injustice,  and  was  rcston-d  to  his  rank
by  a  naval  court  in  1857.  Ho  was  then  on  leave
until  the  civil  war  Ix'gan,  when  ho  took  command
of  the  steamer  "  Montgomery,"  in  the  Gulf  block-
ading sfjuadron.  He  was  ret  ire<l,  26  Fob.,  1862,  on
his  own  application,  after  more  than  forty  years'
isorvice.  Ho  was  continued  on  special  duty  at  New
York,  Philadelphia,  and  Bost«m  in  1863-'7,'and  was
promoted  to  comnuxlore  on  the  retired  list  on  4
April,  1867,  after  which  ho  was  unemployed.  See
*'  Uefence  of  Thompson  Darrah  Shaw  Ix'fore  the
Naval  Court  of  Inquiry,"  by  his  counsel  Robert  K.
Scott  (Washington,  1857).

SHAW,  WnUam  Smith,  lawyer,  b.  in  Haver-
hill, Mass.,  13  Aug.,  1778;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  25
April,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1798,  became  private  secretary  to  his  uncle.  Presi-
dent John  Adams,  and  at  the  close  of  the  latter's
administration  l)egan  to  situdv  law  in  IJoston  with
William  Sullivan.  He  was  atlmitted  to  the  bar  in
April,  1804,  and  in  the  same  year  became  treasurer
of  the  Anthology  society,  the  nucleus  of  the  Boston
athenaMiin.  He  devoted  much  of  his  time  to  the
collection  of  its  library,  and  became  known  as
"  Athenaeum  .Shaw."  lie  was  the  first  to  suggest
making  the  library  public,  and  connecting  with  it
a  rcjuling-roora.  After  the  incorporation  of  the
institution  he  was  its  secretary  and  librarian  till
182:J,  and  its  secretary  alone  till  1824.  At  his  de-
cease ho  left  it  collections  of  coins,  pamphlets,  and
books  to  the  value  of  $10,000.  tor  many  years
after  1806  he  was  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  district  court,
and  he  took  part  in  |»olitics  as  secretary  of  the  state
Federalist  committee.  Mr.  Shaw  wjus  a  fellow  of
the  American  ccademy,  an  original  memlH>r  of  the
American  antiquarian  society,  and  an  ofiicer  of  the
Linna>an  society.  Besides  his  connection  with  the
*♦  Monthly  Anthology  and  Ik>ston  Review,"  the
publication  of  the  Anthology  society,  he  was  a  pro-
moter of  the  "North  American  Review."  His  por-
trait, by  Gilbert  Stuart,  was  ()ainte<l  by  ortler  of
the  trustees  of  the  Athena'um  on  his  retirement
from  office.  See  **  Memorials  of  William  Smith
Shaw,"  by  Joseph  B.  Felt  (Boston,  18.V2).— His
cousin,  Lemael,  jurist,  b.  in  Barnstable,  Mass.,
9  Jan.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Ii<iston,  Mass.,  30  March,  1861.
His  father,  the  Rev.  Oakes  Shaw,  was  pastor  of
the  West  Parish  of  I^mstable  from  1700  till  his
death  in  1807.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Har-
vartl  in  1800,  and,  after  serving  for  a  year  as  usher
in  the  Franklin  K-hool  in  Boston,  U-gan  the  study
of  law  in  that  city. Ho  had  also  been  an  assistant


O^^^UCC^  U/^a.^


e<litor  of  the  Ronton  "Gazi-tte,"  and  in  1802  prtK
|M>sals  were  itwui*<l  for  the  publication  by  Ruhacriiv
tion  of  his  translation  of  a  Frt^nch  work  on  the
"Civil  ami  Military  Tran>a<'tioii»  of  lionaitarte.**
Flo  completiHl  the  tninsUtion.  but  it  met  with  no
flnanciul  siip|H>rt.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  io
1804.  Itegan  practice
in  Bost^>n,  and  row
erwlually  to  eminence
m  his  profession.  He
was  several  times  a
njemlier  of  the  legis-
lature  l»etween  1811
and  1810,  and  in  1820
a  delegate  to  the  State
constitutional  con-
vention. In  1821-'2
and  1828-'0  he  sat  in
the  state  senate.  He
draughted  the  char-
ter of  the  city  of  Bos-
ton, and  held  various
minor  town  offices,
but  never  allowwl
these  to  interfere  with

his  legal  practic-e.  In  January.  1820.  at  a  meeting
that  was  held  in  opposition  to  the  recently  estal>-
lishe<l  tariff,  he  was  the  head  of  a  conunittee  to
draught  a  memorial  to  congress.  In  1830,  on  the
death  of  Chief-Justice  Isaac  Parker,  of  the  Massa-
chusetts su|)reme  court,  Mr.  Shaw  was  ap|M)inted
his  successor,  though  he  had  never  held  any  judicial
office.  He  declineil  |»eremptorily  at  first,  but  finally
accept^tl.  He  took  his  seat  in  Sej)temlier.  1830.
and  held  it  till  his  resignation,  31  Aug..  1860.
During  this  perio<l  he  gainetl  a  high  reputation  for
his  judicial  ability,  and  he  is  regarded  as  one  of
the  foremost  jurists  that  New  Kngland  has  pro-
duced. Few  men  have  contributed  more  to  the
growth  of  the  law  as  a  progressive  science.  Among
other  noted  cases  he  presided  at  the  trial  of  the
convent  rioters  in  1834,  and  at  that  of  Prof.  John
W.  Webster  for  the  murder  of  Dr.  George  Park-
man.  His  charge  to  the  iury  in  the  latter  case
was  widely  condemned  as  harsh,  but  public  opin-
ion generally  sustained  him.  In  18.53  Judge
Shaw  visited  England,  where  he  was  conlially  re-
ceived by  members  of  the  Imr.  He  was  an  over-
seer of  Harvard  for  twenty-two  years,  an<l  for
twenty-seven  years  one  of  its  corporation,  and  he
held  membership  in  many  learned  societies.  His
reported  decisions  fill  a  large  jwirt  of  fifty  volumes,
and  include  many  in  novel  and  complicated  cases.
Among  his  published  addresses  a»*  a  "  Fourth-of-
Julv  Oration  "(1815);  "  Inaugural  Address  "(1830);
and  "  Address  at  the  Oi>ening  of  the  New  Court-
House,  Worcester"  (1845).

SHAYS,  Daniel,  insurgent,  b.  in  Hopkinton.
Mass.,  in  1747;  d.  in  S|)arta,  N.  Y..  20  Sept..  1825.
He  served  as  an  ensign  at  the  luittle  of  Bunker
Hill,  and  attaine<l  the  rank  of  captain  in  the  Con-
tinental army,  but  "  resigned  his  commission  for
reasons  quite'  problematical."  He  then  reside<l  at
Pelham  (now  Prescott),  and  in  1786  took  i>art  in
the  popular  movement  in  western  Massachusetts
for  the  redress  of  allege<l  grievances.  This  hod
begun  as  early  as  1782,  and  had  increastnl  as  i»opu-
lar  discontent,  incident  on  the  unsettled  condition
of  affairs  at  the  close  of  the  Revolution,  became
greater.  Conventions  were  held  in  several  western
counties,  lists  of  grievences  were  drawn  up,  com-
mittees of  corresjiondenc-e  were  established,  and
the  same  mtu'hinery  was  sought  to  bo  used  against
the  state  government  that  had  l>een  successful  in
overturning  British  rule  in  1775. The  complaints


488


SHAYS


SHEA


were  divers,  but  were,  in  general,  that  the  gov-
ernor's salary  was  too  high,  the  senate  aristocratic,
the  lawyers  extortionate,  and  taxes  too  burdensome.
Among  the  demands  were,  that  the  general  court
should  no  longer  sit  in  Boston,  and  that  a  large
issue  of  paper  money  should  be  made.  Though  the
conventions  deprecated  violence,  there  were  up-
risings in  several  counties,  directed  against  the
courts,  which  were  popularly  regarded  as  the  in-
struments of  legal  oppression,  especially  in  the  col-
lection of  debts.  Tne  tribunals  were  prevented
from  sitting,  in  many  cases,  and  the  malcontents
prew  bolder.  The  militia  was  often  powerless,  as
Its  members  largely  sympathized  with  the  mobs.
An  attempt  by  the  legislature  to  redress  some  of
the  popular  grievances  proved  futile.  Shays  first
became  known  as  a  leader  in  the  rebellion  when,
at  the  head  of  about  1,000  men,  he  appeared  at
Springfield  to  prevent  the  session  of  the  supreme
court  at  that  place.  The  court-house,  by  the  gov-
ernor's order,  had  been  occupied  bv  a  somewhat
smaller  body  of  militia  under  Gen.  William  Shep-
ard,  which  sustained  the  court,  but,  after  sitting
three  days,  it  adjourned,  having  transacted  little
business,  and  on  the  fourth  day  both  parties  dis-
persed. Shays  was  also  present  at  the  large  gath-
ering of  insurgents  that  took  place  in  Worcester  in
December,  and  retired  at  the  head  of  a  large  part
of  them  to  Rutland,  Vt.,  on  9  Doc.  At  this  time
he  seems  to  have  regretted  his  part  in  the  agitation,
as,  in  a  conversation  with  a  confidential  agent  of
the  state,  he  expressed  his  desire  to  desert  his  fol-
lowers and  receive  a  pardon.  The  officer  was  after-
ward empowered  to  offer  him  one  on  that  condition,
but  had  no  opportunity  to  do  so.  In  January,
1787,  three  bodies  of  insurgents  concentrated  on
Springfield,  where  they  hoped  to  capture  the  Con-
tinental arsenal,  which  was  defended  by  Gen.  Shep-
ard  with  1,000  militia.  The  largest  body,  under
Shays,  numbered  1,100  men,  and  approached  by
the  Boston  road.  Meanwhile  the  state  govern-
ment had  raised  and  equipped  an  army  of  4,000
men,  under  Gen.  Benjamin  Lincoln,  whose  approach
made  hasty  action  necessary.  Shays  sent  a  mes-
sage to  Luke  Day,  the  leader  of  one  of  the  other
bodies  of  insurgents,  saying  that  he  should  attack
the  arsenal  on  25  Jan.,  and  desiring  Day's  aid.
The  latter  answered  that  he  could  not  move  till
the  26th,  but  the  despatch  was  intercepted  by  Gen.
Shepard,  and  the  militia  were  therefore  in  readi-
ness. Before  advancing.  Shays  had  sent  a  petition
to  Gen.  Lincoln,  who  was  then  two  days'  march
from  Springfield,  proposing  a  truce  till  the  next
session  of  the  legislature,  but  before  a  reply  could
reach  him  he  attacked  the  arsenal  early  on  the
afternoon  of  the  25th.  After  repeated  warnings,
and  two  volleys  over  the  heads  of  the  approaching
body,  the  militia  fired  directly  into  their  ranks,
killing  three  men  and  wounding  one.  Shays  at-
tempted to  rally  his  men,  but  they  retreated  pre-
cipitately to  Ludlow,  ten  miles  distant,  and  on  the
next  day  effected  a  junction  with  the  forces  of  Eli
Parsons,  the  Berkshire  leader,  after  losing  about
200  by  desertion.  After  the  arrival  of  Gen.  Lin-
coln's army,  and  the  consecjuent  flight  of  Day  and
his  men,  Shays  continued  his  retreat  through  South
Hadley  to  Amherst.  He  was  pursued  by  the  state
troops  to  this  point,  and  then  took  position  on  two
high  hills  in  Pelham,  which  were  rendered  difficult
of  access  by  deep  snow.  On  30  Jan.,  Gen.  Lincoln
summoned  him  to  lay  down  his  arms,  and  Shays
returned  a  conciliatory  answer,  suggesting  a  truce
till  a  reply  could  be  obtained  to  a  petition  that  had
just  been  sent  to  the  general  court.  Gen.  Lincoln
refused. Meanwhile  the  legislature  met,  declared


the  state  to  be  in  rebellion,  and  rejected  the  peti-
tion, which  too  much  resembled  a  communication
from  one  indef>endent  power  to  another.  On  3
Feb.  the  insurgents  moved  to  Petersham,  under
cover  of  a  conference  between  one  of  their  leaders
and  a  state  officer,  and  they  were  followed  by  the
state  troops  in  a  forced  march  of  thirty  miles
through  a  blinding  snow-storm  and  in  a  bitter
north  wind.  When  they  were  overtaken  the  in-
surgents made  little  resistance.  They  were  pur-
sued for  about  two  miles  beyond  the  town;  150
were  captured,  and  the  rest  dispersed.  This  ended
Shays's  rebellion.  Several  of  its  leaders  were  sen-
tenced to  be  hanged,  but  they  were  finally  par-
doned. Shays,  after  living  in*  Vermont  about  a
year,  asked  and  received  pardon,  and  removed  to
Sparta,  N.  Y.  He  was  allowed  a  pension  in  his  old
age,  for  his  services  during  the  Revolution.  See
"History  of  the  Insurrections  in  Massachusetts
in  the  Year  1786,  and  the  Rebellion  Consequent
Thereon,"  by  George  R.  Minot  (Boston,  1810),  and
Josiah  G.  Holland's  "  History  of  Western  Massa-
chusetts "  (2  vols.,  Springfield,  1855).

SHEA,  John  Augustus  (siiay),  author,  b.  in
Cork,  Ireland,  in  1802 ;  d.  in  New  York,  15  Aug.,
1845.  He  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1827,  and
engaged  in  journalism.  He  published  "  Rudekki,
an  Eastern  Romance  of  the  Seventh  Century,  in
Verse  "  (Cork,  1826) ;  "  Adolph,  and  other  Poems  "
(New  York,  1831);  "Parnassian  Wild  Flowers"
(Georgetown,  1836);  and  "Clontarf,  a  Narrative
Poem"  (New  York,  1843).  A  volume  of  his
"  Poems  "  was  published  after  his  death  by  his  son,
George  Augustus  Shea  (1846).  He  left  in  manu-
script "  Di  Vasari,"  an  unfinished  tragedy,  a  life  of
Byron,  and  a  poem  entitled  "  Time's  Mission."  His
most  popular  piece  is  "The  Ocean." — His  son,
George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cork,  Ireland,  10  June,  1826.
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  early  life  and
settled  in  New  York,  where  he  studied  law.  After
being  called  to  the  bar,  he  attained  distinction  in
his  profession,  and  was  appointed  corporation  at-
torney of  New  York  from  1865  to  1867.  He  became
chief  justice  of  the  Marine  court  of  New  York  in
1870,  and  held  the  position  up  to  1882.  He  was
associate  counsel  with  Charles  O'Conor  in  defend-
ing Jefferson  Davis,  and  was  counsel  for  the  Kings
county  elevated  railroad  in  Brooklyn,  establishing
its  charter  by  a  decision  of  the  court  of  appeals,  re-
versing the  special  and  general  terms  in  Brooklyn.
He  wrote  "  Hamilton,  a  Historical  Study "  (New
York,  1877).  An  enlarged  edition  was  issued
under  the  title  "  The  Life  and  Epoch  of  Alexander
Hamilton,  a  Historical  Study  "  (Boston,  1880).

SHEA,  John  Dawson  Gilmary,  author,  b.  in
New  York  city,  22  July,  1824.  He  was  educated  at
the  grammar-school  of  Columbia  college,  of  which
his  father  was  principal,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  but  has  devoted  himself  chiefiy
to  literature.  He  edited  the  "  Historical  Maga-
zine "  from  1859  till  1865,  was  one  of  the  founders
and  first  president  of  the  United  States  Catholic
historical  society,  is  a  member  or  corresponding
member  of  the  principal  historical  societies  in  this
country  and  Canada,  and  corresponding  member
of  the  Royal  academy  of  history,  Madrid,  lie  has
received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  St.  Francis
Xavier  college,  New  York,  and  St.  John's  college.
Fordham.  His  writings  include  "The  Discovervand
Exploration  of  the  Mississippi  Vallev"  (New  Vork,
1853);  "History  of  the  Catnolic  Missions  among
the  Indian  Tribes  of  the  United  States"  (1854;
German  translation,  WQrzburg,  1856) ;  "  The  Fallen
Brave"  (1861);  "  Early  Voyages  up  and  down  the
Mississippi  "  (Albany,  1862) ;  "  Novum  Belgium,  an


SHEAFE


SnECUT


489


Account  of  the  Now  Netherlands  in  lfl48-'4"  (New
York,  1^W2);  "The  Oi»erali(>n» of  the  Frem-h  Fleet
under  Count  de  (imuse "  (1H04):  "The  Lini*oln
Memorial"  MHOS);  trauHlationH  of  Charlevoix's
"  History  an«l  (Jeneral  Description  of  New  France  "
(6  vols.,  lWtO-*72);  Hennepin's  "Description  of
Louisiana"  (18^*0) :  Lo  Clercffs  "  Kstaltiishinent  of
the  Faith"  (1881);  and  Penalosa's  "  KxiHMlilion  "
(1882);  "Catholic  Church  in  Colonial  Davs"(188«);
"Catholic  Hierarchy  of  the  Unitwl  States"  (1886);
and  "Life  and  Times  of  Archbishop  Carroll"  (1888).
He  also  translated  De  Courcy's  "Catholic  Church
in  the  United  States"  (18.5(J)';  and  edite<i  the  C^ra-
moisy  series  of  narratives  and  documents  l)earing
on  the  early  history  of  the  French-American  colo-
nics (20  vols.,  18^7-68):  "Washington's  Private
Diarv  "  (1861) :  Cadwallader  Colden's  "  History  of
the  Five  Indian  Nations,"  edition  of  1727  (1866) ;
Alsop's  "  Maryland  "  (1860);  a  series  of  grammars
and  dictionaries  of  the  Indian  languages  (15  vols.,
1860-74) ;  and  "  Life  of  I'ius  IX."  (1875).  He  has
also  published  "  Bibliography  of  American  Catholic
Bibles  and  Testaments  "  (1859),  corrected  several
of  the  very  erroneous  Catholic  Bibles,  and  revised
by  the  Vulgate  Challoner's  original  Bible  of  1750
(1871),  and  has  issue<l  several  prayer-books,  school
histories,  Bible  dictionaries,  and  translations.

SHEAFE,  JameH,  senator,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H..  16  Nov.,  1755;  d.  there,  5  Dec.,  1829.  He
was  gra^luated  at  Harvard  in  1774,  was  for  several
years  a  member  of  the  board  of  selectmen  of  the
town  of  Portsmouth,  a  representative,  and  subse-
quently a  senator,  in  the  New  Hampshire  legisla-
ture, and  a  meml)er  of  the  State  executive  council.
He  was  a  representative  in  congress  from  New
Hampshire  from  1779  till  1801,  and  U.  S.  sena-
tor from  7  Dec.,  1801,  till  1802,  when  he  resigned.
He  was  defeated  as  the  Federalist  candidate  for
governor  in  1816  by  William  Plumer,  a  Democrat.
Mr.  Sheafe  was  a  merchant  and  ship-owner.

SHEAFER,  Pet«r  Wenrick,  mining  engineer,
b.  in  Halifax,  Pa.,  31  March,  1819.  He  conipleted
his  education  in  the  academv  at  Oxford,  N.  V.,  in
1837,  and  was  associated  with  Henry  D.  Rogers  in
the  first  geological  survey  of  Pennsylvania  in  1838.
In  this  connection  he  was  specially  engaged  in  trac-
ing the  geological  features  of  the  range  of  moun-
tains that  extends  from  near  Pottsville  to  beyond
Shamokin  and  Tamaqua.  In  1848  he  settled  in
Pottsville  and  devoted  his  attention  to  mining  en-
gineering, and  he  has  Imen  sjiecially  active  in  the
development  of  the  coal  and  iron  interests  of  that
district.  The  maimgement  of  the  coal-mines  of
the  Philadelphia  and  Reading  coal  and  iron  com-

giny,  and  of  those  that  were  be<|ueathed  by  Stephen
irartl  to  Philadelphia,  were  for  a  long  time  con-
flde«l  to  him.  He  has  been  consulted  frequently  in
complicated  questions  of  mining  law,  and  has  test i-
fle<l  in  court  as  an  exi»ert  in  these  subjects.  In
1849  he  secured  the  passage  of  a  bill  for  c«)mpleting
the  first  state  survey,  and  in  1873  he  was  influen-
tial in  securing  the  ap{)ointment  of  J.  P.  Lesley
iq.  V.)  to  undertake  the  charge  of  the  second  survey
of  Pennsylvania.  Mr.  Sheafer  is  a  member  of  vari-
ous societies,  including  the  American  institute  of
mining  engineers,  to  whose  transactions  he  has  con-
tributed professional  pa|)ers.  He  issueti  in  1875,
under  the  auspices  of  the  Pennsylvania  historical
uocietv.  H  map  of  Pennsvlvania  as  it  was  in  1775.

SHtAFFE,  Sir  Roger  Hale,  bart.,  British  sol-
dier, b.  in  Bost<m,  Mass.,  15  July,  MiiH;  d.  in  Edin-
burgh. Scotland,  17  July,  1851.'  He  was  the  thinl
8on  of  William  Sheaffe,  deputy  collector  of  customs
at  Boston.  After  the  death  of  the  lx>y's  father.
Earl  Percy,  whose  quarters  were  at  his  mother's


!  house,  took  charge  of  his  eilucation,  and  procured
I  him  a  commission  in  the  5th  foot,  1  May,  1778.
j  He  became  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  1798,  nerved  in
I  Holland  in  1799,  and  in  the  expe<lition  to  the  Baltic

in  1801.  He  was
I  on  duty  in  Canada
i  from  Si'ptemlier,
1802,  till  Octolier,
1811,  on  25  April,
1808,  received  the
brevet  rank  of  col-
onel, and  on  4
June,  1811,  be-
came a  major-gen-
eral. He  served
again  in  Canada
from  29  July.  1812,
till  November.
1813,  and  com-
manded the  Brit-
ish troops  after  the
fall  of  Oen.  Sir
Isaac  Brock  at
Queenston,  where
he  defeated  the
American  troops,  and  for  this  service  was  made  a
baronet,  16  Jan.,  1813.  He  defende<l  York  (now
Toronto)  when  it  was  attacked  in  April,  1813.  Sir
Roger  had  been  apix>inte<l  administrator  of  the

fovemment  of  Canada  West  after  the  death  of
trock,  and  continued  as  such,  and  in  command
of  the  troops,  till  June,  1813.  He  was  promoted
lieutenant-general,  19  July.  1821,  was  advanced  to
the  full  rank  of  general,  28  June.  1828,  and  became
colonel  of  the  3<)th  regiment.  21  Dec,  1829.

SHEARMAN,  Thomas  Ga-skell  (sher-man),
lawyer,  b.  in  Birmingham.  England,  25  Nov.,  1834.
He  came  with  his  parents  to  New  York  when  he
was  nine  years  old.  was  educated  privately,  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Kings  county  in
1859,  and  became  successful  in  practice  in  New
York  city.  Since  1879  Mr.  Shearman  has  been  an
active  worker  in  the  cause  of  free-trade.  He  was
joint  author  of  "  Tillinghast  and  Shearman's  Prac-
tice, Pleadings,  and  Forms  "  (New  York,  1861-'5),
and  "Shearman  and  Redfield  on  Negligence"  (1869),
prepared  for  the  commissioners  of  the  code  the
whole  of  the  "  Book  of  Forms  "  (Albany,  1861),  and
most  of  that  part  of  the  civil  code  that  relates  to
obligations,  etc.  (Albany,  1865),  and  has  written
numerous  pamphlets  on  free-tratle,  protection,  in-
direct taxation,  and  cognate  subjects.

SHECUT,  JohnLinnieusEdnardWhitridge,
author,  b.  in  Beaufort.  S.  ('.,  4  Dec,  1770;  d.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1836.  He  was  graduated  in
medicine  at  Philadelphia  in  1791.  anA  soon  after-
ward began  practice  in  Charleston,  where  he  spent
the  remainder  of  his  life.  He  was  actively  con-
cerned in  founding  the  South  Carolina  homespun
society,  the  first  cotton-factory  in  the  state,  and  in
1813  organize<l  the  Anticpiarian  society  of  Charles-
ton, now  the  Literary  and  philosophical  sm-iety  of
South  Carolina.  Dr.  Shecut  maintaineil  that  a
pretlisposing  cause  of  yellow  fever  was  the  derange-
ment of  the  atmosphere  consequent  upon  its  Xteing
dcprive<l  of  its  due  proportion  of  electricity,  and  he
is  said  to  have  l>een  the  first  physician  in  Charles-
ton to  api>ly  electricity  in  the  treatment  of  this
disease.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Flora  Carolinien-
sis,  a  Historical.  Metlical,  and  Economical  Display
of  the  Vegetal»le  Kingdom"  (2  vols.,  Charleston.
1806);  "An  Essay  on  the  Yellow  Fever  of  1817"
(1817);  "An  Inquiry  into  the  Propert  ies  and  Pow-
ers of  the  Electric  Fluid,  and  its  Artificial  Aopli-
cation  to  Medical  Uses"  (1818);  "Shecut's Medical


490


SHEDD


SHEELEIGH


and  Philosophical  Essays"  (1819):  "Elements  of
Natural  Philosophy  "  (1820) ;  and  "  A  New  Theory
of  the  Earth  "  (182G).

SHEDD.  Joel  Herbert,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
PepjtKjrell,  Mass.,  31  May,  1834.  He  was  educated
in  Kridgewater  academy,  and  then  took  a  three-
years'  course  in  civil  engineering  in  a  Boston  oflice.
On  the  completion  of  his  studies  he  established  him-
self in  his  profession  in  Boston,  but  in  1809  removed
to  Providence,  R.  I.,  where  he  has  since  resided.
In  1800  he  was  appointed  commissioner  for  Massa-
chusetts on  the  Concord  and  Sudbury  rivers,  and
he  has  been  chairman  of  the  state  board  of  harbor
commissioners  of  Rhode  Island  since  its  organiza-
tion in  1876.  Ho  was  commissioner  from  Rhode
Island  to  the  World's  fair  in  Paris  in  1878,  and
chairman  of  the  Rhode  Island  body  of  the  inter-
state commission  on  boundary-lines  between  that
state  and  Connecticut  in  1886-'7  ;  and  was  also  at
the  head  of  the  similar  commission  on  the  encroach-
ments of  Pawtucket  river  in  1887-'8.  Mr.  Shedd
was  elected  a  member  of  the  American  society  of
civil  engineers  in  1809,  and  was  chairman  of  its
sub-committee  on  sewerage  and  sanitary  engineer-
ing at  the  World's  fair  in  Philadelphia  in  1870.  He
has  executed  many  engineering  works  in  the  cities
of  the  New  England  and  the  middle  states,  as  well
as  for  the  U.  S.  government  and  the  states  of  Mas-
sachusetts and  Rhode  Island.  The  most  important
single  work  of  engineering  that  he  has  designed  and
executed  is  the  Providence  water-works,  costing
$4,500,000.  Every  element  of  these  works  was
studied  fundamentally,  and  nothing  was  copied.
They  have  been  much  referred  to,  and  have  a  Euro-
pean reputation.  Mr.  Shedd  has  probably  done  more
to  improve  the  quality  of  American  hydraulic  ce-
ments than  any  other  engineer,  both  by  the  rigidity
of  his  demands  and  by  his  careful  testing  of  the  ma-
terial. He  has  been  frequently  called  on  to  testify  on
engineering  matters  in  court,and  he  has  contributed
largely  to  professional  journals.  Among  his  articles
are  the  section  on  "  Rain  and  Drainage  "  in  French's
"Farm  Drainage "  (New  York,  1859);  "Essay  on
Drainage  "  (Boston,  1859) ;  and  reports  on  "  Venti-
lation" (1804);  "Roads"  (1805);  "  Water- Works "
(18e8-'9) ;  and  "  Sewerage  "  (1874-'84).  The  latter
include  reports  to  nearly  all  of  the  principal  cities
of  New  England.— His  wife,  Julia  Ann  Clark,  b.
in  Newport,  Me.,  8  Aug.,  1834,  has  contributed  on
art  to  various  periodicals,  and,  besides  translations
in  book-form,  has  published  "  Famous  Painters
and  Paintings"  (Boston,  1874);  "The  Ghiberti
Gates"  (1879);  "Famous  Sculptors  and  Sculp-
ture" (1881);  and  "Raphael,  his  Madonnas  and
Holv  Families  "  (1883).

SHEDD,  William  Oreenongh  Thayer,  au-
thor, b.  in  Acton,  Mass.,  21  June,  1820.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1839,
and  at  Auburn  theological  seminary  in  1843,  and
in  1844  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  in  Brandon,  Vt.  He  became  professor  of
English  literature  in  the  University  of  Vermont
in  1845,  which  chair  he  held  till  appointed  to  that
of  sacred  rhetoric  in  Auburn  theological  seminary
in  1852.  In  1854  he  was  made  professor  of  church
history  in  Andover  theological  seminary.  In  1802
he  became  associate  pastor  of  the  Brick  church
(Presbyterian)  in  New  York  city,  but  he  resigned
in  1803,  and  was  appointed  to  the  professorship  of
biblical  literature  .in  Union  theological  seminary,
and  in  1874  to  that  of  systematic  theology  in  the
same  institution,  which  he  still  (1888)  holds.  He
has  published  "  Eloquence  a  Virtue,  or  Outlines
of  Systematic  Rhetoric ;  from  the  German  of  Dr.
Francis  Theremin  "  (New  York,  1850) ;  "  Coleridge's


/y  9  7:^KyXji^t>u>^.


Works,  with  Introductory  Elssays  "  (7  vols.,  1853) ;
"  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  History "  (An-
dover, 1850) ;  "  Discourses  and  Essays  "  (1850) ;  "  A
Manual  of  Church  History,"  from  the  German  of
Heinrich  Ernst  Fer-
dinand Guericke  (2
vols.,  1857);  "The
Confession  of  Augus-
tine," with  introduc-
tory essay  (1800);  "A
History  of  Christian
Doctrine "  (2  vols..
New  York,  1863) ;
"Ilomileticsand  Pas-
toral Theology  "
(1807);  "Sermons "to
the  Natural  Man "
(1871);  "Theological
Essays  "(1877);  "Lit-
erary Essays  "  (1878) ;
"Commentary  on  St.
Paul's  Epistle  to  the
Romans  ^'  (1879) ;
"Sermons  to  the  Spir-
itual Man  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Doctrine  of  Endless  Pun-
ishment "  (1885).  Dr.  Shedd  wrote  the  "  Gospel  of
Mark"  in  vol.  ii.  of  the  translation  of  Lange's
commentary ;  and  contributed  an  introduction  to
Samuel  R.  Asbury's  translation  of  Dr.  Carl  Acker-
man's  work,  "  The  Christian  Element  in  Plato  and
the  Platonic  Philosophy  "  (Edinburgh,  1800),  and
to  the  American  edition  of  Dr.  James  McCosh's
"  Intuitions  of  the  Mind"  (New  York,  1805).

SHEELEIGH,  Matthias,  clergyman,  b.  at
Charlestown,  Chester  co..  Pa.,  29  Dec,  1821.  He
is  a  descendant  of  a  German  family  that  came  to
this  country  early  in  the  18th  century,  and  whose
name  originally  was  Schillich.  He  studied  in  West
Chester,  Pa.,  and  in  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettys-
burg, in  1840-'l,  and  was  graduated  at  the  theo-
logical seminary  there  in  1852.  In  the  same  year
he  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Lutheran
church,  and  in  1885  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Newberry  college,  Newberry,  S.  C.  He  has
filled  various  pastorates  in  New*  York,  Pennsyl-
vania, and  New  Jersey,  and  since  1809  has  been  at
Fort  Washington,  Pa.,  near  Philadelphia.  He  was
secretary  of  the  general  synod  in  1800,  1868,  and
1871,  has  been  a  member  of  the  Lutheran  board
of  publication  since  1859,  and  its  president  in
1809-71,  and  a  director  of  Gettysburg  theological
seminary  since  1804.  In  1868  he  was  appointed
by  the  general  synod  one  of  its  delegates  to  the
meeting  of  the  World's  evangelical  alliance  that
was  held  in  New  York  in  1873.  He  has  won  repu-
tation as  a  poet  and  statistician,  and  is  a  frequent
contributor  to  religious  periodicals.  He  has  been
editor  of  the  "Sunday-school  Herald,"  in  Phila-
delphia, since  1860,  and  of  the  "  Lutheran  Alma-
nac and  Year- Book  "  since  1871.  Besides  numerous
doctrinal  and  historical  articles  in  theological  re-
views, and  many  contributions  in  poetry  and  prose
to  periodicals,  he  has  published  "  Hymns  for  the
Seventh  Jubilee  of  the  Reformation "  (Philadel-
phia, 1807);  "An  Ecclesiad :  A  Jubilee  Poem  be-
fore the  General  Synod  ",  (1871) ;  "  A  Gettys-
burgiad:  A  Jubilee  Poem  before  the  Gettysburg
Theological  Seminary"  (1876):  and  "Luther:  A
Song  Tribute,  more  than  Fifty  Original  Poems,  on
the  400th  Anniversary  of  Luther's  Birth  "  (1883).
A  large  number  of  his  hymns  have  found  a  place
in  collections.  He  has  a  volume  of  original  son-
nets nearly  ready  for  publication.  Besides  these,
he  has  published  "Olai  Thorlaksson,  an  Icelandic
Narrative,"  translated  from  the  German  (1870) ;


SlIKFKEY


SHELBY


481


*•  Outline  of  01«1  TesUinent  History  "  (1869) ;  "  Out-
line of  New  TiwUmoMl  History  "  (1870);  "Herald
Picture  Il«x»k8"  (12  vol».,  1878);  and  a  "  Hriof  His-
tory of  Martin  Luther"  (1883).

>4HEFFEY,  UanipL  lawyer,  b.  in  Frederick.
Md..  in  171K);  d.  m  Staunton,  Va,.  3  Dec..  18.S0.
He  was  hr»-d  a  shm-nmker  in  liis  father's  shop,  but,
althoujih  without  atlvanlHjr«s,  acquirwi  through
his  own  exertions  a  n'sjK'«-tnl»le  iHlueation.  He
eniijrrat<>d  U)  Virginia  wneii  twenty-one  years  of
ap?,  followed  his  tra»le  at  Wytheville.  at  the  same
time  studic<l  law.  an«l  was  mlniittetl  to  the  bar.
His  original  character  and  natural  ability  soon
brought  him  into  notic«\  he  acqiiin-d  a  large  prac-
tice, and,  removing  to  Staunton,  won  reputatiim
at  the  Imr,  and  was  for  many  years  a  member  of
the  legislature.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Federalist  in  1810,  and  served  by  re-election  from
1809  till  1817.  His  8{)eech  in  favor  of  the  renewal
of  the  charter  of  the  first  United  States  bank  was
a  masterly  effort,  and  was  listened  to  by  the  house
for  three  hours  in  profound  silence,  lie  opposed
the  war  of  1812.  He  often  engageil  in  controversy
with  .lohn  Randolph,  who  on  one  occasion,  in  com-
menting on  his  sneech,  said :  "  The  shoemaker  ought
not  to  go  beyoncl  his  last."  Mr.  ShefTey  retorted  :
"  If  that  gentleman  had  ever  been  on  a  shoemaker's
bench,  he  would  never  have  left  it."

SHEFFIELD,  Joseph  Earle,  donor,  b.  in
Southport,  Conn,,  19  June,  1793 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  16  Feb.,  1882.  He  received  a  common-
school  etlucation,  and  in  1808.  when  only  fifteen
years  of  age,  began  his  business  career  as  a  clerk
m  New  Benie,  N.  C.  In  1813  he  Ixjcame  a  partner
in  a  New  York  house,  but  remained  in  New  Berne
to  represent  the  business  there.  He  travelled  ex-
tensively in  the  south  on  business  matters,  and,
visiting  Mobile,  Ala.,  he  decided  to  transfer  his
southern  business  to  that  city,  and  in  a  few  years
became  its  chief  cotton  merchant.  In  183.5  he
returned  to  his  native  state,  and  established  him-
self in  New  Haven.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the
construction  of  the  New  Haven  and  Northampton
canal,  and  was  one  of  the  most  energetic  in  secur-
ing the  charter  for  the  New  York  and  New  Haven
railnmd.  His  next  enterprise  was  building  the  Chi-
cago and  Rock  Island  railroad,  which  proved  very
profitable  to  him.  His  donations  to  Yale  have  been
munificent.  In  1860  the  name  of  its  scientific  de-
partment, which  was  reorganized  and  place<l  on  a
firm  Iwsis  by  his  lilierality,  was  changed  to  the
Sheffield  scientific  school  in  his  honor.  Its  two
buildings  are  called  respectively  Sheffield  hall  and
North  Sheflleld  hall,  ile  gave  to  other  coUe^,
seminaries,  and  n'ligious  institutions,  and  his  gifts
amounte<l  to  more  than  $1,000,000.

SHEFFIELD,  WilHam  Paine,  senator,  b.  on
Block  island.  R.  I.,  30  Aug..  1819.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Kingston  acatlemy,  R.  I.,  and  by  private
tutors,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  law-school  in
184ii.  and  admitte<l  to  the  bar  in  1844.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1842-'5,  1849-'52,
1857-61.  1863-'73,  and  1875-'84.  He  was  chosen
to  congress  as  a  Unionist  in  1860.  served  one  term,
and  in  1884  he  was  appointed  by  the  governor
to  fill  out  the  unexpired  term  of  Henry  B.  Anthony
in  the  U.  S.  senate,  serving  from  19  Nov.  of  that
year  till  22  Feb.,  1885,  when  the  vacancy  was  fillwl
by  the  legislature.  He  was  a  memlicr  of  the  Rhode
Island  const ituti<mal  convention  in  1841,  and  of
the  one  that  frame<l  the  existing  constitution  in
1842.  He  was  a  commissioner  to  revise  the  state
laws  in  1871-'2,  has  been  f)resident  of  the  People's
library  since  its  foundation,  and  a  trustee  of  the
Redwood  library,  in  Newport,  for  many  years. His


publications  include  many  s|»eechefl  and  mono-
graphs, es[)ecially  conc>eniing  alterations  on  the
constitution  of  RluMle  Island;  "Historical  Sketch
of  Block  Island"  (New[K»rt,  1H76) ;  "Historical
Sketch  of  New|K»rt"  (1876);  and  "Rhode  Island
Privat.-ens"  (IHH;}).

SHE<ii(Ki>l'E,  JameM  Henry,  artist,  b.  about
1810;  d.  7  April,  1879.  He  devotwl  himself  mainly
to  portraiture,  but  prmiuced  also  landscafH?  and
genre  pieces.  He  firxt  exhibited  at  the  Aca<lemy
of  design.  New  York,  in  18J15,  wa**  elected  an  a-sso-
ciate  in  1841,  and  Ix'catne  an  aca<leiniciaii  two  years
later.  Frt>m  1848  till  1852  he  was  corres|>onding
secrt>tary  of  the  academy.

SHELBY,  Evan,  pioneer,  b.  in  Wales  in  1720;
d.  at  King's  Meadows  (now  Bristol),  Tenh.,  4  Dec.,
1794.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  emigrate<l  with  his
father's  family  to  North  Mountain,  near  Hagers-
town,  Md.  lie  received  a  meager  education,  but
when  quite  young  became  note<l  as  a  hunter  and
woodsman.  In  the  old  French  war  he  rose  from
the  rank  of  private  to  that  of  ca[>tain,  in  which
capacity  he  served  throughout  the  cam^mign  of
Gen,  John  P'orlws.  He  then  engaged  in  trade  with
the  Indians,  and  afterwanl  en>barki><l  extensively
in  herding  and  raising  cattle  on  the  Virginia  bor-
der. He  was  thus  employed  when,  in  1774,  war
began  with  the  Shawnees  and  Dela wares.  Raising
a  body  of  fifty  volunteers  in  the  Watauga  district,
he  led' them  on  a  march  of  twenty-five  days  through
a  trackless  wilderness,  and  joined  the  Virginia
army  on  the  eve  of  the  battle  of  Point  Pleasant.
Toward  the  close  of  the  action,  all  his  ranking
officers  being  either  killed  or  disabled,  the  com-
mand devolved  upon  him.  and  he  utterly  routed
the  enemy.  In  1779  he  led  a  successful  expedi-
tion against  the  Chickainauga  Indians.  He  subse-
quently served  with  the  Virginia  army  on  the  sea-
board, rising  to  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  then  to
that  of  general. — His  eldest  son.  Isaac,  governor
of  Kentucky,  b.  in  North  Mountain,  Md..  11  Dec.,
1750;  d.  near  .Stanford,  Kv.,  18  July,  1826.  ac-
quired a  common  English  education,  and  the  prin-
ciples of  survey-
ing at  Frederick-
town,  and  before
he  was  of  age
served  as  deputy
sherifif  of  Freder-
ick county.  In
1771  he  removed
with  his  father  to
the  present  site
of  Bristol,  Tenn.,
and  followed  with
him  the  business
of  herding  cattle
till  1774,  when,
being  appointed
lieutenant  in  his
father's  company,
he  served  in  the
battle  of  Point
Pleasant,  which
he  was  instrumen-
tal in  winning.  He  commandetl  the  fort  at  that
place  till  July.  1775.  when  his  troops  wore  disband-
e<l  liy  Ixird '  Dun  more,  lest  they  should  join  the
[Mitriot  anny.  During  the  following  year  he  was
employed  at  surveying  in  Kentucky,  nut,  his  health
failing,  he  returned  home  in  July.  1776,  just  in
time  to  l)e  at  the  battle  of  Long  Island  flats.  At
the  first  furious  onset  of  the  savages,  the  Ameri-
can lines  were  broken,  and  then  Shelby,  present
only  as  a  volunteer  private,  seized  the  command.


492


SHELBY


SHELDON


reformed  the  troops,  and  inflicted  upon  the  In-
dians a  severe  defeat,  with  the  loss  of  only  two
men  badly  wounded.  This  battle,  and  John  Se-
vier's defence  of  Watauga,  frustrated  the  rear  at-
tack by  which  the  British  hoped  to  envelop  and
crush  the  southern  colonies.  Soon  afterward  Gov.
Patrick  Henry  promoted  Shelby  to  a  captaincy,
and  mjide  him  commissary  -  general  of  tne  Vir-
ginia forces.  When  Sevier,  in  1779.  projected  the
expedition  that  captured  the  British  stores  at
Chickamauga,  Shelby  eouipped  and  supplied  the
troops  by  the  pledge  of  nis  mdividual  credit.  In
this  year  he  was  commissione<l  a  major  by  Gov.
Thomas  Jefferson,  but,  when  the  state  line  was
run,  his  residence  was  found  to  be  in  North  Caro-
lina. He  then  resigned  his  commission,  but  was
at  once  appointed  to  the  colonelcy  of  Sullivan
county  by  Gov.  Caswell.  He  was  in  Kentucky,
perfecting  his  title  to  lands  he  had  selected  on  his
previous  visit,  when  he  heard  of  the  fall  of  Charles-
ton and  the  desperate  situation  of  affairs  in  the
southern  colonies.  He  at  once  returned  to  engage
in  active  service  against  the  enemy,  and,  crossing
the  mountains  into  South  Carolina,  in  July,  1780,
he  won  victories  over  the  British  at  Thicketty  Fort,
Cedar  Springs,  and  Musgrove's  Mill.  But,  as  the
disastrous  defeat  at  Camden  occurred  just  before
the  last  engagement,  he  was  obliged  to  retreat
across  the  Alleghanies.  There  he  soon  concerted
with  John  Sevier  the  remarkable  expedition  which
resulted  in  the  battle  of  King's  Mountain,  and
turned  the  tide  of  the  Revolution.  For  this  im-
portant service  he  and  Sevier  received  the  thanks
of  the  North  Carolina  legislature,  and  the  vote  of
a  sword  and  a  pair  of  pistols.  Having  been  elected
to  the  general  assembly,  Shelby  soon  afterward  left
the  army  to  take  his  seat,  but,  before  he  left,  sug-
gested to  Gen.  Horatio  Gates  the  expedition  which,
carried  out  by  Morgan  under  Gen.  Greene,  resulted
in  the  victory  at  Cowpens.  Being  soon  afterward
recalled  to  South  Carolina  by  Gen.  Greene,  he
marched  over  the  mountains  with  Col.  Sevier  and
500  men,  and  did  important  service  against  the
British  in  the  vicinity  of  Charleston.  In  the  win-
ter of  1782-'3  he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  to
survey  the  lands  along  the  Cumberland  that  were
allotted  by  North  Carolina  to  her  soldiers,  and  this
done,  he  repaired  to  Boonesborough,  Ky.,  where  he
settled  as  a  planter.  He  was  a  delegate  to  all  the
early  conventions  that  were  held  for  obtaining  the
separation  of  Kentucky  from  Virginia,  and  suc-
ceeded, in  connection  with  Thomas  Marshall  and
George  Muter,  in  thwarting  the  treasonable  scheme
of  Gen.  James  Wilkinson  and  his  associates  to  force
Kentucky  out  of  the  Union  and  into  an  alliance
with  Spain.  When,  in  1792,  Kentucky  was  ad-
mitted as  a  state,  Shelby  was  almost  unanimously
elected  its  first  governor.  During  nearly  the  whole
of  his  administration  the  western  country  was  in
a  state  of  constant  irritation,  in  consequence  of  the
occlusion  of  the  Mississippi  by  Spain ;  but,  by  his
firm  and  sagacious  policy,  this  discontent  was  kept
from  breaking  out  into  actual  hostilities.  Finally,
by  the  treaty  of  20  Oct.,  1795,  the  Spaniards  con-
ceded the  navigation  of  that  river;  and  Shelby's
term  of  office  expiring  soon  afterward,  he  refused
to  be  again  a  candidate,  and  returned  to  the  culti-
vation of  the  farm  which  he  had  reluctantly  left
at  what  he  deemed  the  call  of  his  country.  He
subsequently  refused  all  office  except  that  of  presi-
dential elector,  to  which  he  was  chosen  six  times
successively  under  Jefferson,  Madison,  and  Mon-
roe ;  but,  on  the  eve  of  the  second  war  with  Great
Britain,  his  state  again  peremptorily  demanded  his
services. Our  first  western  army  had  been  cap-


tured, Michigan  was  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and
the  whole  frontier  was  threatened  by  a  strong  coa-
lition of  savages,  armed  by  Great  Britain.  In-
stinctively the  people  turned  to  Shelby,  and  he
consented  to  serve  as  governor  "  if  there  should  be
a  war  with  England."  Organizing  a  body  of  4,000
volunteers,  he  had  them  mounted  on  his  own  re-
sponsibility, and  at  the  age  of  sixty-three  led  them
in  person  to  the  re-enforcement  of  Gen.  William
Henry  Harrison,  whom  he  joined  just  in  time  to
enable  that  general  to  profit  by  the  victory  of  Perry
on  Lake  Ene.  For  his  services  in  this  campaign
Shelby  received  a  gold  medal  and  the  thauKs  of
congress  and  of  tne  Kentucky  legislature.  In
March,  1817,  he  was  tendered  the  post  of  secretary
of  war  by  President  Monroe ;  but  ne  declined,  anil
never  again  held  any  office  except  that  of  commis-
sioner for  the  purchase  from  the  Chickasaws  of
their  remaining  lands  in  Tennessee  and  Kentucky.

SHELDON,  Alexander,  phvsician,  b.  in  Suf-
field,  Conn..  23  Oct.,  1766 ;  d.  in  Montgomerv  coun-
ty. N.  Y.,  10  Sept.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1787,  settled  in  Montgomery  county,  N.  Y.,
took  an  active  part  in  politics,  was  speaker  of  the
New  York  assembly  in  1804,  1806,  and  1812,  and  a
judge  of  the  county  court.  He  was  graduated  at
the  New  York  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons
in  1812,  and  became  eminent  in  his  profession.
He  was  a  regent  of  the  University  of  New  York
state,  a  meinlxsr  of  the  convention  that  framed  the
State  constitution  in  1820,  and  chairman  of  the
committee  on  the  executive  departments.  In  the
presidential  contest  between  John  Adams  and
Thomas  Jefferson  he  warmly  espoused  the  cause
of  the  latter.  He  was  the  last  of  the  speakers  of
the  New  York  assembly  that  wore  the  cocked  hat,
the  badge  of  that  office. — His  son.  Smith,  pub-
lisher, b.  in  Montgomery  county,  N.  Y..  13  Sept.,
1811 ;  d.  in  Nyack,  N.  Y.,  30  Aug.,  1884,  was  edu-
cated at  Albany  academy,  acquired  a  fortune  in  the
dry-goods  trade  in  that  city,  and,  removing  to  New
York  in  1854,  established  the  publishing-house  of
Sheldon  and  Co.,  of  which  his  son,  Isaac  E.  Shel-
don, is  now  (1888)  the  head.  His  latter  life  was
devoted  to  benevolent  enterprises,  especially  to  the
education  of  the  colored  population  of  the  south,
to  which  cause  he  gave  liDerally  and  for  which  he
collected  large  sums  of  money.  He  was  an  original
corporator  of  Vassar  college  and  chairman  of  the
executive  committee,  a  trustee  of  Rochester,  and
an  incorporator  of  Madison  university.

SHELDON,  David  Newton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Suffield,  Conn.,  26  June,  1807.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1830,  studied  in  Newton  theological
seminary,  and  was  pastor  of  Baptist  churches  in
Maine  till  1856,  when  he  became  a  Unitarian.  In
1843-53  he  was  president  of  Waterville  college
(now  Colby  university).  Brown  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1847.  He  has  published  sermons
and  "  Sin  and  Redemption  "  (New  York,  1856).

SHELDON,  Edward  Anstin,  educator,  b.  in
Perry  Centre,  Wyoming  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  Oct.,  1823.
He  studied  at  Hamilton  three  years,  but  was  not
graduated.  In  1869  that  college  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  A.  M.  He  was  superintendent  of  public
schools  at  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  m  1851-3,  occupied  the
same  post  in  Oswego  in  1853-'69,  and  since  1862
has  been  principal  of  the  Oswego  state  normal
training-scnool.  He  was  the  first  to  introtluce  into
this  country  a  systematic  course  of  objective  in-
struction in  the  public  schools,  and  in  1861  organ-
ize<l  the  first  training-school  for  teachers,  and  his
system  was  subsequently  adopted  by  the  normal
schools  of  New  York  state.  He  has  published
"  First  Reading  Book  and  Reading  Charts  "  (New


SHELDON


8H ELTON


498


York,  18fl2) ;  "  Maniinl  of  Kleniontnrv  Instruction  "  [
(1862);  "Series  of  Ui'tuling  IVkjIvi*  jumI  Chartu"
(1874);  and  "  I^'»w<»n«  on  OhjwtH"  (1875).— His
daughter.  Marjr  I»ownln|r,«Hlucator,  b.  in  Odwejco,
N.  Y ..  15  St>i>t.,  1850,  was  j^nuluatwl  at  the  Univer-
nitv  of  Michipin  in  1H74.  wrvt'«l  as  professor  of
history  in  WVllesley  in  lH7(i-'H.  and  su»»se«juentlv
oeeupieii  the  same  ehair  in  the  State  normal  sehool.
Oswejro,  X.  Y.  She  married  Karl  liarnes  in  1885.
She  has  i)uhlishe<l  - Stmlies  in  (Jeneral  History"
(Boston.  18S5),  and  "Teaeher's  Manual"  (1885).

SHELDON.  (Jeomre  WiUiaui,  author,  b.  in
Sumincrviile,  S.  ('.,  28  Jan..  1H4:{.  IU\  was  gradu-
ate<l  at  Princeton  in  IHHii,  and  wrved  during  1864
at  City  Point.  Va.,  in  charge  of  the  siek  and  wound-
ed of  Gen.  Gnint's  army.  In  1865  he  wa.s  appoint-
ed tutor  in  Latin  and  belles-lettres  in  Princeton,
and  in  18(M>  he  became  instructor  in  the  oriental
languages  at  Union  thw)logical  stMninary,  New
York,  where  he  remained  until  187S,  after  which  he
studied  for  two  years  in  the  British  musiuim.  Mr.
Sheldon  then  devote<l  himself  t«  journalistic  work
and  was  art  critic  of  the  New  York  "  Evening
Post"  in  1876-82.  and  dramatic  critic  and  city
editor  of  the  New  York  "  t'ommercial  Advertisi-r''
in  1884-'6.  He  has  published  "  American  Paint-
ers" (New  York,  1879) ;  "  The  Story  of  the  Volun-
teer Fire  Department  of  the  City  of  New  York "
(1882) ;  "  Hours  with  Art  and  Artists  "  (1882) ;  "Ar-
tistic Homes  "  (1882) ;  "  Artistic  Country  -  Seats  "
(1886);  "Selections  in  Modem  Art"  (1886);  and
"  Ri'cent  Ideals  of  .\merican  Art  "  (1888).

SHKLDON,  Henry  Clay,  clergyman,  b,  in  Mar-
tinsburg.  N.  Y.,  12  March.' 1845.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1867,  and  at  the  theological  denart-
raent  of  Boston  university  in  1871,  studied  in  Leii>-
sic  in  1874-'5,  and  since  the  latter  date  has  been
professor  of  historical  theology  in  Boston  univer-
sity. Mr.  Sheldon's  standpoint  is  that  of  evangeli-
cal Arminianisra,  in  opposition  l)oth  to  Calvinism
and  to  Liljeralism.  lie  has  published  a  "  History
of  Christian  Doctrine"  (2  vols..  New  York,  1886).

SHELDON,  Lionel  Allen,  soldier,!).  inOLsego
county,  N.  Y..  30  Aug.,  1829.  He  was  brought  up
on  a  farm  in  Ohio,  educated  at  Oberlin,  taught  for
several  years,  and  after  attending  the  law-school
in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1851,  and  settled  in  Elyria,  Ohio.  He  served
one  term  as  judge  of  probate,  supported  .John  C.
Pn^mont  for  the  presidential  nomination  in  the
Phihulel|)hia  Ilepublican  convention  in  1856.  was
commissioned  bnga<lier-general  of  militia  in  1860,
and  actively  engaged  in  raising  recruits  for  the
National  army  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.
He  became  captain  of  cavalry  in  August,  1861,  was
chosen  maior  soon  afterwani  in  the  2<i  Ohio  cavalry,
transferred  as  lieutenant-colonel  to  the  42d  Ohio
infantry,  became  colonel  in  1862,  and  commandinl
the  latter  regiment  in  West  Virginia,  Kentucky,  aud
eastern  Tennessee.  In  Novemberof  that  year,  when
his  regiment  was  place<l  under  (Jen.  William  T.  Sher-
man at  Memphis,  he  commanded  a  brigade  which
participated  m  the  battles  of  Chickasaw  Bayou  and
Arkansas  Post.  He  led  a  brigade  in  the  13th  army
corps  in  1863,  was  wounded  at  the  Iwittle  of  Fort
Gil)son,  and  particijmttHl  in  the  capture  of  Vicks-
burgand  in  subsequent  skirmishes.  In  March.  1865.
he  was  brevetted  brigadier-jjeneral  of  volunteers.
After  the  war  he  settled  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  prac-
tiseil  his  profession,  and  in  18<J9-'75  was  in  con-

{^ress,  having  been  elected  as  a  Republican.  I)ur-
ng  this  service  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee
on  militia.  He  was  appointed  governor  of  New
Mexico  in  1881,  served  till  1885,  and  was  receiver
of  the  Texas  and  Pacific  railway  in  1885-*7.


SHELLAKARGER.  SaniueL  confrressman.  b.

in  Clark  county,  Ohio.  10  Dfc,  1817.  Iiewasgrada-
ated  at  Miami  in  1842,  tttudied  law  under  Gen.
Samson  Mason,  was  admitte<l  to  the  l>ar  in  1847,
was  a  memlM*r  of  the  first  legislature  in  Ohio  that
met  under  the  pre,s4^-nt  constitution,  and  in  1860
w»is  elette<l  to  con^rt'ss  as  a  Kepubiican.  He  took
his  seat  in  the  sitei-ial  M'ssi(»n  tliat  met  in  accord-
ance with  Pri>sident  liincohrs  call,  on  4July,  1861,
and  served  in  1861-3,  in  18<K-'«.  and  in  l870-'8.
He  was  chairman  of  the  committees  on  commerce,
that  on  charges  by  Frey  against  Uosooe  Conkling,
and  that  on  tlie  provost-marshal's  bureau,  and  was
on  the  sfH^'ial  committees  on  the  a.ssa8sination  of
President  Lincoln,  civil  service,  and  the  New  Or-
leans riots.  He  was  U.  S.  minister  t  .  Portugal  in
1869-'70.  and  in  1874-'5  was  one  of  the  civil  ser-
vice commission.  He  then  r<*sume<l  the  practice
of  his  profession  in  Washington.  D.  C.

SHELTON,  Frederick  William,  author,  b.  in
Jamaica,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  in  1814;  d.  in  Carthage
Ijanding,  N.  Y.,  20  June,  1881.  He  was  gnwluated
at  Princeton  in  185J4,  studied  for  the  ministry,  and
t<x)k  orders  in  the
Protestant Episco-

fal  church  in  1847.
le  was  rector  of
thi  church  in  Hunt-
ington, L.  I.,  for
several  years,  also
of  the  church  in
Fishkill,  N.  Y.,  and
in  18.54  accepted  a
call  to  Mont|)elier,
Vt.  About  ten
years  later  he  re-
moved to  Carthage
lianding,  N.  Y.,  and
devoted  himself
chiefly  to  author-
ship. Mr.  Shelton's
publications  were
"TheTrollopiad,or

Travelling  Gentleman  in  America,"  a  satirical  poem
(New  York,  1837);  "Salander  and  the  Dragon,"  a
romance  (1851) ;  "The  Rector  of  St.  Bardolph's, or
Superannuated"  (1853);  "Up  the  River," a  series
of  rural  sketches  on  the  Huds<m  (1853);  "Chrjs-
talline,  or  the  Heiress  of  Fall-Down  Castle,"  a  ro-
mance (1854);  and  "  Peeps  from  a  Belfrj'.or  Parish
Sketch-Book"  (1*55).  He  also  publishetl  several
lectures  on  jxipular  topics,  and  was  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine  "  and
other  periodicals.  To  the  former  he  contributed  a
series  of  local  humorous  .sketches,  beginning  with
"The  Kushow  Property,  a  Tale  of  Crowbill  in
1848,"  followed  by  "  The  Tinnecum  Papers,"  and
other  articles,  including  criticisms  of  Charles
Ijamb,  Vincent  Bourne,  and  other  authors.  Two
of  his  lectures  are  entitled  "The  Gold  Mania"  and
"  The  Use  and  Abuse  of  Reason."  Mr.  Shelton  was
the  intimate  friend  of  William  Wilson,  the  poet-
publisher,  Gulian  C.  Veri»lanck,  Frederick  S.  Coz-
zens,  and  other  literary  men.  With  the  above-named
writers  he  was  a  contributor  to  the  "  Knicker-
iKxiker  Gallery,"  published  for  the  benefit  of  I^ewis
Oaylord  Clark  {q.  v.)  after  his  retin'ment  from  the
eilitorship  of  the  "  KnickerlHX?ker  Magazine."

SHELTON.  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fair^
field.  Conn.,  11  Sept.,  179H;  d.  there,  11  Oct,  1888.
He  was  the  son  of  Rev.  Philo  Shelton  (1754-1825).
the  first  clergyman  ordained  by  a  bishop  of  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church  in  the  Unite<i  States.  He
was  (fraduated  at  the  General  theological  seminary
in  New  York  city  in  1823,  was  onlained deacon


^/Zry^it^^


494


SHEPARD


SHEPARD


by  Bishop  Brownell.  and  priest  in  1826  by  the
same  bishop.  He  officiated  for  a  time  at  Platts-
burg  and  Red  Hook,  N.  Y.,  and  also  in  Fairfield,
Conn.  In  1829  he  accepted  the  rectorship  of  St.
Paul's  church,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  where  he  served  for
fifty  years,  and  then  became  rector  emeritus.  His
death  occurretl  while  he  was  on  a  visit  to  his  native
place.  Dr.  Shelton  published  no  contributions  to
church  literature,  but  devoted  himself  wholly  to
his  pastoral  work  and  to  his  share  in  the  work  of
the  church  at  large.

SHEPARD,  Charles  Uphani,  mineralogist,  b.
in  Little  Compton,  R.  I.,  29  June,  1804;  d.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.,  1  May,  1886.  He  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1824,  and  spent  a  year  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  studying  botanv  and  mineralogy
with  Thomas  Xuttall,  and  at  the  same  time  gave
instruction  in  these  branches  in  Boston.  The
study  of  mineralogy  led  to  his  preparation  of  pa-
pers on  that  subject  which  he  sent  to  the  ''  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Science,"  and  in  this  manner  he
became  acquainted  with  the  elder  Silliman.  He
was  invited  in  1827  to  become  Prof.  Silliman's  as-
sistant, and  continued  so  until  1831.  Meanwhile
for  a  year  he  was  curator  of  Franklin  Hall,  an
institution  that  was  established  by  James  Brewster
in  New  Haven  for  ptipular  lectures  on  scientific
subjects  to  mechanics.  In  1830  he  was  appointed
lecturer  on  natural  history  at  Yale,  and  held  that
place  until  1847.  He  was  associated  Avith  Prof.
Silliman  in  the  scientific  examination  of  the  cul-
ture and  raanufjicture  of  sugar  that  was  undertaken
by  the  latter  at  the  special  request  of  the  secretary
of  the  treasury ;  and  the  southern  states,  particu-
larly Louisiana  and  Georgia,  were  assi"[ned  to  him
to  report  upon.  From  1834  till  1861  he  filled  the
chair  of  chemistry  in  the  Medical  college  of  the
state  of  South  Carolina,  which  he  relinquished  at
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  but  in  1865,  upon
the  urgent  invitation  of  his  former  colleagues,  he
resumed  his  duties  for  a  few  years.  While  in
Charleston  he  discovered  rich  deposits  of  phosphate
of  lime  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  that  city.
Their  great  value  in  agriculture  and  subsequent
use  in  the  manufacture  of  superphosphate  fertiliz-
ers proved  an  important  afldition  to  the  chemical
industries  of  South  Carolina.  In  1845  he  was
chosen  professor  of  chemistry  and  natural  history
in  Amherst,  which  chair  was  divided  in  1852,  and
he  continued  to  deliver  the  lectures  on  natural
history  until  1877,  when  he  was  made  professor
emeritus.  He  was  associated  in  1835  with  Dr.
James  G.  Percival  in  the  geological  survey  of  Con-
necticut, and  throughout  his  life  he  was  actively
engaged  in  the  study  of  mineralogy.  He  an-
nounced in  1835  his  discovery  of  his  first  new
species  of  microlite,  that  of  warwickite  in  1838,
that  of  danburite  in  1839,  and  he  afterward  de-
scribed many  other  new  minerals  until  shortly
before  his  death.  Prof.  Shepard  acquired  a  large
collection  of  minerals,  which  at  one  time  was  un-
surpassed in  this  country,  and  which  in  1877  was
f)urchased  by  Amherst  college,  but  three  years
ater  was  partially  destroyed  by  fire.  Early  in  life
he  began  tne  study  and  collection  of  meteorites,  and
his  cabinet,  long  the  largest  in  the  country,  likewise
became  the  property  of  Amherst.  His  papers  on
this  subject,  from  1829  till  1882,  were  nearly  forty
in  number  and  appeared  chiefly  in  the  "  American
Journal  of  Science."  The  honorary  depee  of
M.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Dartmouth  m  1836,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Amherst  in  1857.  Prof.
Shepard  was  a  member  of  many  American  and
foreign  societies,  including  the  Imperial  society  of
natural  science  in  St.  Petersburg,  the  Royal  society


of  Gnttingen,  and  the  Society  of  natural  sciences
in  Vienna.  In  addition  to  his  many  papers,  he
published  a  "  Treatise  on  Mineralogy  "  (New  Haven ;
3d  ed.,  enlarged,  1855) ;  a  "  Report"  on  the  Geologi-
cal Survey  of  Connecticut"  (1837);  and  numerous
reports  on  mines  in  the  United  States.— His  son,
CnarleH  Uphani,  chemist,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
4  Oct..  1842.  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1863  and  at
the  University  of  Gottingen  in  1867,  with  the  de-
gree of  M.  D.  On  his  return  he  was  appointed
professor  of  chemistry  in  the  Medical  college  of  the
state  of  South  Carolina,  which  chair  he  held  until
1883,  and  since  that  time  he  has  devoted  himself
entirely  to  the  practice  of  analytical  chemistry.
Dr.  Shepard  has  been  active  in  developing  the
chemical  resources  of  South  Carolina,  and  has  paid
special  attention  to  the  nature  and  composition  of
the  phosphate  deposits  of  that  state. In  1887  he

[)resentea  the  second  cabinet  of  minerals  that  was
eft  by  his  father,  numbering  more  than  10,000
specimens,  to  the  collections  at  Amherst,  and  his
cabinet  of  representatives  of  more  than  200  dif-
ferent meteorites  has  been  deposited  in  the  U.  S.
national  museum  in  Washington,  D.  C.  He  is  a
member  of  scientific  societies  and  has  contributed
to  the  literature  of  his  profession.

SHEPARD,  Elliott  Fitch,  lawyer,  b.  in  James-
town, Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  25  July,  1833.  He
was  educated  at  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1858.  and  for  many
vears  in  practice  in  New  York.  In  1861  and  1863
he  was  aide-de-camp  on  the  staff  of  Gov.  Edwin  D.
Morgan,  was  in  command  of  the  depot  of  volun-
teers at  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  and  aided  in  organizing,
equipping,  and  forwarding  to  the  field  nearly
5(5,000  troops.  He  was  instrumental  in  raising  the
51st  New  York  regiment,  which  was  named  for  him
the  Shepard  rifles.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  New
York  state  bar  association  in  1876,  which  has
formed  the  model  for  the  organization  of  similar
associations  in  other  states.  In  March,  1888,  he
purchased  the  New  York  "  Mail  and  Express."

SHEPARD,  Irving,  educator,  b.  in  Marcellus,
Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  July,  1843.  He  received  his
primary  education  in  the  public  schools  in  Michi-
gan, entered  the  National  arrav  in  1862,  and  served
nearly  three  years  in  the  17th  Michigan  volunteers.
He  commanded  the  party  that  burned  the  Arm-
strong house  in  the  enemy's  lines,  in  front  of
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  in  November,  1863,  was  promoted
captain  for  bravery  in  that  action,  and  wounded
m  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness  in  May,  18(>4.  He
was  graduated  at  Olivet  college  in  1871,  was  super-
intendent of  city  schools  and  principal  of  the  high-
school,  Charles  Citv,  Iowa,  in  1871-'5,  occupied  a
similar  office  at  Winona,  Mich.,  from  the  latter
date  till  1879,  and  has  since  been  president  of  the
Michigan  normal  school.

SHEPARD,  Isaac  Fitzgerald,  soldier,  b.  in
Natick,  Middlesex  co.,  Mass.,  7  July,  1816.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1842,  was  princi-
pal of  a  Boston  grammar-school  in  1844-'57,  and
served  in  the  legislature  in  1859-'60.  He  became
lieutenant-colonel  and  senior  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.
Nathaniel  G.  Lyons  in  1861,  colonel  of  tlie  3d  Mis-
souri infantry  in  1862.  and  dn  1863  colonel  of  the
1st  regiment  of  Mississippi  colored  troops,  com-
manding all  the  colored  troops  in  the  Mississippi
valley.  On  27  Oct.,  1863,  he  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  was  adjutant-
general  of  Missouri  in  1870-'l,  and  U.  S.  consul  at
Swatow  and  Hankow,  China,  in  1874-'86.  He  was
chairman  of  the  Missouri  state  Republican  com-
mittee in  1870-'l,  and  department  commander  of
the  Grand  army  of  the  republic  at  the  same  time.


SHEPARD


SHKPLEY


405


He  wlitwl  thf  lioston  "  Dailv  Bee"  in  lR4(V-*ft,  tho
"MiswHiri  IVin<H.ral"  in  1888-'0.  the  "  MiwM.uri
SUt«  Atljis"  in  lH71-'2,  ami  has  publiHluMl  "  Pe»>-
blcs  fn)in  Castaiia,"  |KM'ms(IV»st«)n.  184(») ;  "  Poetry
of  FtM>lin>f"  (1H44);  "  Scvnos  and  Sonps  of  Social
Life"  (1K46):  "  Mouschohi  Tah-s"  (IHOl);  and  sev-
eral siiiirlc  iMM-ins  an<l  orations.

SIIKI'AKI).  Samuel,  cl.Tjfyinan.  I),  in  Salis-
Imrv,  Mass..  22.1uiu',  17:J»;  d.  in  Hrentwofxl,  N.  H..
4  N'ov.,  1H15.  At  tho  a^e  of  sixtwn  he  removwl
to  New  IIain|)shire.  and  after  slmlying  raeilicine
settUnl  in  Hrontwoo<l.  where  ho  so«»n  won  reputa-
tion in  iiis  profession.  In  1770  he  united  with  a
Baptist  church,  and  in  1771  he  was  ordaine<l  to  the
ministry.  He  preached  through  a  wide  extent  of
country,  and  in  liis  double  ofllce  of  minister  and
physician  i<H)ked  after  tho  cure  of  both  soul  and
Dot^v.  While  pastor  of  the  church  at  HrentwcHKl
he  ha<l  the  oversight  of  several  other  churches  that
were  branches  of  this  central  b<Kly.  He  was  thus
a  sort  of  Baptist  diocesan  bishop.  No  man  in  the
history  of  his  denomination  in  New  Hampshire
was  lietter  known  in  his  day.  He  published  sev-
eral tnicts.  chieflv  relating  to  liaptism.

SHEPARD,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Towces-
ter,  KnglaiKl.  5  Nov.,  1«K)5;  d.  in  Cambridge.  Mass.,
25  Aug.,  1049.  He  was  graduated  at  Oxford  in
1627,  onlained  in  the  established  church,  and  in
1630  silenced  for  non-conformity.  He  was  subse-
quently ttitor  and  chaplain  in  the  family  of  Sir
Richard  Darby,  whoso  cousin  he  married.  He  was
silenced  again  in  IWiS.  and  in  October,  \QS5,  sailed
for  this  country,  settled  in  lioston,  and  from  that
time  till  his  tleath  was  pastor  of  tho  church  in
Cambridge,  succeeding  Thomas  Hooker.  He  soon
became  involved  in  the  Antinomian  controversy,
actively  opposed  the  innovators,  and  was  a  member
of  tho  synod  that  silenced  them.  His  second  wife,
Joanna. "whom  he  married  in  1037,  was  the  daughter
of  Thomas  Hooker.  Ho  was  active  in  founding
Harvard,  and  instnimental  in  placing  it  at  Cam-
bridge. Nathaniel  Morton,  the  historian,  says  of
him  :  "  By  his  death  not  only  tho  church  and  peo-
ple of  Cambridge,  but  all  New  England,  suflfered  a
ffreat  loss."  By  his  thinl  wife,  Margaret  Boradel,
no  was  the  ancestor  of  President  John  Q.  Adams.
He  was  a  vigorous  and  popular  writer  on  theo-
logical subjects,  and  published  "New  England's
Lamentations  for  Old  England's  Errors"  (London,
164o) :  "  Tho  Clear  Sunshine  of  the  Gospel  Break-
ing out  on  the  Indians  of  New  England  "  (1048 ;
New  York,  1805) ;  "  Theses  SablwticH"  (1049) ;  and
left  in  manuscript  numerous  sermons  that  were
8ubsec[uently  printed  in  England.  These  include
"Subjection  to  Chris'.,"  with  a  memoir  of  him  by
Samuel  Mather  and  William  Greenhill  (Ijondon,
1652),and  "The  Parables  of  the  Ten  Virgins  and  oth-
er Sermons"  (1660 ;  new  ed.,  Aberdeen,  1638).  His
autobiography  was  publishe<l  (Cambridge,  Mass.,
1K;J2).  and  his  collecte<l  works,  with  a  memoir  of
him  by  Rev.  Horatio  Alger  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1853).
Cotton  Mather  also  wrote  his  memoir  in  the  "  Mag-
nalia,"  and  in  his  "  Lives  of  tho  Chief  Fathers  of
New  England." — His  son,  Thonian,  clergyman,  b.
in  Ix)nd«)n,  England,  5  April,  16JJ5 ;  d.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  22  Dec.,  1677,  was  jjnwluatetl  at
Harvard  in  1653,  and  from  1658  till  his  death  was
assistant  pastor  of  the  Cambridge  church.  He  pulw
lisht^l  an  election  sermon  (1072),  and  edited  a  vol-
ume of  miscellaneous  sermons  (1673).

8HEPARI>.  William,  soldier,  b.  near  Boston,
Mass.,  1  Dec.,  17:i7:  d.  in  West  field,  Ma-ss.,  11  Nov.,
1817.  Ho  enlisttnl  in  the  provincial  army  at  seven-
teen years  «)f  age,  served  in  1757-*63,  was  a  captain
under  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst,  and  participated  in  the


battles  of  Fort  William  and  Crown  Point.  He  he-
came  colonel  of  the  4th  MaHsachusetts  regiment
in  1777,  and  served  till  178:1.  |tarticifMting  in
twentv-twd  engaeementJt,  and  winning  a  reputation
for  efrtciency  ana  courage.  Heoetlletl  on  a  farm
in  Me«lway,  Mass.,  after  the  ix'we.  was  a  member
of  the  executive  council  in  178H-'90.  a  briga<lier-

iceneral  of  militia,  and  in  that  ca|uu-ity  during
l)aniel  .Shavs's  insurrection  in  1786  prevented  the
insurgents  from  seizing  the  Springfield  arm>nal.  He
was  sul)sequently  major-general  of  militia,  and  in
congress  in  1797-18(W.

SHEPHERI),  Nathaniel  (Graham,  author,  h.
in  Now  York  city  in  18;i5:  d.  there.  2:1  May.  1869.
He  studiiHl  art  in  New  York,  taught  drawing  in
Georgia  for  several  years,  returned  to  his  native
city,  and  engaged  in  the  insurance  business,  de-
voting his  leisure  to  study  and  to  writing  {K)ems.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  U'came  a  war
correspondent  for  the  New  York  "Tribune."  He
contributed  largely  to  periodicals  and  journals,
and  was  the  author  of  "The  Dead  Drummer-Itoy."
"The  Roll-Call,"  "  A  Summer  Reminiscence,"  and
other  jxMMiis.  which  were  wi<lely  circulatetl.

SHEPHERD,  Oliver  Lathrop,  soldier,  b.  in
Clifton  Park,  Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y..  15  Aug.,  1815.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1840,  and  a.ssigne<l  brevet  2d  lieutenant,  4th'  in-
fantry, was  promoted  2<1  lieutenant,  3d  infantry,
on  2  Oct.,  1840,  served  in  the  Seminole  war.  and
became  1st  lieutenant  in  the  3<1  infantr)',  3  Nov.,
1845.  In  1846  he  was  selected  by  Gen.  Zachary
Taylor  as  commissary  of  the  supi)ly  train  in  its
march  from  Corpus  Christi  to  the  Rio  Grande,  and
served  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  receiving  the  brevet
of  captain  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at
Contreras  and  Churubusct),  and  that  of  major  for
Chapultepec.  He  was  appointwl  captain  on  1  Dec.,
1847,  served  on  the  frontier,  and  commanded  Fort
Defiance,  New  Mexico,  which  he  defended  with
three  companies  against  a  night  attack  of  the  Nav-
ajoe  Indians,  with  al>out  2,500  Imives,  on  30  April,
1800,  and  was  afterward  stationed  at  Fort  Hamil-
ton, N.  Y.  He  then  commanded  a  Itattalion  of  the
3d  infantrj'  in  the  defences  of  Washington.  l)et»anie
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  18th  infantry.  14  May,
1861,  served  in  the  Tennessee  and  Mississippi  cam-
paign in  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  and  was  engaged  in
the  pursuit  of  the  Confederates  to  Baldwin,  Miss.,
30-31  May.  1862.  receiving  tho  brevet  of  colonel  for
service  during  the  siege  of  Corinth,  17  May,  1862.
He  participated  in  Gen.  Don.  Carlos  Buell's  move-
ment through  Alaltama  and  Tennessee  to  Louis-
ville. Ky..  in  July  and  Sei)tember,  and  also  in  Gen.
William  S.  Rosecrans's  Tennessee  campaign,  serv-
ing with  the  Army  of  the  Cumberlanu  from  No-
vember, 1862,  till  April,  1803,  and  commanding  a
brigade  of  regular  troops  from  31  Dec,  1802,  till
3  Jan.,  1868.  He  became  colonel  of  the  15th  in-
fantry on  21  Jan.,  180Ji,  and  was  brevette<l  brigadier-
general  on  13  March.  1805.  for  service  at  Stone
river.  He  l>ecame  colonel  of  the  15th  infant rv  on
21  Jan.,  imS,  and  from  7  May,  1863,  tUl  13  Feb.,
1866,  he  was  superintendent  of  the  regimental  re-
cruiting ser\nce  at  Fort  Adams,  R.  I.,  and  he  after-
ward commandetl  the  15th  repiment  in  Alaliama
during  the  reconstniction  of  that  state  in  1868,  in
which  he  performed  an  imixirtant  part,  and  was
also  a  commissioner  of  the  Fretnlmen's  bureau  for
Alabama.  Consolidating  the  15th  and  :Uth  infant-
ries, he  marched  with  them  to  New  Mexico  in  1860.
He  wius  retired  from  the  army  on  15  Dec.,  1870,

SHEPLEY,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Groton.  Conn.,
16  Oct..  1787;  d.  iti  Saco.  Me..  9  Feb.,  1857.  His
family  settled  in  Groton  about  1700,  the  name  ap-


496


SHEPLEY


SHEPPARD


pearinfj  on  the  town-records  as  Sheple.  Several  of
nis  ancestors  held  local  offices,  one  of  whom,  Joseph,
was  a  member  of  the  State  convention  of  1788,
where  he  oppose<l  the  adoption  of  the  constitution
of  the  United  States.  John  entered  Harvard  in
the  class  of  1806.  but  left  U'fore  graduation,  studied
law  and  practised  in  Rutland  and  Fitt-hburj;.  Mass.,
served  in  the  legislature,  was  a  meml)er  of  the  con-
vention for  amending  the  state  constitution,  and
in  1825  went  to  Maine,  where  he  formed  a  partner-
ship with  his  brother  Ether.  For  many  years  he
was  reporter  of  the  decisions  of  the  supreme  court
of  Maine,  and  he  published  "  Maine  Reports  "  (Hal-
lowell,  1836-'49).— His  brother.  Ether,  jurist,  b.  in
Groton,  Mass.,  2  Nov.,  1789;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,
15  Jan.,  1877,  after  graduation  at  Dartmouth  in
1811,  studied  law  at  South  Berwick,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1814,  and  be^an  to  practise  in  Saco,  He
was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1819,  a  delegate
to  the  convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of
Maine  in  1820,  and  U,  S.  district  attorney  for  that
state  from  1821  till  1833.  He  had  removed  to
Portland  about  1821.  He  was  elected  a  U.  S.  sena-
tor as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1833.  till
3  March,  1836,  when  he  resigned,  having  been
chosen  a  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  Maine,  of
which  he  was  chief  justice  from  1848  until  1855.  In
1856  he  was  appointed  sole  commissioner  to  revise
the  statutes  of  Maine.  He  received  the  decree  of
LL.  D.  from  Waterville  (now  Colby  University),  in
1842,  and  from  Dartmouth  in  1845.  While  serving
on  the  bench  he  furnished  the  materials  for  twenty-
six  volumes  of  reports,  and  published  "  The  Re-
vised Statutes  of  Maine"  (Efallowell,  1857),  and
"Speech  in  Congress  on  the  Removal  of  the  De-

gosits,"  in  which  he  vindicated  the  course  of
resident  Jackson  (1857). — Ether's  son,  (ireorge
Forster,  soldier,  b.  in  Saco,  Me.,  1  Jan.,  1819 ;  d.
in  Portland,  Me.,  20  July,  1878,  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  in  1837,  and,  after  studving  law  at
Harvard,  began  practice  in  Bangor,  Me.,  in  1840,
but  in  1844  removed
to  Portland.  From
1853  till  1861  he  was
U.  S.  district  attor-
ney for  Maine,  during
which  period  he  ar-
gued important  cases
in  the  U.  S.  supreme
court.  In  1860  he  was
a  delegate  at  large  to
the  National  Demo-
cratic convention  in
Charleston,  and  at-
tended its.  adjourned
session  in  Baltimore.
He  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  12th
Maine  volunteers  at
the  beginning  of  the
civil  war,  and  partici-
pated in  Gen.  Benja-
min F.  Butler's  expe-
dition against  New  Orleans,  commanding  as  acting
brigadier-general  a  brigade  at  Ship  Island,  and  at
the  capture  of  New  Orleans  he  led  the  3d  brigade.
Army  of  the  Gulf.  On  the  occupation  of  that  city
he  was  appointed  military  commandant  and  acting
mayor,  and  assigned  to  the  command  of  its  de-
fences, resigning  in  June,  1862,  when  he  was  ap-
pointed military  governor  of  Louisiana,  serving
until  1864.  On  18  July,  1862,  he  was  made  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers.  After  the  inauguration
of  a  civil  governor  of  Louisiana,  Gen.  Shepley  was
placed  in  command  of  the  military  district  of  east-


em  Virginia,  became  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.  Godfrey
Weitzel,  and  for  a  short  time  during  the  absence  of
that  officer  commanded  the  25th  array  corps.  He
continued  with  the  Army  of  the  James  to  the  end
of  the  war.  entered  Richmond  on  8  April,  1865,  and
was  appointed  the  first  military  governor  of  that
city.  Resigning  his  commission  on  1  July,  1865.
he  declined  the  app<iintment  of  associate  judge  of
the  supreme  court  of  Maine,  but  in  1869  accented
that  of  U.  S.  circuit  judge  for  the  first  circuit  of
Maine,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  Dart-
mouth gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1878.  His
decisions  are  reported  in  Jabez  S,  Holmes's  "  Re-
ports" (Boston.  1877).

SHEPPARD,  Furman,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bridge-
ton.  Cumberland  eo.,  N.  J.,  21  Nov.,  1823.  After
graduation  at  Princeton  in  1845  he  .studied  law,
and  in  1848  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Philadel-
phia, where  he  has  since  practised.  He  was  dis-
trict attorney  in  1868-'71,  and  again  in  1874-'7.
In  the  latter  term  he  ^ave  special  attention  to  the
prompt  despatch  of  cnminai  cases  during  the  Cen-
tennial exhibition  of  1876.  By  establishing  a  mag-
istrate's court  on  the  exhibition  grf)unds,  he  suc-
ceeded in  having  offenders  arrested,  indicted,  tried,
and  sentenced  within  a  few  hours  after  the  com-
mission of  the  offence.  This  rapid  proceeding  was
popularly  designated  "  Sheppard's  railroad,'  and
it  entirely  broke  up  the  preparations  of  the  crimi-
nal class  of  the  country  for  preying  upon  the  thou-
sands of  daily  visitors  to  the  exhibition.  For  sev-
eral years  he  has  Ixsen  a  trustee  of  Jefferson  medical
college,  a  member  of  the  American  philosophical
society,  and  an  inspector  of  the  Eastern  state  peni-
tentiary in  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Sheppard  is  the
author  of  "  The  Constitutional  Text  -  Book  :  a
Practical  and  Familiar  Exposition  of  the  Consti-
tution of  the  United  States"  (Philadelphia,  1855),
and  an  abridged  and  modified  edition  of  the  same,
entitled  "The  First  Book  of  the  Constitution"
(1861).  He  has  also  contributed  to  the  "  Vocabu-
larv  of  the  Philosophical  Sciences,"  edited  by
Prof.  Charies  P.  Krauth,  D.  D.

SHEPPARD,  John  Hannibal,  author,  b.  in
Cirencester,  Gloucestershire,  England,  17  March,
1789 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  25  June,  1873.  In  1793  his
parents  settled  in  Ilallowell,  Me.  He  was  educated
at  Harvard,  which  he  left  in  his  junior  year,  but  in
1867  the  university  placed  his  name  among  the
graduates  of  1808.  He  studied  law.  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1810,  and  practised  in  Wiscassett,  Me.
From  1817  till  1834  he  was  register  of  probate  for
Lincoln  county,  and  in  1842  he  settled  in  Boston,
Mass.  He  was  an  early  and  efficient  member  of
the  New  England  historic-genealogical  society,  its
librarian  in  1861-'9,  and  cpntributed  to  its  "  Regis-
ter." The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  given  to  him  by
Bowdoin  in  1830,  and  by  Harvard  in  1871.  In
addition  to  several  masonic  and  antiouarian  ad-
dresses, he  was  the  author  of  occasional  poems,  of
"  Reminiscences  of  the  Vaughan  Family '  (Boston,
1865),  and  "  The  Life  of  Samuel  Tucker,  Commo-
dore in  the  American  Revolution  "  (1868).

SHEPPARD,  Moses,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1771 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
1  Feb.,  1857.  He  was  early  thrown  upon  his  own
resources,  owing  to  the  forfeiture  of  the  property
of  his  father,  Nathan  Sheppard,  who  adhered  to  the
mother  country  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  and
entered  the  employ  of  John  Mitchell  as  a  clerk.
In  a  few  years  he  was  made  partner,  and  after  the
death  of  Mr.  Mitchell  conducted  the  business
alone,  from  which  he  retired  in  1832.  Mr.  Shep-
pard took  an  active  interest  in  the  question  of
American  slavery,  in  common  with  the  Society  of


D.  Appleton  &Co.


SllKIiATON


SHERIDAN


4»7


Prion«l8,of  which  ho  was  h  ineinlK<r.  iind  aided  with
cnuDM-l  Hixl  money  the  Aini'rirau  coliniizution
srxnctv.  lie  |Niid  for  the  «Mlucation  of  Dr.  SuniucI
MeCiill  ninl  other  rolore<l  men  that  lii><.-ninc  emi-
nent ill  liiU'riii,  uiitl  his  inMueiKi-  prevented  the
passing;  of  a  law  to  Iwiiish  frix?  nejfnn's  from  Mary-
land. His  fortune  wa.s  be«jiieathed  to  found
the  Shetipard  asvhiin  for  tlie  insane  in  Italti-
moH'.— lIis  ffnindnephew,  Nathan,  uutiior.  h.  in
lialtimore.  Md..  9  Nov.,  IWW  ;  «l.  in  Xew  York  eitv,
24  Jan..  1HS8,  was  );nMiuated  at  Attiel)on)ujfh  col-
lep'  in  1854,  and  at  Rochester  th(?oio(jical  seminary
in  1K.V.).  i)urinj,'  tiie  eivil  war  he  was  sjKK-ial  corre-
8pomh>nt  t»f  the  New  Yorit  "  World  "  and  the  Chi-
cago "Jimrnal"  and  "Tribune,"  and,  during  the
Pranco-tJerman  war,  of  the  "CMneinnati  Gazette,"
His  experiences  were  publishe<l  ivs  "Shut  up  in
Paris,"  a  diary  of  the  siege  (liondon.  1H71).  and  was
translated  into  French,  (Jerman,  and  Italian.  He
was  also  a  sjMM'ial  American  correspondent  of  the
London  "Times"  and  a  ccmtrihutor  to  "  Fraser's
Magazine  "  and  "  Temple  liar."  In  1873  he  Ix'came
lecturer  on  mo<lern  English  literature,  and  teacher
of  rhetoric,  at  the  University  of  Chicago,  and  four
years  later  he  accepted  a  similar  charge  at  Allegha-
ny college.  He  spent  four  years  in  Europe,  and  lec-
ture<l  in  all  of  the  princi|)al  towns  of  Great  Britain
and  Ireland,  and  in  1870  delivered  a  course  before
the  Edinburgh  philosonhical  society  and  on  "  Pub-
lic SjH-aking"  l)efore  tne  Universities  of  Aberdeen
and  St.  Andrew's,  Scotland,  which  has  been  issued
as  "  Before  an  Audience "  (New  York,  1886).  In
1884  he  settled  in  Saratoga  Springs,  founded  the
Saratoga  athenaeum,  and  was  its  president  until  his
death.  He  also  compiled  and  edited  "The  Dick-
ens Reader"  (1881);  "Character  Readings  from
George  Eliot"  (1883):  "The  Essays  of  George
Eliot."  with  an  intn^uction  (1883);  "Darwinism
Stated  l)V  Darwin  Himself  "(1884);  and  "Sari^toga
Chins  aiul  Carlsbad  Wafers  "  (1887).
SHERATON,  Jame.s  Paterson,  Canadian  cler-

fyman,  b.  in  St.  John,  New  Brunswick,  29  Nov.,
841.  After  graduation  at  the  University  of  New
Brunswick  in  1862  he  studied  theology  in  the
University  of  King's  college.  Windsor,  Nova  Scotia,
took  orders  in  the  Church  of  England  in  1864-'5,
and  became  rector  of  Shediac,  New  Brunswick,  in
1865,  and  of  Pictou,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1874.  In  1877
he  became  principal  and  professor  of  exegetical
and  systematic  theology  in  Wvcliffe  college.  To-
ronto.'which  offices  he  now  (1888)  holds.  He  was  a
memV)er  of  the  senate  of  the  University  of  Toronto
in  1885.  The  degree  of  D.  I),  was  conferred  on  him
by  Queen's  university,  Ontario,  in  1882.  He  was
editor  of  "  The  Evangelical  Churchman  "  from  1877
till  1882,  and  since  that  date  has  been  its  principal
e<litoria1  fontributor,  and  he  is  the  author  of  essays
on  education,  tlie  church,  and  Christian  unitv.

SHKRBROOKE.  Sir  John  Coape,  British  sol-
dier, b.  altout  1760;  d.  in  Claverton,  Nottingham-
shire. England,  14  Feb..  18:10.  He  entered  the
British  army,  in  which  he  became  captain  in  1783,
lieutenant-colonel  in  1794,  colonel  in  1798,  lieuten-
ant-general in  1811,  and  colonel  of  the  33d  regi-
ment in  1818.  He  served  with  cre<lit  in  the  talking
of  Seringapatam  in  1797,  and  in  1809  was  appoint-
ed to  the  staff  of  the  army  in  the  peninsul>\  under
the  Duke  c)f  Wellington,  being  second  in  command
at  the  Imtlle  of  Talavera,  27-28  Jul^,  1809.  For
his  conduct  there  he  wasapf)ointed  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  Nova  Scotia,  and  in  1816  he  wits  transferre<l
to  the  governorship  of  Lower  Canada.  At  this
time  the  farmers  ha<l  suffered  from  the  total  loss  of
their  wheat  crop,  and  he  advanced  for  their  relief
£14,216,  which  parliament  augmented  by  the  a<.l-
voL.  v.— 32


ditional  sum  of  £iVi,rjO0.  During  his  administra-
tion he  effecte*!  the  a4imiHsion  of  the  s|M»aker  of
the  a-sstMubly,  fx-officiD,  to  a  s«*at  in  the  exw-utive
council.  He  resign<'d  his  office  in  IHIH.  returned
U)  England,  and  was  made  general  in  Mav.  1825.

SH  ER  BIRN  E,  A  ndrew.  sailor,  b.  in  Rye,  N.  H..
30  S'pt.,  l7tJ5;  d.  in  .\ugusta,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,
in  1831.  He  sailed  l)efore  the  mast  at  an  early
age,  was  shipwrecked,  capturtnl  by  the  British,
conf)ne«l  in  tne  Old  Mill  prison  in  Englaml,  and
afterward  Invaine  a  Ba|)tist  clergyman.  He  re-
ceived a  {jcnsion  for  his  services  in  the  navv  during
the  Revolution,  and  wrote  his  own  "  Afemoim
(Utica,  1H28;  2d  ed.,  Pn>vidence,  1H31).

SHEKBl'RNK,  John  Saninel,  iurist,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H..  in  1757;  d.  there,  2  Aug.,  1830.
After  graduation  at  Dartmouth  in  1776  lie  studied
law  at  Harvard,  was  a<lmitted  to  the  l>ar,  and  be-
gan to  practise  in  Portsmouth.  He  servetl  as
brigade  major  on  the  staff  of  (Jen.  William  Whir>-
ple.  and  lost  a  leg  at  the  battle  of  Butts  Hill,  It.  I.,
29  Aug.,  1778.  He  was  elected  a  representative  to
congress  from  New  Hampshirt>,  serving  from  2
Dec, 1793, till 3 March, 1797. and was  subse-'

Suently  appointed  bv  President  Jefferson  U.  S.
istrict  attorney  for  ifew  Hampshire,  serving  from
1801  till  1804.  ■  From  that  time  till  his  death  he
was  U.  S.  judge  for  the  district  of  New  Hamp-
shire.— His  son,  John  Henry,  b.  in  Portsmoutli.
N.  II.,  in  1794;  d.  in  Eurojie  al)out  18,50.  entered
Phillips  Exeter  academy  in  1809.  In  1825  he  be-
came register  of  the  navy  de|>artment  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C.,  and  for  several  years  was  foreign  corre-
spondent for  the  Philadelphia  "Saturday  Courier."
He  published  "Osceola,  a  tragedy;  "Erratic
Poems  " :  a  "  Life  of  John  Paul  Jones  "  (Washing-
ton. 1825):  "Naval  Sketches  "(Philadelphia,  1845);
"The  Tourist's  Guide  in  Euro|)e.  or  Pencillings  in
England  and  on  the  Continent " ;  and  "  Suppressed
History  of  the  Administration  of  John  Adam.s,
1797-1801,"  as  printed  and  suppressed  by  John
Wood  in  1802  (1846).— His  son,  John  'Henry
(1814-1849),  was  a  U.  S.  naval  officer  and  .served  in
the  Mexican  war.

SHERIDAN,  PhHin  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in
Albany,  N.  Y.,  6  March.  1831 ;  d.  in  Nonquitt,
Mass.,  5  Aug.,  1888.  After  attending  the  public
school  he  was  entered  as  a  cadet  in  the  United
States  military  acatlemv,  1  July,  1848.  On  account
of  a  quarrel  with  a  cadet  file-closer  in  1850,  whose
conduct  toward  him  he  deemed  insulting,  he  was
susjKsnded  from  the  academy  for  a  year,  but  re-
turned, and  was  graduated,  1  July,  1853,  standing
thirty-fourth  in  a  class  of  fifty-two,of  which  James
B.  ^icPhers<m  was  at  the  head.  Gen.  John  M.
Schofield  and  the  Confederate  Gen.  John  B.  Hood
were  also  his  classmates.  On  the  day  of  his  gradu-
ation he  was  appointed  a  brevet  2d  lieutenant  in
the  3d  infantry.  After  service  in  Kentucky,  Texas,
and  Oregon,  he  w^as  made  2d  lieutenant  in  the  4th
infantry,  22  Nov.,  1854,  1st  lieutenant,  1  March,
1861,  and  captain  in  the  13lh  infantry,  14  May,
1861.  In  December  of  that  year  he  was  chief
quartermaster  and  commissary  of  the  army  in
southwestern  Missouri.  In  the  Mississijipi  cam-
paign from  April  to  September,  1862,  he  wascjuar-
termaster  at  Gen.  Hall»>ck's  headquarters  during
the  advance  upon  Corinth.  It  then  l)ecame  mani-
fest that  his  true  place  was  in  the  field.  On  20
May,  1862,  he  was  apptiinte<l  colonel  of  the  2d
Michigan  cavalry,  and  on  1  July  was  sent  to  make
a  mid  on  Booneville,  Miss.  He  did  excellent  ser-
vice in  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  from  Corinth  to
i  Baldwin,  ana  in  many  skirmishes  during  July,  and
at  the  battle  of  Booneville.


498


SHERIDAN


SHERIDAN


In  reward  for  his  skill  and  courage  he  was  ap-
pointed, 1  July,  a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,
and  on  1  Oct.  was  placed  in  command  of  the  11th
division  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  in  which  ca-
pacity he  took  part  in  the  successful  battle  of  P(;r-
ryville,  on  8  Oct.,  between  the  armies  of  Gen.  Buell
and  Gen.  Bragg,  at  the  close  of  which  the  latter  re-
treated from  Kentucky.  In  this  action  Sheridan
was  particularly  distinguished.  After  the  enemy
had  driven  back  McCook's  corps  and  were  pressing
upon  the  exposed  left  flank  of  Gilbert,  Sheridan,
with  Gen.  Ilobert  B.  Mitchell,  arrested  the  tide,
and,  driving  them  back  through  Perryvilie,  re-es-
tablished the  broken  line.  His  force  marched  with
the  army  to  the  relief  of  Nashville  in  Octol)er  and
November.  He  was  then  placed  in  command  of  a
division  in  the  Army  of  the  Cuml)erland,  and  took

Sart  in  the  two  davs'  battle  of  Stone  Kiver  (or
Iurfreesboro),31  Dec,  1802,  and  3  Jan.,  1803..  Bu-
ell had  been  relieved  from  the  command  of  the
army  on  30  Oct.,  and  Rosecrans  promoted  in  his

glace.  The  Confederate  army  was  still  under
niffg.  The  left  of  Rosecrans  was  strong,  and  his
right  comparatively  weak.  So  the  right  was  simpily
to  hold  its  ground  while  the  left  should  cross  the
river.  The  project  of  Bragg,  well-conceived,  was
to  crush  the  National  right,  and  he  almost  suc-
ceede<l.  Division  after  division  was  driven  back
until  Cheatham  attacked  him  in  front,  while  Cle-
burne essayed  to  turn  his  flank,  and  Sheridan  was
reached ;  the  fate  of  the  dav  seemed  to  be  in  his
hands.  He  resisted  vigorously,  then  advanced  and
drove  the  enemy  back,  changing  front  to  the  south
(a  daring  manoeuvre  in  battle),  held  the  overwhelm-
ing force  in  check,  and  retired  only  at  the  point  of
the  bayonet.  This  brilliant  feat  of  arms  enabled
Rosecrans  to  form  a  new  line  in  harmony  with  his
overpowered  right.  Sheridan  said  laconically  to
Rosecrans,  when  they  met  on  the  field,  pointing  to
the  wreck  of  his  division,  which  had  lost  1,030  men :
"  Hei-e  are  all  that  are  left."  After  two  days  of
indecision  and  desultory  attempts,  Bragg  aban-
doned Murfreesboro  and  fell  back  to  TuUahoma,
while  Rosecrans  waited  for  a  rest  at  that  place.

Sheridan's  military  ability  had  been  at  once  rec-
ognized and  acknowledged  by  all,  and  he  was  aj>
pointed  a  major-general  of  volunteers,  to  date  from
31  Dec,  1802.  lie  was  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of
Van  Dorn  to  Columbia  and  Franklin  during
March,  and  captured  a  train  and  many  prisoners
at  Eaglesville.  He  was  with  the  atlvance  on  TuUa-
homa from  24  June  to  4  July,  1803,  taking  part  in
the  capture  of  Winchester,  "fenn.,  on  27  June.  He
was  with  the  army  in  the  crossing  of  the  Cumber-
land mountains  and  of  the  Tennessee  river  from
15  Aug.  to  4  Sept.,  and  in  the  severe  battle  of  the
Chickamauga,  on  19  and  20  Sept.  Bragg  ma-
noeuvred to  turn  the  left  and  cut  Rosecrans  oflE
from  Chattanooga,  but  was  foiled  by  Thomas,  who
held  Rossville  road  with  an  iron  grip.  During
the  battle  there  was  a  misconception  of  orders,
which  left  a  gap  in  the  centre  of  the  line  which
the  enemy  at  once  entered.  The  right  being  thus
thrown  out  of  the  fight,  the  centre  was  greatly
imperilled.  For  some  time  the  battle  seemed  ir-
recoverably lost,  but  Thomas,  since  called  "the
Rock  of  Chickamauga,"  held  firm ;  Sheridan  ral-
lied many  soldiers  of  the  retreating  right,  and
joined  Thomas;  and,  in  spite  of  the  fierce  and
repeated  attacks  of  the  enemy,  it  was  not  until
the  next  day  that  it  retired  upon  Rossville,  being
afterward  withdrawn  within  the  defences  of  Chat-
tanooga, whither  McCook,  Crittenden,  and  Rose-
crans had  gone.  Rosecrans  was  superseded  by
Thomas,  to  whom  was  presented  a  problem  ap-


parently incapable  of  solution.  He  was  ordered
to  hold  the  place  to  the  jK^int  of  starvation,  and
he  said  he  would.  The  enemy  had  possession  of
the  approaches  by  land  and  water,  men  and  ani-
mals were  starving,  and  forage  and  provisions  had
to  be  hauled  over  a  long  and  exceedingly  diflicult
wagon-road  of  seventy-five  miles.

Gen.  Grant  was  then  invested  with  the  command
of  all  the  southern  armies  contained  in  the  new
military  division  of  the  Mississippi,  embracing  the
departments  of  the  Ohio,  the  Cumberland,  and  the
Tennessee.  He  reached  Chattanooga  on  23  Oct.,  and
the  condition  of  affairs  was  suddenly  changed.  He
ordered  the  troops  relieved  by  the  capture  of  Vicks-
burg  to  join  him,  and  Sherman  came  with  his
corps.  Sheridan  was  engaged  in  all  the  operations
around  Chattanooga,  under  the  immediate  com-
mand and  personal  observations  of  Gen.  Grant,  and
played  an  imjx>rtiint  part  in  the  battle  of  Mission
Ridge.  From  the  centre  of  the  National  line  he
led  the  troops  of  his  division  from  Orchard  Knob,
and,  after  carrying  theintrenchmentsand  rifle-pits
at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  instead  of  using  his
discretion  to  pause  there,  he  moved  his  division
forward  to  the  top  of  the  ridge  and  drove  the  ene-
my a(!ross  the  summit  and  down  the  opposite  slope.
In  this  action  he  first  attracted  the  marked  atten-
tion of  Gen.  Grant,  who  saw  that  he  might  be  one
of  his  most  useful  lieutenants  in  the  future — a  man
with  whom  to  try  its  difficult  and  delicate  prob-
lems. A  horse  was  shot  under  him  in  this  action,
but  he  pushed  on  in  the  pursuit  to  Mission  Mills,
with  other  portions  of  the  army  of  Thomas  harass-
ing the  rear  of  the  enemy,  for  Bragg,  having  aban-
doned all  his  positions  on  Lookout  Mountain,
Chattanooga  Valley,  and  Missionary  Ridge,  was  in
rapid  retreat  toward  Dalton,

After  further  operations  connected  with  the  oc-
cupancy of  east  Tennessee,  Sheridan  was  trans-
ferred by  Grant  to  Virginia,  where,  on  4  April,
1804,  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  cavalry
corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  all  the  cavalry
being  consolidated  to  form  that  command.  Here
he  seemed  in  his  element;  to  the  instincts  and  tal-
ents of  a  general  he  joined  the  fearless  dash  of  a
dragoon.  Entering  with  Grant  upon  the  overland
campaign,  he  took  part  in  the  bloody  battle  of  the
Wilaerness,  5  and  0  May,  1864.  Constantly  hi  the
van,  or  on  the  wings,  he  was  engaged  in  raids,
threatening  the  Confederate  flanks  and  rear.  His
fight  at  Todd's  Tavern,  7  May,  was  an  important
aid  to  the  movement  of  the  army;  his  capture  of
Spottsylvania  Court-House,  8  >fay,  added  to  his
reputation  for  timely  dash  and  daring;  but  more
astonishing  was  his  great  raid  from  the  9th  to  the
24th  of  May.  He  cut  the  Virginia  Central  and  the
Richmond  and  Fredericksburg  railroads,  and  made
his  appearance  in  good  condition  near  Chatfield
station  on  25  Mav.  In  this  raid,  having  under  him
kindred  spirits  in  Merritt,  Custer,  Wilson,  and
Gregg,  he  first  made  a  descent  upon  Beaver  Dam
on  10  May.  where  he  destroyed  a  locomotive  and  a
train,  and  recaptured  about  400  men  who  had  been
made  prisoners.  At  Yellow  Tavern,  on  1 1  May,  he
encountered  the  Confederate  cavalry  under  J.  E.
B.  Stuart,  who  was  killed  iij  the  engagement.  He
next  moved  upon  the  outer  defences  of  Richmond,
rebuilt  Meadow's  bridge,  went  to  Bottom's  bridge,
and  reached  Haxall's  on  14  May.  He  returned  oy
Hanovertown  and  Totopotomoy  creek,  having  done
much  damage,  created  fears  and  misgivings,  and
won  great  renown  with  little  loss.  He  led  the  ad-
vance to  Cold  Harbor,  crossing  the  Pamunky  at
Hanovertown  on  27  May,  fought  the  cavalry  bat-
tle of  Hawes's  Shop  on  the  2iBth,  and  held  Cold


SHERIDAN


SIIKKIDAN


499


Harbor  until  (Jen.  William  F*.  Smith  came  un  with
the  (5th  corps  to  <MTU|»y  the  placf.  The  l»lo<Mly  J»at-
tlc  of  Cuhl  llHrlM>r  wiuh  fought  nn  jil  Mhv  an<l  8
Juno.  S<>tttn^  out  on  7  Junu,  Slu>ri<hiii  niu<l<>  u  raid
tA>wani  CharlottcwvilU'.  whori!  ho  i'X|»cctiMi  to  niwt
the  National  fort-e  under  (Jen,  Hunter.  This  move-
ment, it  wa.s  thought,  would  force  Ixh-  to  detach
liis  cavalry.  Unexiiectetlly.  however.  Hunter  maile
a  detour  to  Lyncnbur^,  and  Sheridan,  unahle  to
join  him,  rctumeil  to  Jordan'8  |)oint,  on  .lames
river.  Thenw,  after  apiin  cutting;  the  Virjfinia
Central  and  Richmond  and  Fredericksburg  rail-
n)ads  and  capturing  .'»(K)  j)risoners,  he  rejoineil  for
a  brief  8[)ace  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  In  cjuick
succession  came  the  cavalry  actions  of  Trevillian
station,  fought  between  Wade  Hampton  and  Tor-
bert,  11  and  12  June,  and  Tunstnll  station,  21
June,  in  which  the  movements  wen>  feints  to  cover
the  railroad-crossings  of  the  Chickahominy  and
the  James.  There  was  also  a  cavalry  atTair  of  a
similar  nature  at  St.  Marv's  church  on  24  June.
Presswl  by  Grant.  Ijee  fell  hack  on  28  July.  1804.

The  vigor,  judgment,  and  dash  of  Sheridan  had
now  marked  him  in  the  eyes  of  (irant  as  fit  for  a
far  more  important  station.  Karly  in  August,
IHM,  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  Arn>y  of
the  Shenandoah,  formed  in  part  from  the  army  of
Hunter,  who  retired  from  the  command,  and  from
that  time  till  the  end  of  the  war  Sheridan  seems
never  to  have  encountered  a  military  problem  too
diflicult  for  his  solution.  His  new  army  consisted
at  first  of  the  Gth  corps,  two  divisions  of  the  8th,
and  two  cavalry  divisions,  commanded  by  Gens.
Torbert  and  Wilson,  which  he  took  with  him  from
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  Four  days  later,  7
Aug.,  the  scope  of  his  command  was  constituted
the  Middle  Military  Division.  He  had  an  ardu-
ous and  difficult  task  before  him  to  clear  the  ene-
my out  of  the  valley  of  Virginia,  break  up  his
magazines,  and  relieve  Washington  from  chronic
terror.  Sheridan  grasped  the  situation  at  once.
He  posted  his  forces  in  front  of  lierryville,  while
the  enemy  under  Early  occupied  the  west  bank  of
Opequan  creek  and  covered  Winchester.  In  his
division,  besides  the  6th  corps  under  Wright  and
the  8th  under  Crook,  Sheridan  had  receivetl  the
addition  of  the  IDth,  commanded  by  Emory.  Tor-
bert was  placed  in  command  of  all  the  cavalry.
Having  great  confidence  in  Sheritlan,  Grant  yet
acted  with  a  proper  caution  Wfore  giving  him  the
final  order  to  aavance.  He  went  from  (.'ity  Point
to  Harper's  Ferry  to  meet  Sheridan,  and  toUl  him
be  must  not  move  till  Lee  had  withdrawn  a  portion
of  the  Confederate  force  in  the  valley.  As  soon  as
that  was  done  he  gave  Sheridan  the  laconic  direc-
tion, "  Go  in"."  He  says  in  his  report :  "  He  was  off
promptly  on  time,  and  I  may  add  that  I  have
never  .since  deemed  it  necessary  to  visit  Gen.  Sheri-
dan before  giving  him  orders.'  On  the  morning  of
19  Sept..  Sheridan  atUicketl  h^rly  at  the  crossing
of  the  Ot)e<j[uan,  fought  him  all  day,  drove  him
through  Winchester,  and  sent  him  "whirling  up
the  valley,"  having  captured  5,(K)0  prisoners  and
five  pins.  The  enemy  did  not  stop  to  reorganize
unti The  had  reached  Fisher's  hill,  thirty  miles  south
of  Winchester.  Here  Sheridan  again  came  up  and
disl<»dged  him,  driving  him  through  Harrisonburg
and  Staunton,  and  in  st;nttered  |Hirtions  through
the  passes  of  the  Blue  Uidge.  For  these  successes
he  was  ma4le  a  brigadier-general  in  the  regular
army  on  10  Sent.  Ileturning  lei.surely  to  Stras-
burg,  he  pt)s»e<l  nis  annv  for  a  brief  repose  t)ehind
(Jedar  creek,  while  TorWrt  was  desf»atched  on  a
raid  to  Staunton,  with  orders  to  devastate  the  coun-
try, so  that,  should  the  enemy  return,  he  could  find


no  subsistence,  and  this  was  effectually  done.  To
clear  the  way  for  an  a^lvance,  the  enemy  now  sent
"a  new  cavalry  general,"  Thomas  L.  I{o^'*er,  down
the  valley :  but  he  was  soon  driven  bttck  in  confu-
sion. Early's  anny,  l>eing  reH'nforce<l  by  a  jjart
of  liongst reel's  commaml,  again  moved  forwanl
with  celerity  and  s«-crecy.  and,  fonling  the  north
fork  of  the  Shenandoah,  on  18  <A-t.  approached
rapidly  and  unol»serve«l,  un<ler  favor  of  foif  and
darkness,  to  within  tWO  yards  of  Shoriilan  s  left
flank,  which  was  fornunl  by  ('r«K)k's  coriis.  When,
on  the  early  morning  of  the  lOth,  they  leapc<l  ujKm
the  surprise<l  National  force,  there  was  an  imme-
diate ret  r(>at  and  the  ap]M'araiice  of  an  ap[ialling
disaster.  The  Hth  cor|>s  was  rolle<l  up,  the  exiK>«ied
centre  in  turn  gave  way,  and  soon  the  whole  army
was  in  retreat.  Sheridan  hml  U-en  al>scnt  in  Wash-
ington, and  at  this  juncture  had  -just  returned  to
Winchester,  twenty  miles  from  the  field.  Hearing
the  sound  of  the  Imttle,  he  ro<le  rapidly,  and  ar-
rivinl  on  the  field  at  ten  o'clock.  Ashe  rode  up  he
shouted  to  the  retreating  troops  :  "  Face  the  other
way,  btiys :  we  are  going  back  ! "  Many  <jf  the  Con-
federates ha<l  left  their  ranks  for  plunder,  and  the
attack  was  made  upon  their  disorganizexl  battal-
ions, and  was
successful.  A
portion  of
their  army,
ignorant  of
tne  swiftly
coming  dan-
ger, was  in-
tact, and  had
determinetlto
give  a  finish-
ing-blow  to
the  disorgan-
ized National
force.  This
was  caught
and  hurled
back  bv  an  at-
tack in two

columns  with  cavalry  supports.  The  enemy's  left
was  soon  routed  ;  the  rest  folIowe<l,  never  to  return,
and  the  valley  was  thus  finally  renderetl  impossible
of  occupancy  by  Confederate  troops.  They  did  not
stop  till  they  had  rcache<l  .Staunton,  and  pursuit  was
made  as  far  as  Mount  Jackson.  They  had  lost  in
the  campaign  1(5.952  killetl  or  woundwl  and  13,(X)0
prisoners.  Under  orders  from  Grant,  Sheridan
devastated  the  valley.  He  has  lx>en  censured  for
this,  as  if  it  were  wanton  destruction  and  cruelty.
He  destroyed  the  barns  and  the  crops,  mills,  facto-
ries. farming-ut4>nsils,  etc.,  and  drove  off  all  the
cattle,  sheep,  and  horses.  But,  a^  in  similar  cases
in  European  history,  although  there  must  have
been  much  suffering  and  some  uncalled-for  rigor,
this  was  necessary  to  destroy  the  resources  of  the
enemy  in  the  valley,  bv  means  of  which  they  could
continually  menace  W'ashington  and  Pennsylvania.
The  illustration  is  a  representation  of  "Sheridan's
Ride,"  a  statuette,  by  James  E.  Kelly.  The  steel
portrait  is  taken  from  a  photograph  made  in  1884.
The  terms  of  the  president's  order  making  .Sheri-
dan a  major-general  in  the  army  were:  "  For  per-
sonal gallantry,  military  skill,  and  just  confidence
in  the  courage  and  iMitriotism  of  his  trooi>s,  dis-
played by  Philip  H.  Sheridan  on  the  19th  of  Gcto-
l>er  at  (!'edar  Run,  where,  under  the  blessing  of
Providence,  his  routed  army  was  reorganized,  a
great  national  disast«'r  averted,  and  a  brilliant  vic-
tory achieved  over  the  n'l»els  for  the  thin!  time  in
pitched  battle  within  thirty  days,  Philip  H.  Sheri-


600


SHERIDAN


SHERMAN


dan  is  appointed  major-general  in  the  United
States  army,  to  ranlt  as  such  from  the  8th  day  of
November,  18(M."  The  immediate  tribute  of  (Jrant
was  also  very  strong.  In  an  order  that  each  of  the
armies  under  his  command  should  fire  a  salute  of
one  hundred  guns  in  honor  of  these  victories,  he
says  of  the  last  battle  that  *'  it  stamps  Sheridan,
what  I  have  always  thought  him.  one  of  the  ablest
of  generals."  On  9  Feb.,  1865,  Sheridan  received
the  thanks  of  congress  for  '•  the  gallantrv,  military
skill,  and  courage  displayed  in  the  brilliant  series
of  \ictories  achieved  by  his  army  in  the  valley  of
the  Shenandoah,  especially  at  Cedar  Run."  Dur-
ing the  remainder  of  the  war  Sheridan  fought
under  the  direct  command  of  Grant,  and  always
with  unabated  vigor  and  consummate  skill.  In  the
days  between  27  Feb.  and  24  March,  18G5,  he  con-
ducted, with  10.000  cavalry,  a  colossal  raid  from
Winchester  to  Petersburg,  destroying  the  James
river  and  Kanawha  canal,  and  cutting  the  Gor-
donsville  and  Lynchburg,  the  Virginia  Central,  and
the  Richmond  and  Fredericksburg  railroads.  Dur-
ing this  movement,  on  1  March,  he  secured  the
bridge  over  the  middle  fork  of  the  Shenandoah,
and  on  the  2d  he  again  routed  ?jarly  at  Waynes-
boro', pursuing  him  toward  Charlottesville.  He
joined  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  and  shared  in  all
its  battles.  From  Grant's  general  oi-ders.  sent  in
circular  to  Meade,  Ord,  and  Sheridan,  on  24  March,
1865,  we  learn  that  a  portion  of  the  army  was  to
be  moved  along  its  left  to  turn  the  enemy  out  of
Petersburg,  that  the  rest  of  the  army  was  to  be
ready  to  repel  and  take  advantage  of  attacks  in
front,  while  Gen.  .Sheridan,  with  his  cavalry,  should
go  out  to  destroy  the  Southside  and  Danville  rail-
road and  take  measures  to  intercept  the  enemy
should  he  evacuate  the  defences  of  Richmond.  On
the  morning  of  29  March  the  movement  began.
Two  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  were
moved  toward  Dinwiddle  Court-House,  which  was
in  a  measure  the  key  of  the  position  to  be  cleared
by  Sheridan's  troops.  The  court-house  lies  in  the
fork  of  the  Southside  and  Weldon  railroads,  which
meet  in  Petersburg.  A  severe  action  took  place  at
Dinwiddle,  after  which  Sheridan  advanced  to  Five
Forks  on  31  March.  Here  he  was  strongly  resisted
by  the  bulk  of  Lee's  column,  but.  dismounting  his
cavalry  and  deploying,  he  checked  the  enemy's
progress,  retiring  slowly  upon  Dinwiddle.  Of  this
Gen.  Grant  says  :  ''  Here  he  displayed  great  gener-
alship. Instead  of  retreating  with  his  whole  com-
manu,  to  tell  the  story  of  superior  forces  encoun-
tered, he  deployed  his  cavalry  on  foot,  ...  he  de-
spatched to  me  what  had  taken  place,  and  that  he
was  dropping  back  slowly  on  Dinwiddie."  There
re-enforced,  and  assuming  additional  command  of
the  5th  corps.  12,000  strong,  he  returned  on  1  April
with  it  and  9.000  cavalry  to  J'ive  Forks  and  or-
dered Merritt  to  make  a  feint  of  turning  the  ene-
my's right,  while  the  5th  struck  their  left  flank.
The  Confederates  were  driven  from  their  strong
line  and  routed,  fleeing  westward  and  leaving
6,000  prisoners  in  his  nands.  Sheridan  imme-
diately pursued.  Five  Forks  was  one  of  the  most
brilliant  and  decisive  of  the  engagements  of  the
war,  and  compelled  Lee's  evacuation  of  Petersburg
and  Richmond.  Sheridan  was  engaged  at  Sailor's
Creek,  0  April,  where  he  captured  sixteen  guns,
and  in  many  minor  actions,  8-9  April,  harassing
and  pursuing  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia,  and
aiding  largely  to  compel  the  final  surrender.  He
was  present  at  the  surrender  at  Appomattox  Court-
House  on  9  April.  He  made  a  raid  to  South  Bos-
ton. N.  C,  on  the  river  Dan.  on  24  April,  returning
to  Petersburg  on  3  May,  1865.


After  the  war  Sheridan  was  in  charge  of  the
military  division  of  the  Gulf  from  17  July  to  15
Aug.,  1866,  which  was  then  created  the  I)epart-
ment  of  the  Gulf,  and  remained  there  until  11
March,  1867.  From  12  Sept.  to  16  March  he  was
in  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Missouri,
with  headquarters  at  Fort  Leavenworth,  Kan.
Thence  he  conducted  a  winter  campaign  against
the  Indians,  after  which  he  took  charge  of  the
military  division  of  the  Mississippi,  with  head-
quarters at  Chicago,  When  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant
became  president.  4  March,  1869,  Gen.  William  T.
Sherman  was  made  general-in-chief  and  Sheridan
was  promoted  to  lieutenant-general,  with  the  un-
derstanding that  both  these  titles  should  disappear
with  the  men  holding  them.

In  1870  Sheridan  visited  Europe  to  witness
the  conduct  of  the  Franco- Prussian  war.  He  was
with  the  German  stafif  during  the  battle  of  Grave-
lotte,  and  presented  some  judicious  criticisms  of
the  campaign.  He  commanded  the  western  and
southwestern  military  divisions  in  1878.  On  the
retirement  of  Sherman  in  1883,  the  lieutenant-gen-
eral became  general-in-chief.  In  May,  1888,  he  be-
came ill  from  exposure  in  western  travel,  and,  in
recognition  of  his  claims,  a  bill  was  passed  by  Iwth
houses  of  congress,  and  was  promptly  signed  by
President  Cleveland,  restoring  for  him  and  dur-
ing his  lifetime  the  full  rank  and  emoluments  of
general.  He  was  the  nineteenth  general-in-chief  of
the  United  States  army.  Sheridan  never  was  de-
feated, and  often  plucked  victory  out  of  the  jaws
of  defeat.  He  was  thoroughly  trusted,  admired,
and  loved  by  his  officers  and  men.  He  bore  the
nickname  of  "Little  Phil,"  a  term  of  endearment
due  to  his  size,  like  the  "  petit  corporal  "  of  Napo-
leon I.  He  was  below  the  middle  height,  but  pow-
erfully built,  with  a  strong  countenance  indicative
of  valor  and  resolution.  Trustful  to  a  remarkable
degree,  modest  and  reticent,  he  was  a  model  soldier
and  general,  a  good  citizen  in  all  the  relations  of
public  and  private  life,  thoroughly  deserving  the
esteem  and  admiration  of  all  who  knew  him.  In
1879  Sheridan  married  Miss  Rueker,  the  daughter
of  Gen.  Daniel  H.  Rueker,  of  the  U.  S.  army.  He
was  a  Roman  Catholic,  and  devoted  to  his  duties  as
such.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Personal  Memoirs  "
(2  vols..  New  York,  1888).

SHERMAN,  Bnren  Robinson,  governor  of
Iowa,  b.  in  Phelps,  N.  Y.,  28  May,  1836.  In  1849
the  family  removed  to  Elmira,  where  he  attended
the  public  schools,  and  in  1852  was  apprenticed  to
a  jeweler.  In  1855  the  family  emigrated  to  Iowa,
where  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in

1859,  and began  practice  in  V^inton  in  January,

1860.  In  1861  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  13th
Iowa  infantry,  was  promoted  lieutenant,  was  se-
verely wounded  at  Shiloh,  and  advanced  to  cap-
tain for  gallant  conduct  on  the  field,  but  in  the
summer  of  1863  his  wounds  compelled  him  to  re-
sign. On  his  return  he  was  elected  county  judge
of  Benton  county,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1866
to  accept  the  office  of  clerk  of  the  district  court,
to  which  he  was  three  times  re-elected.  He  was
chosen  auditor  of  the  state  in  1874,  and  twice  re-
elected, retiring  in  January,  1881.  In  1882-'6  he
was  governor  of  Iowa.  During  his  two  terms  of
service  many  new  questions  were  presented  for  set-
tlement, anumg  which  was  that  of  total  prohibi-
tion of  the  liquor  traffic,  which  Gov.  Sherman
favored  in  letters  and  s}iee<'hes.  He  held  public
officers  to  strict  accountability,  and  removed  a
high  state  official  for  wilful  misconduct.  In  1885
he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  from  the  Univer-
sity of  Iowa.


SHERMAN


SHE KM AN


001


8HERMAN,  Henry.  Inwvor,  b.  in  Albany.  N.  Y..
A  March.  ISOH;  <|.  in  \Vii.Hhinjrt<>n.  I).('..  28  March.
1879.  Aft«T  jfrailuiition  at  \  alo  in  1820  he  stii(Ii<><l
thwiloffv  and  thon  law.  r(>tnrnin)r  in  1882  U>  Al-
banv.  lie  mtnn  reniovwl  to  N»'w  S'ork  fity,  and  in
1856  to  Hartford.  Conn.,  and  was  employed  in  the
U.  S.  treasury  de|>artinent  in  Wiuihinjcton  frtun
1801  till  1868.'when  he  resnnnnl  his  Inw-pnictire  in
that  city.  He  was  a  jxTsonal  friend  of  President
I<inmln',  who  on  the  morning  U-fore  hi.-*  assassina-
tion offered  him  the  chief  justiceship  of  New  Mex-
ico. H«  was  afterwanl  commissioned  by  President
Johnson,  but  s<H>n  resigneil.  Mr.  Shernmn  wa«  the
author  of  "  An  Analytical  Dijrest  of  the  I^aw  of
Marine  Insurance  to  the  Present  Time"  (New
S'ork.  1H41):  "The  (tovenimental  History  of  the
UnittMl  States  of  America"  (1S4^{:  enlarffcnl  ed..
Hartford.  1H(MM :  and  "  Slavery  in  the  United  States
of  AmtTicii"  (lliirtford,  1858).

SHERMAN,  John,  cler>fvman,  b.  in  De<lham,
England.  2«  Dec.,  1«13 :  d.  in  Watertown,  Mass..  8
Aug.,  1085.  He  was  educate<l  at  Cambridge,  where
he  was  calletl  a  "  College  Puritan."  came  to  New
England  in  1W4,  and  preached  in  Watertown  in
the  open  air.  After  continuing  for  some  time  in
Connifticut,  he  was  chosen  a  magistrate  of  that
colony.  On  27  May,  1641.  and  from  1044  until  his
death,  he  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  Watertown,  Mass.  He  was  a  fellow  of  Harvanl,
delivered  lectures  there  for  many  years,  and  was  a
popular  preacher  and  an  eminent  mathematician.
In  1682  he  delivere<l  a  discourse  before  the  conven-
tion of  Congregational  ministers  in  Massachusetts,
the  first  sermon  on  that  occasion  that  is  now  uf)on
record.  He  published  several  almanacs,  to  which
he  aj)pen«led  nious  reflections.

SIIKRMAN',  Roger,  .signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Indt'pt'iidence,  b.  in  I^wton,  Mass.,  19  April.
1?21  ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  23  July,  1793.  His
great-grandfather,  Capt.  John  Sherman,  came  from
England  to  Watertown,  Mass.,  about  1635.  His
grandfather  and  father  were  farmers  in  moderate

circumstances.  In
1723  the  family  re-
moved to  Stoning-
ton,  Mass.,  where
he  spent  his  bov-
hood  and  youtli.
lie  had  no  formal
education  except
that  which  was
obtained  in  the
ordinary  country
sch(H>ls,  but  by  his
own  unaided  exer-
tions he  acquired
respectable  attain-
ments in  various
branches  of  learn-
ing,  es|»eciallv

was  early  appren-
ticed to  a  shoemaker,  and  continued  in  that  occu-
pation until  he  was  twenty-two  years  of  age.  It  is
said  that  while  at  work  on  his  bench  he  was  accus-
tomed to  have  before  him  an  open  b«x)k.  so  that
he  could  <levote  ever}'  spare  minute  to  .study.  At
the  ap'  of  nineteen  he  lost his father,  and the

Srincipal  care  and  sup|x>rt  of  a  large  family  thus
evolved  upon  him,  with  the  charge  of  a  small
farm.  In  1 443  he  removwl  with  his  family  to  New
Milford.  Conn.,  ixrforming  the  journey  on  foot,
and  taking  hLs  shoemaker's  tools  with  him.  Here,
in  partnership  with  bis  brother,  be  engaged  in


men-antile  businetw.  In  1745  he  was  ap(K*inted
8ur%"eyor  of  lands  for  the  county  in  which  ho  re-
sided, a  [lost  for  which  his  early  attention  to  math-
ematics ciualifled  him.  Not  long  afterward  he  fur-
nishe<l  the  astn>nomical  calculations  for  an  al-
manac; that  was  publishe<l  in  New  York,  and  he
continue<l  this  siTvice  for  several  years.  Mean-
while, encourage<l  to  this  step  by  a  judici<ius  friend,
he  was  devoting  his  leisur*'  hours  to  the  study  of
the  law,  and  mmle  such  progress  that  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  liar  in  1754.  In  1755  he  was  elect«d
a  representative  of  New  Milfonl  in  the  general  aa-
semuly  of  Connecticut,  and  the  same  year  he  was
apix>inted  a  justice  of  the  jn-ace.  In  1759  he  was
made  one  of  the  judges  of  common  pleas  in  Litch-
field county.  Two  years  later  he  reiiiove<l  to  New
Haven,  w^here  the  same  appointments  were  given
him.  In  addition  to  this,  tie  l>ecame  treasurer  of
Yale  college,  from  which,  in  17<J5,  he  re<'eive<I  the
honorarv  degree  of  M.  A.  In  17(MJ  he  wa.sa[>|H)int«d
judge  o\  the  su|>erior  court  of  Connecticut,  and  in
the  same  year  was  chosen  a  memlxT  of  the  upper
house  of  tlie  legislature.  In  the  former  *»ffice  he
continued  twenty-three  years;  in  the  latter,  nine-
teen. When  the  lievolutionary  st  niggle  U»gan
Roger  Sherman  devoted  himself  unres<Tvcdly  to  the
patriot  cause.  In  such  a  crisis  he  was  obligwl  to  be
a  leader.  In  August,  1774,  he  was  electe«l  a  delegate
to  the  Continental  congress,  and  was  [iresent  at  its
opening  on  5  Sept.  following.  Of  this  Ixxly  he  was
one  of  the  most  acrtive  memljers.  Without  showing
gifts  of  popular  speech,  he  commanded  respect  for
his  knowietige.  juugment.  integrity,  and  devotion  to
duty.  He  served  on  many  important  committees,
but' the  most  decisive  prmjf  of  the  high  esteem  in
which  he  was  held  is  given  in  the  fact  that,  with
Adams,  Franklin.  Jefferson,  and  Livingston,  he  was
appointe<i  to  prepare  a  draft  of  the  Declaration  of
Inuependence,  to  which  document  he  subsequently
aflixeil  his  signature.  Though  a  meml)er  of  con-
gress, he  was  at  the  same  time  in  active  service  on
the  Connecticut  committee  of  safety.  In  1783  he
was  associated  with  Judge  Richanl  I^aw  in  revis-
ing the  statutes  of  the  state,  and  in  1784  he  was
elected  mayor  of  New  Haven,  which  office  he  con-
tinued to  hold  until  his  death.  He  was  chosen,  in
conjunction  with  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  and  Oliver
Ellsworth,  a  delegate  to  the  convention  of  1787
that  was  charged  with  the  duty  of  framing  a  con-
stitution for  the  United  States.  I)<x'uinentarjr
proof  exists  that  quite  a  number  of  the  pro|x)si-
tions  that  he  offered  were  incor|>orated  in  that  in-
strument. In  the  debates  of  the  Constitutional
convention  he  l>ore  a  conspicuous  part.  He  was
also  a  member  of  the  State  convention  of  Connecti-
cut that  ratifie<l  the  constitution,  and  was  very
influential  in  Mfuring  that  result.  A  series  of
pafK'rs  that  he  wrote  under  the  signature  of  "Citi-
zen "  powerfully  contributed  to  the  same  end.  Im-
mediately after  the  ratification  of  the  constitution
he  was  made  a  representative  of  Connecticut  in
congress,  and  took  an  active  jmrt  in  the  discussions
of  that  iKMly.  In  February,  1790,  the  (Quakers
having  preseiite<l  an  a«ldress  to  the  house  on  the
subject  of  "  the  licentious  wicke<lness  of  the  Afri-
can trade  for  slaves."  Mr.  Sherman  8uppt)rte<l  its
reference  to  a  committee,  and  was  successful  in  his
efforts,  though  he  w»is  strongly  opjMxscnl. He  was

Itromoted  in  1791  to  the  .senate.  an«l  <lie«l  while
lolding  this  oflice.  The  carwr  of  Roger  Sherman
most  happily  illustrates  the  ixissibilities  of  Ameri-
can citizenship.  I^'ginning  life  under  the  heaviest
disadvantagi>s,  he  rose  to  a  career  of  ever-increasing
usefulness,  honor,  and  success.  He  was  never  re-
moved from  an  oflice  except  by  promotion  or  be-


602


SHERMAN


SHERMAN


cause  of  some  legislative  restriction.  Thomas  Jef-
ferson spoke  of  him  as  "a  man  who  never  said  a
foolish  thing";  and  Nathaniel  Macon  declared
that  "  he  had  more  common  sense  than  any  man  I
have  ever  known."  In  early  life  he  united  with
the  Congregational  church  in  Stonington,  and
through  his  long  career  he  remained  a  devout
and  {)ractical  Christian.  Mr.  Sherman  was  twice
married,  and  among  his  descendants  are  Senators
William  M.  Kvarts  and  George  P.  Hoar. —  His
nephew,  Roger  Minot,  lawyer,  b.  in  Woburn,
Mass.,  22  May,  1773;  d.  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  30
Dec,  1844,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1792,  and
served  as  tutor  there  during  1795.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  at  Fairfield  in  1796,  was  a
member  of  the  general  assembly  in  1798  and  of
the  state  senate  in  1814-'18,  and'of  the  Hartford
convention  of  1814.  He  was  judge  of  the  superior
court  and  the  supreme  court  of  errors  in  1840-'2.
— Roger's  grandson,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ne\/
Haven,  Conn.,  in  1772 ;  d.  in  Trenton  Falls,  N.  Y.,
2  Aug.,  1828,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1793,  be-
came pastor  of  the  1st  church  at  Mansfield,  Conn.,
in  1797,  and  remained  in  this  relation  until  180."),
when  he  withdrew  from  it  because  of  his  ailoption
of  Unitarian  views.  He  was  for  a  short  time  pastor
of  a  Unitarian  church  at  Trenton  Falls,  the  first
of  that  denomination  that  was  organized  in  the
state  of  New  York.  At  this  place  he  established
and  for  several  years  conducted  a  flourishing
academy.  He  was  the  author  of  a  work  entitled
*'  One  God  in  One  Person  Only,"  which  is  said  to
have  been  the  first  elaborate  defence  of  Unitarian-
ism  that  api^eared  in  New  P]ngland  (1805) ;  also  of
"  The  Philosophy  of  Language  Illustrated  "  (1826) :
"Description  of  Trenton  Palls"  (1827):  and  of
various  minor  ])ublications.

SHERMAN,  Thomas  West,  soldier,  b.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  26  March,  1813 ;  d.  there,  16  March,
1879.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U  S.  military
academy  in  1836,  assigned  to  the  3d  artillery,
served  in  the  Florida  war  until  1842,  became  1st
lieutenant  on  14  March,  1838,  and  subsequently
was  employed  in  recruiting  and  garrison  service
until  1846.  He  became  captain  on  28  May,  1846,
engaged  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  was  brevetted
major  for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at  Bu-
ena  Vista,  23  Feb.,  1847.  He  served  again  on  gar-
rison and  frontier  duty  from  1848  till  1861,  during
which  time  he  engaged  in  quelling  the  Kansas  bor-
der disturbances,  and  commanded  an  expedition  to
Kettle  lake,  Dakota.  On  27  April,  1861,  he  became
major,  and  until  10  May,  1861,  commanded  a  bat-
tery of  U.  S.  artillery  and  a  battalion  of  Pennsyl-
vania volunteers  at  Elkton,  Md.  Prom  21  May
till  28  June  he  was  chief  of  light  artillery  in  the
defence  of  Washington,  D.  C,  having  been  made
lieutenant-colonel,  5th  artillery,  on  14  May,  and
brigadier-general,  U.  S.  volunteers,  on  17  May,  1861.
He  organized  an  expedition  for  seizing  and  holding
Bull's  bay,  S.  C,  and  Fernandina,  Fla.,  for  the  use
of  the  blockading  fleet  on  the  southern  coast,  com-
manded the  land  forces  of  the  Port  Roval  expedi-
tion from  21  Oct..  1861,  till  31  March,'  1862,  and
led  a  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  from
30  April  till  1  June,  1862.  He  participated  in  the
siege  of  Corinth,  Miss.,  commanded  a  division  in
the  Department  of  the  Gulf  from  18  Sept.,  1862,
till  9  Jan.,  1863,  and  in  the  defences  of  New  Or-
leans from  9  Jan.  till  19  May,  1863,  when  he  joined
the  expedition  to  Port  Hudson,  La.,  commanding
the  2a  division  of  the  19th  army  corps,  which
formed  the  left  wing  of  the  besieging  army.  While
leading  a  column  to  the  assault  on  27  May  he  lost
his  right  leg,  in  consequence  of  which  he  was  on


leave  of  absence  until  15  Feb..  1864.  He  was  made
colonel  of  the  3d  artillery  on  1  June,  1863.  On  his
return  to  duty  he  was  in  command  of  a  reserve
brigade  of  artillery  in  the  Department  of  the  Gulf,
of  the  defences  of  New  Orlean.s  and  of  the  southern
and  eastern  districts  of  Louisiana.  On  13  March,
1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,  U.  S.
army,  for  gallant  services  at  the  ca[)ture  of  Port
Hudson,  and  also  major-general  of  volunteers  and
major-general.  U.  S.  army,  for  gallant  and  meritori-
ous services  during  the  war.  After  the  war  he
commanded  the  3d  artillery  at  Fort  Adams,  R.  I.,
the  Department  of  the  East,  and  the  post  of  Key
West,  Fla.  He  was  retired  from  active  service  as
major-general  on  31  Dec.,  1870,  for  disability.

SHERMAN,  William  Tecnmseh,  soldier,  b.  in
Lancaster,  Ohio,  8  Pel).,  1820;  d.  in  New  York  city,
14  F'eb.,  1891.  His  branch  of  the  family  is  traceil
to  one  who  came  to  this  country  in  1634  with  his
brother,  the  Rev.  John  Sherman,  and  his  cousin,
Capt.  John  Sherman.  Roger  Sherman,  signer  of
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  traces  his  lineage
to  the  captain,  and  Gen.  Sherman  to  that  of  the
Rev.  John,  whose  family  settled  in  Woodbury  and
Norwalk,  Conn.,  whence  some  of  them  removed  to
Lancaster,  Fairfield  co.,  Ohio,  in  1810.  The  father
of  Gen.  Sherman  was  a  lawyer,  and  for  five  years
before  his  death  in  1829  judge  of  the  supreme
court.  His  mother,  who  was  married  in  1810,  was
Mary  Hoyt.  They  had  eleven  children,  of  whom
William  was  the  sixth  and  John  the  eighth.  Will-
iam was  adopted  by  Thomas  Ewing,  and  attended
school  in  Lancaster  till  1836.  In  July  of  that  year
he  was  sent  as  a  cadet  to  West  Point,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1840  sixth  in  a  class  of  forty-two
members.  Among  his  classmates  was  George  H.
Thomas.  As  a  cadet,  he  is  remembered  as  an
earnest,  high-spirited,  honorable,  and  outspoken
youth,  deeply  impressed,  according  to  one  of  his
early  letters,  with  the  grave  responsibility  properly
attaching  to  "  serving  the  country."  He  also  at
that  time  expressed  a  wish  to  go  to  the  far  west,
out  of  civilization.  He  was  commissioned  as  a  2d
lieutenant  in  the  3d  artillery,  1  July,  1840,  and  sent
to  Florida,  where  the  embers  of  the  Indian  war
were  still  smouldering.  On  30  Nov.,  1841,  he  was
made  a  1st  lieutenant,  and  commanded  a  small  de-
tachment at  Picolata.  In  1842  he  was  at  Fort
Morgan,  Mobile  Point.  Ala.,  and  later  at  Fort  Moul-
trie, Charleston  harbor,  where  he  indulged  in  hunt-
ing and  society,  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  fort
being  a  summer  resort  for  the  people  of  Charleston.
In  1843,  on  his  return  from  a  short  leave,  he  began
the  study  of  law,  not  to  make  it  a  profession,  but
to  render  him.self  a  more  intelligent  soldier.  When
the  Mexican  war  began  in  1846  he  was  sent  with
troops  around  Cape  Horn  to  California,  where  he
acted  as  adjutant-general  to  Gen.  Stephen  W.
Kearny,  Col.  Mason,  and  Gen.  Persifer  P.  Smith.
Returning  in  1850,  on  1  May  he  married  Miss  Ellen
Boyle  Ewing,  at  Washington,  hei  father,  his  old
friend,  then  being  secretary  of  the  interior.  He
was  appointed  a  captain  in  the  commissary  depart-
ment, 2  Sept.,  1850,  and  sent  to  St.  Louis  and  New
Orleans.  He  had  already  received  a  brevet  of  cap-
tain for  service  in  California,  to  date  from  30  May,
1848.  Seeing  little  prospect  of  promotion  and
small  opportunity  for  his  talents  m  the  army  in
times  oi  peace,  he  resigned  his  commission,  6  Sept.,
1853,  the  few  graduates  of  West  Point  bein^  at  that
period  in  demand  in  many  walks  of  civil  life.  He
was  immediately  appointed  (1853)  manager  of  the
branch  bank  of  Lucas,  Turner  and  Co.,  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.  When  the  affairs  of  that  establishment
were  wound  up  in  1857  he  returned  to  St.  Louis,


SHKHMAN


SHERMAN


603


nnd  livwl  for  a  time  in  New  York  as  n^nt  for  the
St.  Ixjui.s  firm.  In  1H5H-'U  he  wiw  h  it)uii«cllor-at-
lawin  Ijt'avcnworth,  Kan.,  and  in  the  next  year  Jm*-
oame  8Upi>rint4>n<lent  of  the  State  military  academy
at  Alexandria,  I^a.,  where  he  did  gtxnl  work:  but
when  ihatstaleset^eded  fro?n  the  Union  he  promptly
resijrne*!  an(l  returned  to  St.  Ii«)uis,  where  he  was  for
•  short  time  ^)n»sitlent  of  the  Fifth  street  niilroa«l.
Of  the  civil  war  ho  took  what  were  then  eon-
sidenni  extn'ine  views.  He  rejjanled  Pn»sident
Lincoln's  call  for  75.000  three-months'  men  in
April.  lH<n,  a-H  trifling  with  a  serious  matter,  de-
claring that  the  rising  of  the  seces-sioirists  was  not
a  mob  to  he  put  <lown  by  the  poitae  comitatun,  but
a  war  to  be  fought  out  by  armies.  On  Vi  May  he
was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  lUth  infantry,
with  instructions  to  rejwrt  to  Gen.  Scott  at  Wasfi-
ington.  That  ofllcer  Imtl  matured  a  plan  of  cara-
paign,  and  was  about  to  put  it  into  execution.
Sherman  was  put  in  command  of  a  brigade  in
Tyler's  division  of  the  armv  that  marche«l  to  Bull
Run.  His  brigade  comprised  the  l^th,  (5J)th,  and
TOth  New  York  and  the  2d  Wisconsin  regiments.
The  enemy's  left  had  been  fairly  turned,  and  Sher-
man's brigmle  was  hotly  engaged,  when  the  Con-
federates were  re-enforce<l ;  the  National  troops
maiie  fat^il  delays,  and,  struck  by  panic,  the  army
was'sofjn  in  full  retreat.  Sherman's  brigade  had
lost  111  kilUnl.  205  wounde<l,  and  293  missing.  On
8  Aug.,  1861,  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  to  date  from  17  May,  and  on  28  Aug.
he  was  sent  from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  to  be
second  in  command  to  Gen.  Robert  Anderson  in
Kentucky.  Few  twrsons  were  prepared  for  the
curious  nroblem  of  Kentucky  politics.  What  has
been  called  the  "  secession  juggle "  was  at least

Girtially  successful.  On  account  of  broken  health,
en.  Anderson  soon  asked  to  be  relieved  from  the
command,  and  he  was  succeeded  by  Sherman  on
17  Oct.  It  was  exiiected  bjr  the  government  that
the  men,  to  keep  Kentucky  in  the  Union,  could  be
recruited  in  that  state,  and  that  the  numl)ers  re-

auired  would  be  but  few;  but  this  expectation  was
oomed  to  be  disappointed.  Sherman  looked  for
a  great  war,  and  declared  that  60,000  men  would
be  required  to  drive  the  enemy  out  of  the  state
and  200,000  to  put  an  end  to  the  struggle  in  that
region.  Most  men  looke<l  upon  this  prophetic
sagacity  as  craziness.  He  was  relieved  from  his
command  by  Gen.  Buell  on  12  Nov.  and  ordered  to
report  to  Gen.  Hallcck,  commanding  the  Depart-
ment of  the  West.  He  was  placed  in  command  of
Benton  Barracks.  At  this  time  Gen.  Ulysses  S.
Grant  was  in  command  of  the  force  to  move  on
Ports  Henry  and  Donelson  in  February,  1862,  and
just  after  the  capture  of  these  strongholds  .Sher-
man was  assignm  to  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.
It  ainsistetl  of  six  divisions,  of  which  Shernum  was
in  command  of  the  5th.  In  the  battle  of  Shiloh,
or  Pittsburg  Ijanding.  6  and  7  April  (see  Gka.nt,
Uly.ssks  S.).  Sherman's  men  were  iM)ste<l  at  Shiloh
church,  and  the  enemy  were  so  strong  that  all  the
detachments  were  hotly  engaged,  and  Sherumn
served  as  a  pivot.  When  the  Army  of  the  Ohio
came  up,  during  the  night.  Grant  had  alremly  or-
dered Sherman  to  advance,  and  when  the  combinetl
forces  movetl,  the  enemy  retreatetl  rapidly  upon
Corinth.  The  loss  in  Sherman's  division  was  2.034.
He  WiLs  wounded  in  the  hand,  but  did  not  leave
the  field,  and  he  richly  deservwl  the  praise  of  Gen.
Grant  in  his  (ifllcial  re|K»rt :  "  I  feel  it  a  duty  to  a
gallant  and  able  officer.  Brig. -Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,
to  make  mentitm.  He  was  not  onlv  with  his  com-
mand during  the  entire  two  days  o^  the  action,  but
displayed  great  judgment  and  skill  in  the  manuge-


mont  of  his  men.  Although  jwvercly  wounded  in
the  hand  on  the  first  day,  his  place  was  never  va-
cant." And  again:  "To  his  individual  efforts  I
am  indebt<Ml  for  the  success  of  that  Iwttle."  Gen.
Hallcck  dwrlarcil  that  "Sherman  saved  the  fortunes
of  the  day  on  the  6th.  ami  (ronlribule<l  largely  to
the  glorious  victory  of  the  7lh."  After  the  battle
Gen.  Hallcck  assumed  command  of  all  the  armit>s,
and  advance<l  slowlv  U[>on  Corinth,  a<.-ting  rather
with  the  caution  of  an  engine<T  than with the

f>romplness  of  a  strategist.  In  the  new  movement
ten.  Sherman  was  conspicuous  for  judgment  and
dash.  lie  wjis  employed  constantly  where  prompt-
ness an«l  energy  were  neede«l.  Two  miles  in  ad-
vance of  the  army,  as  it  was  range<l  arr>und  Corinth,
he  captured  an<l  fortifitnl  Russell's  house,  which  is
onlv  a  mile  and  a  half  from  Corinth.  I)ec-eiving
Hallcck.  the  enemy  were  jiermitlcd  to  evacuate  the
town  and  destroy  its  defences.  Sherman  was  made
a  major-general  of  volunteers,  to  date  from  1  May,
1862.  On  9  June  he  was  ordered  to  Grand  Junc-
tion, a  strategic  point,  where  the  Memphis  and
Charleston  and  the  Mississippi  Central  railromls
meet.  Memphis  was  to  lx>  a  new  l>asc.  He  was  to
repair  the  former  roa<l.  and  to  guard  them  both
and  keep  them  in  running  order.  Gen.  Ualleck
having  been  made  general-in-chief  of  the  armies  of
the  United  States,  Grant  was,  on  15  Jul  v.  appoint-
ed to  command  the  Department  of  the  Tennessee,
and  he  at  once  ordered  Sherman  to  Memphis,  which
had  been  captured  by  the  National  flotilla,  6  June,
with  instructions  to  put  it  in  a  state  of  defence.
Sherman,  to  secure  himself  against  the  machina-
tions of  the  rebellious  inhabitants,  directed  all  who
atlhered  to  the  Confederate  cause  to  leave  the  city.
He  allowed  them  no  trade  in  cotton,  would  not
permit  the  use  of  Confederate  money,  allowed  no
force  or  intimidation  to  be  used  to  oblige  negroes,
who  had  left  their  masters,  to  return  to  them,  but
made  them  work  for  their  support.  Ho  also  eflfoctu-
allv  suppressed  guerilla  warfare.

'I'hc  western  armies  having  a<lvance<l  to  the  lino
of  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  niilroad,  the  next
step  was  to  capture  Yicksburg  and  thereby  open  to
navigation  the  Mississippi  river.  Vicksburg  was
strongly  fortified  and  pirrisoned  and  was  covered
by  an  army  commanded  by  Gen.  Pemlxjrton  posted
behind  the  Tallahatchie.  Grant  moved  direct
from  Grand  Junction  via  Holly  Springs,  McPher-
son  his  left  from  Corinth,  aiul"  Sherman  his  right
from  Memphis  to  Wyatt.  turning  Pemberton's  left,
who  retreated  to  Grenada  behind  the  Yalabusha.
Then  Grant  detached  Sherman  with  one  of  his
brigades  back  to  Memphis  to  organize  a  su Ancient
force  out  of  the  new  troops  there  and  a  division  at
Helena  to  move  in  boats  escorted  by  Admiral  Por-
ter's gun-boat  fleet  to  Vicksburg  to  capture  the
place  while  he.  Gnint.  held  Pemberton  at  Grenada.
The  expedition  failtni  from  natural  obstjicles  and
the  capture  of  Holly  Springs  by  the  enemy,  and  at
the  .same  moment  (ien.  McClcrnand  arrived  to  as-
sume command  of  the  exjH'dition  by  onlers  of
President  Lincoln,  and  the  Armv  of  tho  Tennessee
was  divided  into  the  13lh.  15tli.  16th.  and  17th
corps,  of  which  Sherman  had  the  15lh.  To  clear
the  flank,  the  ex|HHlif ionary  force  U-fore  Vicksburg
under  McClcrnand  iTturne<l  in  their  boats  to  the
mouth  of  the  Arkansas,  a.scen<le«l  that  river  a  hun-
drcil  miles,  and  carried  by  assault  Fort  Hindman,
capturing  its  stows  ami  five  thousand  [)ri.s4)ner8,
thereby  making  the  Mississippi  safe  from  molesta-
tion. In  this  movement  .Sherman  lK>re  a  conspicu-
ous |>art.  The  ex|)e<lition  then  returne<l  to  the
.Mississippi  river,  and  Gen.  Grant  came  in  person
from  Memphis  to  give  direction  to  the  operations


504


SHERMAN


SHERMAN


against  Vicksbure  from  the  river,  which  resulted
in  its  capture,  with  31,000  prisoners,  on  4  July,  1803,
thereby  opening  the  Mississippi  und  fully  accom-
plishing tne  original  purpose.  During  this  brilliant
campaign  Gen.  Shennan  was  most  active,  and
therefore  was  appointed  a  brigadier-general  in  the
regular  army,  to  date  4  July,  1863.

Aleantime  Rosecrans,  having  expelled  the  ene-
my from  middle  Tennessee,  had  forced  him  to
evacuate  Chattanooga,  fought  the  bloody  battle  of
Chickamauga,  and  fell  back  into  Chattanooga,
where  he  was  in  a  precarious  condition.  On  4  Oct.
Shern)an  was  ordered  to  take  his  corps,  the  15th,
from  the  Big  Black  via  Memphis,  witn  such  other
troops  as  could  be  spared  from  the  line  of  the
Memphis  and  Charleston  railway,  toward  Chatta-
nooga. He  moved,  repairing  the  road  as  he  went,
according  to  the  express  orders  of  Gen.  Halleck.
But  on  the  27th  he  received  orders  from  Gen.
Grant  to  discontinue  all  work  and  march  rapidly
toward  Bridgeport  on  the  Tennessee.  He  lost
no  time  in  doing  so.  Sherman's  15th  corps,  with
other  commands,  by  the  rapid  movement  for,
Chattanooga,  was  now  getting  into  position ;  he
was  preparing  to  cross  the  river  from  the  west
bank,  below  the  mouth  of  the  Chickamauga,  with
the  purpose  of  attacking  the  northern  end  of
Mission  ridge,  while  a  division  of  cavalry  was
sent  to  the  enemy's  right  and  rear  to  cut  the
railroad  behind  him.  At  1  o'clock,  on  the  morn-
ing of  24  Nov.,  Sherman  crossed  on  pontoon-
bridges,  and  by  3  o'clock  p.  m.  he  was  intrenched  at
the  north  end  of  Mission  ridge.  Thus  the  disposal
of  troops  in  Grant's  line  of  battle  was :  Sherman
on  the  left,  in  front  of  Tunnell  Hill ;  Thomas  in
the  centre,  at  Fort  Wood  and  Orchard  Knob ;  while
Hooker  was  to  come  up  from  Wauhatchie,  take
Lookout  mountain,  and,  crossing  to  Rossville,  ad-
vance upon  the  ridge,  to  complete  the  organiza-
tion, 'fhere  was  open  communication  between
these  bodies  by  special  couriers.  .While  prepara-
tions were  making  for  the  centre  attack  under
Thomas,  it  was  evident  that  the  enemy's  design
was  to  crush  Sherman.  Fierce  assaults  were  made
upon  him  in  quick  succession,  which  he  resisted,
and  thus  performed  good  service  in  drawing  the
foe  to  his  flank,  while  Thomas  was  making  the
main  attack  upon  the  ridge,  which  was  successful.
On  the  morning  of  the  25th  Sherman  pursued  the
enemy  by  the  roads  north  of  the  Chickamauga,  ar-
riving at  Ringgold  on  that  day,  and  everywhere  de-
stroying the  enemy's  communications.

During  these  operations  Gen.  Burnside  was  be-
sieged by  Longstreet  in  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  and  was
in  great  straits.  On  3  Dec,  under  orders  from
Grant,  which  another  commander  was  slow  to  obey,
Sherman  made  forced  marches  to  Bumside's  relief,
and  reached  Knoxville  not  a  minute  too  soon,  and
after  supplying  Burnside  with  all  the  assistance
and  re-enforcements  he  needed  marched  back  to
Chattanooga.  Toward  the  end  of  January,  1864,
he  returned  to  Memphis  and  Vicksburg,  whence
with  parts  of  McPherson's  and  Hurlburt's  corps,
then  unemployed,  he  marched  to  Jackson  and
Meridian,  where  he  broke  up  the  Confederate  com-
binations and  destroyed  their  communications.  On
2  March,  Grant  had  been  made  lieutenant-general ;
on  the  12th  he  assumed  command  of  all  the  armies
of  the  United  States,  with  the  purpose  of  conduct-
ing in  person  the  campaign  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac.  On  12  Marcn  he  assigned  Sherman  to
the  command  of  the  military  division  of  the  Missis-
sippi, comprising  the  Departments  of  the  Ohio,  the
Tennessee,  the  Cumberland,  and  the  Arkansas — in
a  word,  of  the  entire  southwestern  region,  with


temporary  headquarters  at  Nashville.  Tn  a  lettet
of  4  March,  1864,  Grant  acknowledges  to  Sherman
his  great  gratitude  for  the  co-operation  and  skill
which  so  largely  contributed  to  his  own  success,
and  on  19  Veh.,  1864,  Sherman  received  the  thanks
of  congress  for  his  services  in  the  Chattanooga  cam-
paign. On  25  March  he  began  to  prepare  his  com-
mand for  action,  to  put  the  railroads  in  good  con-
dition, and  protect  them  and  to  make  provision  for
the  supplies  of  the  army  in  its  approaching  cam-
paign. On  10  April  he  received  his  final  instruc-
tions from  Grant  to  move  against  Atlanta.  Order-
ing his  troops  to  rendezvous  at  Chattanooga,  he
made  it  his  headquarters  on  28  April.  His  force
consisted  of  the  armies  of  the  Cumberland,  Gen.
George  H.  Thomas ;  tiie  Tennessee,  Gen.  James  B.
McPhei*son ;  and  the  Ohio,  Gen.  John  M,  Schofield.
It  was  99,000  strong,  with  254  guns,  while  the  Con-
federate army,  under  Johnston,  about  41,000  strong,
soon  re-enforced  up  to  62,000  men,  was  prepared  to
resist  his  advance,  and  if  Sherman  had  the  advan-
tage of  attack,  Johnston  had  that  of  fighting  be-
hind intrenchments  and  natural  obstacles.  Mov-
ing from  Chattanooga,  Sherman  came  up  with  him
at  Dalton,  14  May,  and  turned  his  position  at  Buz-
zard's Roost  by  sending  McPherson  through  Snake
Creek  gap,  when  Johnston  fell  back  to  Resaca.
After  an  assault,  15  May,  Johnston  retreated  to
Cassville  and  behind  the  Etowah  on  the  17th.
After  the  turning  of  AUatoona  pass,  which  he
made  a  secondary  base,  and  fierce  battles  near  New
Hope  church,  in  the  neighborhood  of  Dallas,  John-
ston still  further  retreated  to  a  strong  position  on
Kenesaw  mountain,  having  contracted  and  retired
his  flanks  to  cover  Marietta.  Sherman  advanced
his  line  with  each  retrograde  movement  of  the
enemy  and  pressed  operations,  continually  gaining
ground.  Both  armies  habitually  fought  from  be-
hind log  parapets  until  Sherman  ordered  an  attack
on  the  fortified  lines,  27  June,  but  did  not  succeed
in  breaking  through.  He  then  determined  to  turn
the  position,  and  moved  Gen.  James  B.  McPher-
son's army  on  3  July  toward  the  Chattahoochee,
which  compelled  Johnston  to  retire  to  another  in-
trenched position  on  the  northwest  bank  of  that
river,  whence  he  fell  back  on  Atlanta  as  Sherman
began  to  cross  the  river,  threatening  to  strike  his
rear  with  a  part  of  the  army,  while  the  rest  lay
intrenched  in  his  front.  On  17  July  began  the
direct  attack  on  Atlanta.  Gen.  John  B.  Hood,
who  had  superseded  Gen.  Johnston  on  17  July,
made  frequent  sorties,  and  struck  boldly  and
fiercely.  There  was  a  severe  battle  at  Peach  Tree
creek  on  20  July,  one  on  the  east  side  of  the  city
two  days  later,  and  on  the  28th  one  at  Ezra  church,
on  the  opposite  side  of  Atlanta,  in  all  of  which  the
National  forces  were  victorious.  After  an  inef-
fective cavalry  movement  against  the  railroad,  Gen.
Sherman  left  one  corps  intrenched  on  the  Chatta-
hoochee and  moved  with  the  other  five  corps  on  the
enemy's  only  remaining  line  of  railroad,  twenty-
six  miles  south  of  Atlanta,  where  he  beat  hira  at
Jonesboro',  occupied  his  line  of  supply,  and  finally,
on  1  Sept.,  the  enemy  evacuated  the  place.

Here  Hood's  presumption  led  to  his  own  de-
struction. Leaving  the  south  almost  defenceless,
he  moved  upon  Nashville,  where  he  was  disastrously
defeated  by  Thomas.  Sherman  had  sent  Thomas  to
that  city  purposely  to  resist  his  advance,  and  with
the  diminished  army  he  moved  upon  Savannah,
threatening  Augusta  and  Macon,  but  finding  little
to  o[>pose  him  in  his  march  to  the  sea.  Sherman
moved  steadily  forward  until  he  reached  the  defen-
sive works  that  covered  Savannah  and  blocked
Savannah  river. These  were  promptly  taken  by


SHERMAN


SHERMAN


605


Msault,  and  communications  were  opcnod  with  the
fleet,  which  funii>hi>(l  niiiple  i<u|ii)Iif«<  to  hi.s  unny.
Savannah  tliiis  Iwcamo  a  niarinu  lta.Hv  for  futun>  o|>-
erations.  Slu-rnian  announctnl  in  n  brit'f  note  to
Pnwithsnt  Linrohi  the  evuniiition  of  thw  city.  "I
beg  to  present  you,"  ho  writes,  "  iis  u  ('liristuias  gift,
the  city  of  Siivunniih,  wit  h  l.'iU  heavy  guns,  ulenty  of
anmuinition,  and  2a,(NM)  Ixiies  of  cotton."  ilisannv
had  march*"*!  !{(K)  miles  in  t  weiily-four  days,  through
the  heart  of  Ucorgia,  and  had  live* I  in  plenty  all
the  way.  The  value  of  this  splendid  achievement
cannot  L>o  ovcrestimate<l.  On  12  Aug.  ho  hatl
been  appointed  major-general  in  the  G.  S.  army,
ami  on  10  Jan.  he  reoeive«l  the  thanks  "of  congress
for  his  "triumphal  march."  After  the  occu|»a-
tion  of  Savannah  the  question  amse  whether  Sher-
man should  come  north  by  sea  or  march  with  his
army  through  the  Atlantic  states,  lie  preferred
the  latter  plan.  Schofleld,  leaving  Thomas  in
Tennessee,  was  sent  by  rail  and  steamers  to  the
coast  of  North  Carolina  with  his  corps  (2>3<1)  to
march  upon  Goldsboro',  N.  C,  to  co-operate  with
him.  Sherman  left  Savannah  in  February,  movetl
through  the  Salkehatchie  swamp,  flanked  Charles-
ton, compelled  its  evacuation,  and  entered  Colum-
bia on  the  17th.  Thence  he  moved  on  Golds-
boro' by  way  of  Winnsboro',  Chemw,  and  Payette-
ville,  ojicning  communication  by  C^ape  Fear  river
with  SchofieTd  on  13  March,  fighting  at  Averys-
boro'  ami  Bentonville,  where  the  enemy  resisted


Ijee'a  mirrendpr  on  the  12th.  and  on  the  14lh  sent  a
flag  of  truce  to  Sherman  to  know  u|K)n  what  terms
he  would  receive  his  surrender.  "  I  am  fully  em-
powered," Sherman  wrote  to  him.  "to arrange  with
you  anv  terms  for  the  susfM'iision  of  hostilities,  and
am  willing  to  confer  with  you  to  that  end.  That
a  ba.se  of  action  may  l>e  hail,  I  undertake  to  abide
by  the  same  conditions  entered  into  by  (iens.  Grant
and  Lee  at  AufKimattox  Court-Ilousc.  Va..  on  the
9th  inst."  After  considerable  corres|»<indenee  and
a  long  interview  with  (>en.  Johnston,  having  in
view  an  immediate  aiitl  complete  peace,  Sherman
made  a  memorandum  or  )>Msis  of  agreement  l>e-
tween  the  armi«?s, which  was considered by  the

f government  as  at  once  too  lenient  and  exceeding
lis  powers.  It  include<l  in  terms  of  capitulation
not  only  the  army  of  Johnston,  but  all  the  Confed-
erate troops  remaining  in  the  field.  By  the  7th
article  it  was  announced  in  general  terms  "  that
the  war  is  to  cease ;  a  general  amnesty  so  far  as
the  executive  of  the  United  States  can  command,
on  condition  of  the  distwndment  of  the  Confeder-
ate army,  the  distribution  of  arms,  and  the  resump-
tion of  peaceful  pursuits  by  officers  and  men  hith-
erto composing  said  armies."  In  order  to  secure
himself  against  the  assumption  of  power,  the  arti-
cle is  thus  continued :  "  Not  being  fully  emf)Owered
by  our  resi)ective  principals  to  fulfil  these  terms,
we  individually  and  officially  pledge  ourselves  to
promptly  obtain  authority,  and  will  endeavor  to


his  advance  vigorously.  At  Aver>-sboro'  on  the
16th  Gen.  Henry  W.  Slocum  with  four  divisions  at-
tacked the  intrenchetl  position  of  Gen.  William  J.
Hanlee,  and,  turning  his  left  flank,  coinjH»lle<l  him
to  fall  biK'k,  while  the  cjivalry,  under  Gen.  Hugh
Judson  Kilpatrick,  were  attacked  and  driven  liack
by  the  Coniederate  infantry  of  Gen.  I^afayette  Mc-
Liaws  on  the  road  to  lientonville.  At  the  latter
point  Gen.  Johnston's  force  was  attacked  in  a
strongly  intrenche<i  position  on  the  19th  by  the  left
wing  of  Sherman's  army,  under  Gen.  Slocum,  whose
right  flank  had  been  broken  and  driven  back.  After
an  obstinate  condmt,  the  Confedenites  withdrew  in
the  night.  Sherman  and  S<'hofield  met  at  Golds-
boro' on  23  and  24  March  as  originally  planned.
Leaving  his  troops  there,  he  visited  President  Lin-
coln and  Gen.  Grant  at  City  Point,  returning  to
Goldsboro'  on  the  30th.  The  interview  on  boanl  4  he
"Ocean  Queen"  is  represente<l  in  the  accompany-
ing vignette  copy  of  a  nainting  by  G.  P.  A.  HealV,
entitle<l  "The  reacemaKers."  the  fourth  memlierof
the  jiroup  l)eing  Admiral  Porter.  Sherman  is  shown
at  the  moment  that  he  said  to  Mr.  Lincoln:  "If
Lee  will  only  remain  in  Richmond  till  I  can  reach
Burkesville,  we  shall  have  him  l)etween  our  thumb
and  fingers,"  suiting  the  aciion  to  the  wonl.

He  was  now  rea<ly  to  strike  the  Danville  road,
break  Ijee's  communications,  and  cut  off  his  re-
treat, or  to  re-enfopce  Grant  in  front  of  Richmond
(or  a  final  attack.  He  would  l>e  ready  to  move  on
10  April. Johnston  at  Greensboro'  received  news  of


carry  out  the  above  programme."  It  was  an  hon-
est effort  on  the  part  of  a  humane  commander  to
put  an  end  to  the  strife  at  once.  Perhaps  affairs
were  somewhat  complicated  by  the  assassination  of
President  Lincoln  on  14  April,  which  create*!  great
indignation  and  sorrow.  It  not  only  aff»'cted  the
terms  Ixitween  Johnston  and  .Sherman,  but  it  caused
the  latter  to  fall  under  the  suspicion  of  the  secre-
tary of  war.  On  their  arrival  in  Washington  they
were  promptly  and  curtly  disapproved  by  a  de-
spatch sent,  not  to  Sherman,  but  t-o  (ten.  Grant,  on
tne  morning  of  24  April,  ilirecting  him  to  .go  at
once  to  North  Carolina,  by  order  of  Sec.  Stan-
ton, to  repudiate  the  terms  and  to  negotiate  the
whole  matter  as  in  the  case  of  Lee.  Gen.  Sherman
considered  himself  rebuked  for  his  conduct.  It
was  supposed  that  in  the  terms  of  agreement  there
was  an  acknowle<lgment  *>f  the  Confederate  gov-
ernment and  a  prop<ise<l  re-establishment  of  the
state  authorities  and  that  it  might  furnish  a
ground  of  claim  for  the  jwyment  of  the  Confeder-
ate debt  in  the  future.  Such  certainly  was  not  its
EuqKise,  nor  df)es  it  now  appear  that  such  could
ave  l)een  its  effect.  Sherman  was  a  soldier  treat-
ing with  soldiers,  and  de.served  more  c(»urteous  and
consiilerate  treatment  from  the  government  au-
thoriti<'s,  even  if  in  his  enthusiasm  he  had  ex-
cee<U»d  his  j)owers.  On  10  March,  .Sherman  set  out
for  Alexandria,  Va.,  and  arrived  on  the  19th.  He
determineil  then  not  to  revisit  Wa.shingt<in,  but  to
await  onlers  in  camp;  but  he  afterward,  at  the


506


SHERMAN


SHERMAN


president's  request,  went  to  see  him.  He  did  not
complain  that  his  agreement  with  Johnston  was
disapproved.  It  was  the  publication  that  consti-
tuted the  gravamen  of  the  oflfence.  its  tone  and
style,  the  insinuations  it  contained,  the  false  in-
ferences it  occasioned,  and  the  offensive  orders  to
the  subordinate  officers  of  Gen.  Sherman  which
succeeded  the  publication.  The<^  he  bitterly  re-
sented at  the  time,  but  before  Mr.  Stanton's  death
they  became  fully  reconciled.

Preliminary  to  the  disbandment  of  the  National
armies  they  passed  in  review  before  President  John-
son and  cabinet  and  Lieut.-Gen.  Grant — the  Army
of  the  Potomac  on  23  May,  and  Gen.  Sherman's
army  on  the  24th.  Sherman  was  particularly  ob-
served and  honored.  He  took  leave  of  his  army
in  an  eloquent  special  field  order  of  30  May.  From
27  June,  1865,  to  3  March.  1869,  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  military  division  of  the  Mississippi,
with  headquarters  at  St.  Louis,  embracing  the  De-
partments of  the  Ohio,  Missouri,  and  Arkansas.
Upon  the  appointment  of  Grant  as  general  of  the
army  on  25  July,  1866.  Sherman  was  promoted  to
be  lieutenant-general,  and  when  Grant  became
president  of  the  United  States,  4  March,  1869,  Sher-
man succeeded  him  as  general,  with  headquarters
at  Washington.  From  10  Nov.,  1871,  to  17  Sept.,
1872,  he  made  a  professional  tour  in  Europe,  and
was  everywhere  received  with  the  honors  due  to
his  distinguished  rank  and  service.  At  his  own
request,  and  in  order  to  make  Sheridan  general-in-
chief,  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list,  with  full
pay  and  emoluments,  on  8  Feb.,  1884.  He  has
received  many  honors,  among  which  may  be  men-
tioned the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Dartmouth,  Yale.
Harvard,  Princeton,  and  other  universities,  and
membership  in  the  Board  of  regents  of  the  Smith-
sonian institution,  1871-'83.

A  thorough  organizer,  he  is  also  prompt  in  exe-
cution, demanding  prompt  and  full  service  from
all  whom  he  commands.  He  is  an  admirable
writer,  and  goes  at  once  to  the  very  point  at  issue,
leaving  no  one  in  doubt  as  to  his  meaning.  His
favorites  are  always  those  who  do  the  best  work  in
the  truest  spirit,  and  his  written  estimate  of  them
is  always  in  terms  of  high  commendation.  With-
out being  a  natural  orator,  he  expresses  himself
clearly  and  forcibly  in  public,  and  asjie  is  continu-
ally called  out,  he  has  greatly  developed  in  that  re-
spect since  the  war.

In  personal  appearance  he  is  a  typical  soldier
and  commander,  tall  and  erect,  with  auburn  hair
carelessly  brushed  and  short-cropped  beard,  his  eyes
dark  hazel,  his  head  large  and  well-formed ;  the
resolution  and  strong  purpose  and  grim  gravity
exhibited  by  his  features  in  repose  would  indicate
to  the  stranger  a  lack  of  the  softer  and  more  hu-
mane qualities,  but  when  he  is  animated  in  social
conversation  such  an  estimate  is  changed  at  once,
and  in  his  bright  and  sympathizing  smile  one  is
reminded  of  Richard's  words :
'•  Grim-visaged  War  has  smoothed  his  wrinkled
front."
His  association  with  his  friends  and  comrades  is
exceedingly  cordial,  and  his  affection  for  those  al-
lied to  him  is  as  tender  as  that  of  a  woman.  A
life  of  Gen.  Sherman  has  been  written  by  Col.
Sanmel  M.  Bowman  and  Lieut. -Col.  Richard  B.
Irwin  (New  York,  1865),  and  he  has  published  "  Me-
moirs of  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  by  Himself"
(2  vols.,  New  York,  1875:  new  ed.,  1885).— His
brother,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Ohio,
10  May,  1823,  after  the  death  of  their  father  in
1829,  leaving  the  large  family  with  but  limited
means,  the  boy  was  cared  for  by  a  cousin  named


y^^  '<^<iS<2.*«.^.*«.»^


John  Sherman,  residing  in  Mount  Vernon,  where
he  was  sent  to  schooL  At  the  age  of  twelve  he  re-
turned to  Lancaster  and  entered  the  academy  to
prepare  himself  for  college.  In  two  years  he  was
sufficiently  advanced  to  enter  the  sophomore  class,
but  a  desire  to
be  self-supporting
led  to  his  becom-
ing junior  rod-
man  in  the  corps
of  engineers en-

faged  on  the  Mus-
ingum.  He  was
placed  in  charge
of  the  section  of
that  work  in  Bev-
erly early  in  1838,
and  so  continued
until  the  summer
of  1839,  when  he
was  removed  be-
cause he  was  a
Whig.  The  re-
sponsibilities at-
tending the  meas-
urements of  ex-
cavations and  em-
bankments, and  the  levelling  for  a  lock  to  a  canal,
proved  a  better  education  than  could  have  been
procured  elsewhere  in  the  same  time.  He  began
the  study  of  law  in  the  office  of  his  brother  Charles,
and  in  1844  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  formed  a
partnership  with  his  brother  in  Mansfield,  and  con-
tinued with  him  until  his  entrance  into  congress,
during  which  time  his  ability  and  industry  gained
for  him  both  distinction  and  pecuniary  success.

Meanwhile,  in  1848,  he  was  sent  jis  a  delegate  to
the  Whig  convention,  held  in  Philadelphia,  that
nominated  Zachary  Taylor  for  the  presidency,  and
in  1852  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Baltimore  conven-
tion that  nominated  Winfield  Scott.  His  attitude
as  a  conservative  Whig,  in  the  alarm  and  excite-
ment that  followed  the  attempt  to  repeal  the  Mis-
souri compromise,  secured  his  election  to  the  34th
congress,  and  he  took  his  seat  on  3  Dec,  1855.  He
is  a  ready  and  forcible  speaker,  and  his  thorough
acquaintance  with  public  affairs  made  him  an
acknowledged  power  in  the  house  from  the  first.
He  grew  rapidly  in  reputation  as  a  debater  on  all
the  great  questions  agitating  the  public  mind  dur-
ing that  eventful  period :  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri
compromise,  the  Dred-Scott  decision,  the  irapK)-
sition  of  slavery  upon  Kansas,  the  fugitive-slave
law,  the  national  finances,  and  other  measures  in-
volving the  very  existence  of  the  republic.  His
appointment  by  the  speaker,  Nathaniel  P.  Banks,
as  a  member  of  the  committee  to  inquire  into  and
collect  evidence  in  regard  to  the  border-ruffian
troubles  in  Kansas  was  an  important  event  in  his
career.  Owing  to  the  illness  of  the  chairman,
William  A.  Howard,  of  Michigan,  the  duty  of  pre-
paring the  report  devolved  upon  Mr.  Sherman.
Every  statement  was  verified  by  the  clearest  testi-
mony, and  has  never  been  controverted  by  any  one.
This  ref)ort,  when  presented/to  the  house,  created  a
great  deal  of  feeling,  and  intensified  the  antago-
nisms in  congress,  being  made  the  basis  of  the  can-
vass of  1856.  He  acted  with  the  Republican  party
in  supporting  John  C.  Fremont  for  the  presidency
because  that  party  resisted  the  extension  of  sla-
very, but  did  not  seek  its  abolition.  In  the  debate
on  the  submarine  telegraph  he  showed  his  oppo-
sition to  m'onopolists  by  saying:  "  I  cannot  agree
that  our  government  should  be  bound  by  any  con-
tract with  any  private  incorporated  company  for


SHERMAN


SHERMAN


5()7


fifty  years;  and  tho  ainontlmcnt  I  desire  to  offer
will  ri'MTve  tho  |»<)wc'r  to  con^^ress  to  determine
the  |iro|x»s«Ml  ciintract  aftor  ton  years."  All  bills
making  a|>pro|»riHti<)ns  for  public  expenditures
were  closely  scrutinized,  and  the  then  prevalent
8yst«m  of  niakini;  contnu-ts  in  advance  of  appro-
priations was  denounced  by  him  ils  illegal.  At  the
close  of  his  secoiul  conjfressional  term  he  was
reco>jni7,e<i  as  the  fon-most  man  in  the  house  of
represejitatives.  lie  hatl  fn>m  deei*  and  unchanire<l
conviction  adopte«l  the  }M)litical  faith  of  the  lie-
publican  |iarty,  but  withftut  any  partisau  rancor  or
malif^nity  towanl  the  south.

He  was  re-cle<rte<l  to  the  30th  conpress,  which
began  its  first  session  amid  the  excitement  cauM'd
by  the  lK)Id  raid  of  John  Hrown.  In  IH.*)!)  he  was
the  Kenublican  candidate  for  the  s|)eakership.  He
ha<l  subscrilKnl,  with  no  knowledge  of  the  book,
for  Hinton  R.  Helper's  "Impending  Crisis,"  and
this  fact  was  brought  up  against  him  and  estranged
from  him  a  few  of  the  s«)uthern  Whigs,  who  be-
sought him  to  declare  that  he  was  not  hostile  to
slavery.  He  refused,  and  after  eight  weeks  of  bal-
loting', in  which  he  came  within  three  votes  of
election,  ho  yielded  to  William  Pennington,  who
was  chosen.  Mr.  Sherman  was  then  made  chair-
man of  the  committee  of  ways  and  means.  He
took  a  decided  stand  against  ingrafting  new  legis-
lation upon  appropriation  bills,  saying:  "The
theory  oi  appropriation  bills  is.  that  they  shall
provide  money  to  carry  on  the  government,  to  exe-
cute existing  laws,  and  not  to  change  existing  laws
or  provide  new  ones."  In  18G0  he  was  again  elected
to  congri'ss,  and,  when  that  body  convened  in  De-
cenUx-r,  the  seceding  members  of  l)oth  houses  were
outsi)oken  and  defiant.  At  the  lx>ginning  of  Presi-
dent Buchanan's  mlministration  the  public  in-
debtedness was  less  than  |20,0()0,00U.  but  by  this
time  it  had  been  increased  to  nearly  $100,000,000,
and  in  such  a  crippled  condition  were  its  finances
that  the  government  had  not  been  able  to  pay  the
salarie:^  of  members  of  congress  and  many  other
demands.  Mr.  Sherman  proved  equal  to  the  occa-
sion in  providing  the  means  for  the  future  support
of  the  government.  His  first  step  was  to  secure
the  passage  of  a  bill  authorizing  the  issue  of  what
are  known  as  the  treasury-notes  of  18(M).

On  the  resignation  of  Salmon  P.  Chase,  he  was
elected  to  his  place  in  the  senate,  and  took  his  seat
on  4  March,  1861.  He  was  re-electe<I  senator  in
1867  and  in  1873.  During  most  of  his  senatorial
career  he  w&s  chairman  of  the  committee  on  finance,
and  served  also  on  the  committees  on  agriculture,
the  Pacific  railroad,  the  judiciary,  and  the  patent-
oflSce.  After  the  fall  of  Fort  Sumter,  under  the  call
of  President  Lincoln  for  75.000  troops  he  tendered
his  services  to  Gen.  Roliert  Patterson,  was  appointed
aide-de-camp  without  pay,  and  remained  with  the
Ohio  regiments  till  the  meeting  of  congress  in
July.  After  the  close  of  this  extra  session  he  re-
turned to  Ohio,  and  received  authority  from  Gov.
William  Denison  to  raise  a  briga«le.  Ijargely  at
his  own  expense,  he  recruited  two  regiments  of  in-
fantry, a  squadron  of  cavalry,  and  a  Imttery  of  ar-
tillerj',  comprising  over  2.2^00  men.  This  force
served  during  the  whole  war,  and  war.  known  as
the  "Sherman  brigmle."  The  most  valuable  ser-
vices rendered  by  him  to  the  L'nion  cause  were  his
efforts  in  the  st'nate  to  maintain  aiul  strtMigthen
the  public  cre<Ut.  and  to  provide  for  the  support  of
the  armies  in  the  field.  On  the  susjx'usion  of
specie  payments,  about  the  first  of  January.  1862,
the  issue  of  United  States  notes  became  a  necessity.
The  question  of  making  them  a  legal  tender  was
not  at  first  received  with  favor. Mainly  through


the  efforts  of  Senator  Shernwin  and  Sec.  Chase,  this
feature  of  the  bill  authorizing  their  issue  was  oar-
rie<l  through  congress.  They  justified  the  legal-
tender  clau.se  of  the  bill  on  the  ground  of  necessity.
In  the  delNites  on  this  question  Mr.  Sherman  said  :
"  I  do  believe  there  is  a  pressing  necessity  that
these  demand-notes  shouhl  l»e  ma«le  legal  tentler,
if  we  want  t<»  avoid  the  evils  of  a  <lepre<'iate<l  and
dishonored  pajK'r  currency.  I  do  Itclieve  we  have
the  constitutional  |Mjwcr  to  pass  such  a  pmvision.
and  that  the  public  safety  now  demands  its  exer-
cise." The  records  of  the  debate  show  that  he
made  the  only  sjieech  in  the  senate  in  favor  of  the
national-lMink  bill.  Its  final  passage  was  secured
only  by  the  personal  ajipcals  of  St>c.  Chase  to  the
senators  who  op|)os«Ml  it.  Mr.  Sherman's  s|)eeches
<m  state  and  national  banks  are  the  most  imi)ortant
that  he  made  during  the  war.  He  int^Mluce^l  a
refunding  act  in  1867.  which  wa.s  ad()pte<l  in  1870,
but  without  the  resumption  clause.  In  1874  a
committee  of  nine,  of  which  he  was  chairman,  was
appointed  by  a  Republican  caucus  to  secure  a  con-
currence of  action.  They  agree<I  upon  a  bill  fixing
the  time  for  the  resumption  of  s[)ecie  |)ayment  at
1  Jan.,  1879.  This  bill  was  reported  to  the  caucus
and  the  senate  with  the  distinct  understanding
that  there  should  be  no  debate  on  the  side  of  the
Republicans,  and  that  Mr.  Sherman  should  be  left
to  manage  it  according  to  his  own  discretion.  The
bill  was  passed,  leaving  its  execution  dej)endent
upon  the  will  of  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  for
the  time  being.

Mr.  Sherman  was  an  active  supporter  of  Ruther-
ford B.  Hayes  for  the  presidency  in  1876,  was  a
inemlier  of  the  committee  that  visited  Louisiana
to  witness  the  counting  of  the  returns  of  that
state.  He  was  apiiointeil  secretary  of  the  treas-
ury by  President  Hayes  in  March,  1877,  and  im-
mediately set  about  providing  a  redemption  fund
by  means  of  loans.  Six  months  before  1  Jan.,
1879,  the  date  fixed  by  law  for  redemption  of
specie  payments,  he  had  accumulated  $140,000,-
000  in  gold,  and  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing
the  legal-tender  notes  gradually  appn)ach  gold  in
value  until,  when  the  day  came,  there  was  practi-
cally no  demand  for  gold  in  exchange  for  the  notes.
In  1880  Mr.  Sherman  was  an  avowed  candidate  for
the  presidential  nomination,  and  his  name  was  pre-
sented in  the  Naticmal  convention  by  James  A.
Garfield.  During  the  contest  between  the  siipport-
ers  of  Gen.  Grant  and  those  of  James  0.  Blaine,
which  resulted  in  Mr.  Garfield's  nomination,  Mr.
Sherman's  vote  ranged  from  90  to  97.  He  returned
to  the  .senate  in  1881,  and  on  the  expiration  of  his
term  in  1887  was  re-elected  to  serve  until  18J>3.
At  present  (1888)  he  is  chairman  of  the  committee
on  foreign  relations,  and  is  an  active  memb(>r  of
the  committees  on  exjienditures  of  public  money,
finance,  and  rules.  In  I)eceml)er,  1885,  he  was
chosen  president  of  the  .senate  pro  fern.,  but  he  de-
clined re-election  at  the  close  of  his  senatorial
term  in  1887.  His  name  was  presented  bv  J(v
seph  B.  Poraker  in  nomination  for  the  presidency
at  the  National  convention  held  in  1884,  but
the  Ohio  delegation  was  divided  between  him
and  James  G.  Blaine,  so  that  he  received  only  30
votes  from  this  state.  Again  in  1888  his  name
was  presentwl  by  Daniel  H.  Hastings,  in  b<>half  of
the  Pennsylvania  delegati<m  at  the  National  con-
vention, and  on  the  first  ballot  he  nveivetl  229
votes  and  on  the  second  249.  l)eing  the  leading
candidate,  and  continued  so  until  Benjamin  Har-
rison receive<l  the  support  of  those  whose  names
were  withdrawn.  Mr.  Sherman  has  published
"  Selected  Speeches  and  Reports  on  Finance  and


508


SHERWIN


SHEW


Taxation,  1859-1878"  (New  York,  1879).  See
"John  Sherman.  What  ho  has  said  and  done:  Life
and  Public  S(>rvices,"  by  Rev.  Sherlock  A.  Bronson
(C()iinnl)iis.  Ohio,  1880).

SHERWIN,  Thomas,  educator,  b.  in  West-
moreland. N.  11.,  2()  March,  1799;  d.  in  Dedham,
Mass.,  23  July,  1809.  lie  worked  on  a  farm  in
Temple,  N.  11.,  served  an  apprenticeship  to  a
clothier  in  Groton,  Mass.,  and,  after  graduation  at
Harvard  in  1825,  taught  an  academy  in  Lexitigton,
Mass.,  in  1825-'6.  lie  was  a  tutor  in  mathematics
at  Harvard  in  1826-7,  and  from  1828  till  1838  was
submaster  of  the  English  high-school  of  Boston,
of  which  he  had  charge  from  that  date  until  his
death.  This  school  was  reputed  a  model  of  its
kind.  lie  was  an  originator  of  the  American
institute  of  instruction  in  1830,  its  president  in
18o3-'4,  a  member  of  the  American  academy  of
arts  and  sciences,  was  active  in  establishing  the
Massachusetts  institute  of  technology,  and  was
president  of  the  Massachusetts  teachers'  associa-
tion in  1845.  He  was  the  author  of  an  "  Element-
ary Treatise  on  Algebra "  (Boston,  1841). — His
son,  Thomas,  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  22d
Massachusetts  regiment  during  the  civil  war,  and
for  meritorious  services  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  1865.

SHERWOOD,  Adiel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fort
Edward,  N.  Y.,  3  Oct.,  1791 ;  rl.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo..
18  Aug.,  1879.  After  studying  three  years  at
Middlebury  college,  Vt.,  young  Sherwood  entered
Union  college  in  1816,  and  was  graduated  in  1817.
He  then  spent  a  year  at  Andover  theological  serai-
nary,  at  the  close  of  which  infirm  health  caused
him  to  remove  to  Georgia.  Here  he  was  ordained
in  1820  as  a  Baptist  minister.  Besides  serving  as
pastor  and  performing  extensive  preaching  tours
at  various  places,  he  was  especially  effective  in  ad-
vancing the  educational  interests  of  the  Georgia
Baptists.  For  several  years,  beginning  in  1827,  he
was  at  the  head  of  a  school  in  Edenton.  He  was
elected  in  1837  to  a  professorship  in  Columbian
college.  Washington,  D.  C,  but  resigned  the  next
year  to  accept  the  chair  of  sacred  literature  in
Mercer  university.  Ga.  In  1841  he  was  elected
president  of  Shurtleff  college,  Alton,  111.  During
1848-'9  he  was  president  of  the  Masonic  college,
Lexington,  Mo.  In  1857  he  returned  to  Georgia,
and  became  president  of  Marshall  college  at  Grif-
fin. After  the  civil  war  he  went  again  to  Missouri.
He  received  the  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.  Besides
contributing  extensively  to  periodicals,  Dr.  Sher-
wood was  the  author  of  a  "  Gazetteer  of  Georgia  " ;
"Christian  and  Jewish  Churches";  and  "Notes  on
the  New  Testament."

SHERWOOD,  James  Manning,  clergvman,  b.
in  Fishkill,  X.  Y..  29  Se[)t.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  22  Oct.,  1890.  He  was  educated  by  private
tutors,  studied  theology  under  Rev.  George  Arm-
strong in  Fishkill,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1834.
and  was  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  c-hurch  at  New
Windsor,  N.  Y.,  from  1835  till  1840.  at  Mendon,  N.
Y.,  in  1840-'5,  and  at  Bloomfield,  N.  J.,  in  1852-'8.
He  was  editor  of  the  "American  National  Preacher"
in  1846-"9,  of  the  "  Biblical  Henository  "  from  1847
till  1851,  and  of  the  "  Eclectic  Magazine  "  from  1864
till  1871.  Mr.  Sherwood  was  the  founder  of  "  Hours
at  Home"  in  1865,  which  he  edited  until  1869,  and
he  was  the  editor  of  the  "  Presbvterian  Review  "
from  1863  till  1871,  and  of  the  "  Presliytcrian  Quar-
terly and  Princeton  Review  "  in  1872-'8.  He  con-
ducted the  "  Homiletic  Review  "  from  September,
1883,  and  also  was  the  editor  of  the  "  Missionary
Review."  He  was  engaged  as  a  reader  of  manu-
scripts for  various  publishing-houses,  and  wrote


numerous  reviews.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Plea  for
the  Old  Foundations"  (New  York,  1*56);  "The
Lamb  in  the  Midst  of  the  Throne,  or  the  History
of  the  Cross"  (1883);  and  "Books  and  Authors,
and  how  to  use  Them  "  (1886).  He  also  edited  the
"  Memoirs  "  and  two  volumes  of  "  Sermons  "  of  the
Rev.  IchalHxi  Spencer,  D.  D.  (1855),  and  David
Brainerd's  "  Memoirs,"  with  notes  (1884). — His
cousin,  John  D,  author,  b.  in  Fishkill,  N.  Y.,  15
Oct.,  1818.  was  gniduatetl  at  Yale  in  1839.  He
has  held  local  offices  in  Englewood,  N.  J.,  and  at
one  time  during  the  civil  war  was  commissioner  of
the  draft.  He  afterward  became  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  James  S.  Wadsworth,  with  the  rank  of  colo-
nel, and  served  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  has  contributed
to  magazines,  and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Case  of
Cuba"  (Boston,  1869);  "Comic  History  of  the
United  States  "  (1870) ;  and  a  chapter  on  "  Ameri-
can TumuJi "  in  "  Flint  Chips  and  Guide  to  Pre-
historic ArchaH)logv,"  by  Edward  T.  Stevens  (Lon-
don. 1870).

SHERWOOD,  Mary  E.,  author,  b.  in  Keene,
N.  H.,  about  1830.  She  is  the  daughter  of  James
Wilson,  member  of  congress  from  New  Hamp-
shire, and  married  John  Sherwood,  a  lawyer  of
New  York  city.  She  is  well  known  as  a  society
leader,  and  has  devoted  special  attention  to  the
advancement  of  literary  ana  artistic  pursuits.  One
of  her  sons  married,  in  1887,  Rosina  Emmet,  the
artist.  Mrs.  Sherwood  has  given  in  New  York  city
and  elsewhere,  for  several  seasons,  readings  that
have  been  exceedingly  successful,  has  written  for
various  periodicals,  and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Sar-
casm of  Destiny "  (New  York,  1877) ;  "  Home
Amusements"  (1881);  "Amenities  of  Home"
(1881) ;  "  A  Transnlanted  Rose  "  (1882) ;  and  "  Man-
ners and  Social  L sages"  (1884).

SHERWOOD,  William  Hall,  pianist,  b.  in
Lyons,  N.  Y.,  31  Jan.,  1854.  His  talent  for  music
manifested  itself  at  a  very  early  age,  and  when  he
was  nine  years  old  he  began  to  appear  in  concerts
in  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  and  Canada.  He  af-
terward gave  lessons  also  at  Lyons  musical  academy,
which  was  founded  by  his  father,  Rev.  Lyman  fl.
Sherwood.  In  1871  he  became  the  pupil  of  Will-
iam Mason,  by  whose  advice  he  went  to  Europe
that  vear.  lie  studied  for  seven  months  under
Theodore  Kullak,  and  subsequently  also  with  Dop-
pler,  Ernst  Friedrich  E.  Richter,  and  Carl  Fried-
rich  Weitzraann.  During  this  period  he  frequent-
ly appeared  before  the  public,  at  the  Beethoven  fes-
tival in  Berlin,  at  Weimar  with  Liszt,  and  on  other
occasions,  meeting  with  much  success.  In  1876  he
returned  to  the  United  States,  and  appeared  in
most  of  the  principal  cities,  playing  frequently  in
Philadelphia  during  the  Centennial  exhibition.  In
the  autumn  of  the  same  year  he  settled  in  Boston,
and  soon  became  widely  known  as  a  soloist  and
teacher.  Since  then  he  has  plaved  at  various  times
in  all  the  larger  cities  of  the  IJnion,  and  is  noted
for  his  excellent  technique,  variety  of  interpreta-
tions, and  depth  of  expression.  His  work  as  a
composer  is  limited  to  about  twenty  pieces  for  the
piano,  and  many  more  in  manuscript.

SHEW,  Joel,  physician,  b.  in  Providence,  Sara-
toga CO.,  N.  Y.,  13  Nov.,  1816;  d.  in  Oyster  Bay,
N.  Y.,  6  Oct.,  1855.  After  studying  medicine  and
receiving  his  degree,  he  visited  the  water-cure
establishment  of  Dr.  Vincent  Priessnitz.  which  was
founded  in  1826  in  GrSfenberg,  Austrian  Silesia,
and  became  an  advocate  of  Priessnitz's  system,
which  he  introduced  into  the  United  States.  He
was  physician  in  the  first  hydropathic  institution
opened  in  New  York  in  1844,  and  in  1845  became


SHIELDS


SH1KLI>8


600


manafifnr  of  a  similnr  cutHbiiKhinent  in  Now  Leba-
non Springs,  N.  Y.  Ih-  contributtMl  to  " The  Wstisr-
Cure  Jouriuil."  »n<l  wtts  tlu-  Jiuthor  of  wveml  works
on  watiT  trt'utiiu'iit,  iiu'liKliiif;  "  Ilvilrojuithy,  <ir
the  Wat»T-Curo  ••  (NVw  York.  lH+4)-  "Cholom
treate<l  by  Water"  (IH4S);  "('hil«ln«ii :  their  lly-
drotwthic  Manai^iincnt "  (1852) ;  and  "  The  Ilydrb-
pHthi<-  i<'iimily  Physician"  (IHW).

SHIKLUS,  JahieM,  solditT.  b.  in  Dunf^nnon,
County  Tyront'.  Ireland,  in  IHIO;  d.  in  Ottumwa,
I«)wa.  i  .Ii'uie.  1879.  He  eniiKmted  to  the  United
States  in  182H.  studifvl  law.  and  U'fran  pnw'tice  at
Kaskaskia,  III.,  in  1882.  He  was  sent  to  the  legis-
lature in  18:i6,
elerted  state
auditor  in  18^30,
in  1843  ap-
pointe<lajud^e
of  the  stat«  su-
preme court,
and  in  1845
made  commis-
sioner of  the
general  land-
offlee.  When
the  war  with
Mexico  began
he  was  ap-
pointed a  brig-
adier -  general,
his  commission
dating  fmm  1
July,  1840,  and
was  assigned  to
the  command
of  the  Illinois
contingent.  He  serveil  under  Gen.  Zacharv  Tavlor
on  the  Rio  Grande,  under  Gen.  John  K,  Wool  in
Chihuahua,  and  through  Gen.  Winfiold  Scott's  cam-
paign. At  Cerro  Gonlo  he  gaine<l  the  brevet  of
major-general,  and  was  shot  through  the  lung.
After  his  recovery  he  took  part  in  the  operations  in
the  valley  of  Mexico,  cHimmanding  a  brigade  com-
pose<l  of  marines  and  of  New  York  and  South  Caro-
lina volunteers,  and  at  Chapultepec  he  was  Again
severely  wound»»<l.  He  was  mustered  out  on  20
July,  1848,  and  in  the  same  year  receivetl  the  ap-
pointment of  governor  of  Oregon  territory.  This
office  he  resignetl  on  l»eing  electetl  l^  S.  senator
from  Illinois  as  a  Democrat,  and  serve<I  from  3
Dec.,  1849,  till  3  March.  1*55.  After  the  expiration
of  his  term  he  removed  to  Minnesota,  and  when  the
state  government  was  organized  he  returned  to  the
U.  S.  senate  as  one  of  the  representatives  of  the  new
state,  taking  his  seat  on  12  Mav,  18,58,  and  serving
till  3  March.  1859.  At  the  end  of  his  term  he  set-
tled in  California,  and  at  the  l)cginning  of  hftstili-
ties  in  18<ll  was  in  Mexico,  where  he  was  engaged
in  8ui)erintending  a  mine.  Hastening  to  Washing-
ton, he  was  appointe<l  a  briga<lier-general  of  vol-
unteers on  19  Aug.  He  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  Gen.  Frwlerick  W.  Lander's  brigade  after
the  latter's  death,  and  on  23  March,  lH«i2.  at  the
hea<l  of  a  division  of  (Jen.  Nathaniel  I*.  Hanks's
army  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  he  o^>ened  the
second  campaign  with  the  victory  at  NV  inchestor,
Va.,  after  n>ceiving  a  severe  wouml  in  the  pn'|>ara-
tory  movements  on  the  preceding  dav.  He  was  in
command  at  Port  Republic  on  9  June,  and  was
defeate<l  by  Oen.  Thomas  J.  Jackson.  Itcsigning
his  commission  on  28  March,  186JJ,  he  settled  in
California,  but  soon  remove*!  to  Carrollton,  Mo.,
where  he  resumed  the  pnwtice  of  law.  He  servwl
as  a  railroad  commissioner,  and  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  in  1874  and  1879.


SHIELDS.  Mary,  phiianthrrtpi-^t,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa..  12  Jan.,  1820;  <l.  thi-ff.  8  (M..  1880.
She  was  a  daughter  of  John  Shields,  •  wealthy
merchant  of  that  city,  and  inherite<l  a  lafge  estate
from  him  and  from  her  brother.  She  was  active
in  U'nevolent  work,  and  lieoueathed  $1,400,000  for
charitable  pur|H>s«»s.  The  Pennsylvania  deaf  and
dumb  asvlum,  the  Institution  for  the  blind,  the
Old  man's  home,  the  Houst>  of  mercy  for  the  care
of  consum|)tiv(>s,  the  Indigent  and  single  woman's
society,  nrceiviMl  each  one  sixth  of  this  sum,  and
the  remaining  sixth  was  <livi<le<l  bt'tween  the
Pennsylvania  hospital  and  the  city  of  Philmlelphia,
"to  relieve  and  make  more  comfortable  the  sick
and  insane  [KM)r  at  the  almshouse."

SHIELDS.  Patrick  Henry,  junst,  b.  in  York
county,  Va.,  16  May,  1773;  d.  in  New  Albany,  6
June,  1848.  In  acconlance  with  his  father's  will
he  was  educated  for  the  legal  profession  at  Hamp-
den Sidney  an<l  William  and  Mary  colleges.  In-
heriting a  large  tnwt  of  land  near  I^exington,
Ky.,  he  removed  to  that  state  in  1801.  but  found
the  title  to  the  estate  defective.  In  1805  he  passed
into  Indiana  territory,  and  joine<}  his  classmate  and
life-long  friend,  William  Henry  Harristm.  He  was
commissioned  the  first  jtulge  of  Harris4m  <«unty
in  1808.  and  it  is  reconled  of  him  that  he  fought
gallantly  in  the  Iwttle  of  Tippecanoe.  His  house
was  often  the  hoa<l(juart<>rs  of  the  territorial  au-
thorities. He  was  a  meml)er  of  the  Constitutional
convention  at  Corydon  in  1816.  and  filled  judicial
offices  until  the  time  of  his  death.  Judge  Shields,
as  one  of  the  founders  of  the  state,  took  an  active
part  in  reforming  the  territorial  court.s,  in  organ-
izing the  school-system,  and  in  maintaining  the
congressional  ordinance  of  1787,  which  prohibited
the  indefinite  continuance  of  slaverv,  though  he
was  at  the  time  himself  a  slave-holder.  Accord-
ing to  family  tradition,  he  was  the  author  of  the
constitutional  article  which  confirmed  Indiana  as  a
free  state. — His  grandson,  Charle.s  H'oodrufT,  wlu-
cator,  b.  in  New  AUmny,  Ind.,  4  April,  1825,  entered
Princeton  as  an  advanced  student,  and  was  gratlu-
ated  with  distinction  in  1844.  After  a  c*ourse  of
four  years' study  in  Princeton  theological  seminary
he  was  licensed  to  preach  bv  the  presbytery  of  New
Brunswick.  N.  J.,  in  1848. In  1849  he  was  onlainetl

fiastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  of  llemi)stea<l,
J.  I.,  and  in  1850  he  wa.s  instalUvl  as  pastor  of  the  2d
Presbyterian  church  of  Philadelphia,  Pa.  He  ha<l
Ix'cn  carlv  imbuetl  with  a  philosophical  spirit,  and
publisher!  in  1861  an  elaborate  treatise  entitled
"  Philosophia  Ultima."  in  which  he  expounded  an
academic  scheme  of  irenical  studies  for  the  con-
ciliaticm  of  religion  and  science.  His  friends,  pro-
foundly impressed  by  this  ex|X)sition,  createtl  for
him  in  Princeton  a  new  profess<irship  of  the  har-
mony of  science  and  revealtHl  n-ligion.  This  chair
was  the  first  of  its  kind  in  any  American  c<»llege,
and  at  the  time  of  its  establishment  (18<55)  was  so
novel  in  theory  that  its  utility  and  even  its  ortho-
doxy were  questioned,  but  its  usefulness  as  well  as
its  timeliness  was  s<)on  abundantly  vindicated.  He
was  ap{K)inte<l  professor  of  uKMlern  history  in  1871,
but  soon  resigned  this  added  rhair  that  he  might
not  Ix'  diverted  from  the  aim  of  his  life,  which  he
has  pursued  in  college  ItH'turi's,  in  |«i|K>rs  before
the  philoso|)hical  scx-iety  of  Washington,  in  contri-
butions to  j»eriixlicals,  an»l  in  elal»orate  published
works.  He  received  the  honorary  degree  of  I).  D.
fn>m  Princeton  in  1861,  and  that  of  LL.  I),  from*
Columbian  university.  W»Lshington,  in  1877.  Dr.
Shields  has  a<lvo<'ate<l  the  n«storation  of  theology,
jis  a  science  of  religion,  to  its  tnie  philosophical
position  in  a  university  system  of  culture,  as  dis-


510


SHILLABER


SniNN


tinguished  from  the  clerical  or  sectarian  systems  of
ediiuitioii,  and  tlie  placing  of  philosophy  as  an
umpire  between  science  and  religion,  as  embracing
without  invading  their  distinct  provinces.  Tins
view  he  has  inainUiined  at  Princeton  in  systematic
lectures  and  in  his  "  Religion  and  Science  in  their
Relation  to  Philosophy"  (New  York,  IS?."")),  lie
looks  forward  to  the  formulation  of  an  ultimate
philosophy,  or  science  of  the  sciences,  which  is  to  be
reached  inductively  from  the  collective  intelligence
of  men  working  through  successive  generations.
This  forms  the  argument  of  his  great  work,  "  The
Philosophia  Ultima,"  now  (1888)  passing  through
a  revised  edition,  and  of  which  vol.  i.  is  an  historical
and  critical  introduction,  while  vol.  ii.  is  to  treat
of  the  history  and  logic  of  the  sciences.  Dr.  Shields
has  been  an  earnest  advocate  of  the  restoration  of
the  Presbyterian  prayer-book  of  16(51  for  optional
use  by  ministers  and  congregations  that  desire  a
liturgy.  To  this  end  he  published  "  The  Book  of
Common  Prayer  as  amended  by  the  Presbyterian
Divines"  (18C4).  with  an  appendix  entitled  "  Litur-
gia  Expurgata"  (18G4).  lie  looks  forward  to  the
organic  union  of  the  Congregational,  Presbyterial,
and  Episcopal  principles  of  the  New  Testament
church  in  an  "American  Catholic  Church"  of  the
future.  His  irenical  writings  under  this  head  em-
brace a  series  of  essays  entitled  "  The  United
Churches  of  the  United  States,"  *' The  Organic  Af-
finity of  Presbytery  and  Episcopacy,"  and  "The
Christian  Denominations  and  the  Historic  Episco-
pate." No  essays  have  excited  wider  remark  in  the
theological  world.  The  style  of  Dr.  Shields  is  re-
markable for  lucidity  of  statement  and  graceful
rhetoric.  lie  divides  his  time  equally  between
Princeton  and  his  villa  at  Newport.

SHILLABER,  Boiijaniiii  Penliallow,  humor-
ist, b.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  II.,  12  July,  1814;  d.  in
Chelsea,  Mass.,  2~t  Nov.,  1890.  After  a  common-
school  eduiiation  he  became  a  printer.  In  1832  he
removed  to  Boston,  and,  at  the  end  of  five  years,

he  went  for  a  year,
in  1837,  to  British
Guiana.  In  1840
he  became  editor
of  the  Boston
"Post," which  post
he  retained  for  ten
years.  From  1851
till  1853  he  was
editor  of  a  comic
paper  called  "The
Carpet  -  Bag,"  to
which  John  G.
Saxe  and  other
humorists  contrib-
tited,  and  from
/f^-^  /f  JL.  1856  till  1866  he
^A^j  ^.  ^C^'vUJU.^^^ conducted "The

Saturday  Evening
Gazette."  His  "  Life  and  Sayings  of  Mrs.  Parting-
ton "  (Boston,  1854)  gave  him  a  world-wide  repu-
tation. It  had  been  preceded  by  "Rhymes  with
Reason  and  without"  (1853),  and  was  followed  by
"  Knitting- Work  "  (1857);  "  Partingtonian  Patch-
work" (1873);  and  "Lines  in  Pleasant  Places"
(1875).  In  1879  he  began  the  "  Ike  Partington  Ju-
venile Series,"  with  "Ike  and  his  F'riends"  (1879),
which  he  followed  with  "Cruises  with  Captain  Bob"
(1881),  and  "  The  Doublerunncr  Club  "  (1882).  In
1882  he  published  "  Wide-Swath,"  a  collection  of
verses,  embracing  his  "Lines  in  Pleasant  Places"
and  other  poems.  He  contributed  sketches  and
essays  to  various  periodicals,  during  the  intervals
between  each  published  volume,  with  great  success.


7^.


SHIMEALL,  Richard  Cunningham  (shim'-e-
all).  author,  b.  in  New  York  city  in  1803 ;  d.  there,
19  March,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia
in  1821,  and  at  the  Protestant  Episcopal  general
theological  seminary  in  1824,  ana  the  same  year
was  ordained  to  the  ministry.  After  officiating  for
ten  years  as  rector  of  a  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
he  united  with  the  Reformed  Dutch  church,  and
still  later  with  the  Presbyterian  church.  Mr.
Shimeall  was  a  profound  biblical  iJcholar,  and  had
a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  Greek  and  Oriental
languages.  He  adopted  the  views  of  the  English
Millenarians.  and  most  of  his  works  were  upon
subjects  connected  with  the  prophecies  and  their
interpretation.  His  principal  publications  are
"  Age  of  the  World  as  founded  on  Sacred  Records  "
(New  York,  1842);  "The  End  of  Prelacy"  (1845);
"Our  Bible  Chronology,  Historic  and  Prophetic"
(1859);  "Christ's  Second  Coming  "(1865);  "Politi-
cal Economy  of  Prophecy,  with  Special  Reference
to  the  HistoVy  of  the  Church  "  (1866) ;  "  Prophetic
Career  and  Destiny  of  Napoleon  III."  (1866) ;  "  Dis-
tinction between  the  Last  Personal  Antichrists
and  the  Many  Antichrists  of  Prophecy "  (1868) ;
"  Unseen  World :  the  Heavenly  Blessedness,  or
where  and  what  is  Heaven?"  (1870).

SHINDLER,  Mary  Stanley  Bunce  Palmer.
author,  b.  in  Beaufort,  S.  C,  15  Feb.,  1810.  Her
father,  the  Rev.  B.  M.  Palmer,  was  pastor  of  a  Con-
gregational church  at  Beaufort,  and  when  she  was
three  years  old  he  removed  with  her  to  Charleston,
S.  C,  where  she  was  educated.  In  June,  18Ji5,  Miss
Palmer  married  Charles  E.  Dana,  and  removed  with
him  first  to  New  York,  and  in  1837  to  Blooming-
ton,  Iowa.  On  his  death,  soon  afterward,  she  re-
turned to  her  family  in  Charleston.  Here  she  be-
gan to  write,  and  became  well  known  as  ajnoet.  In
May,  1848,  she  married  the  Rev.  Robert  D.  Shind-
ler,  a  clergyman  of  the  Episcopal  church,  who  was
for  a  time  professor  in  Shelby  college,  Kentucky.
She  removed  with  her  husband  in  1850  to  Upper
Marlborough,  Md.,  and  in  1869  to  Nacogdoches,
Tex.  She  has  published  "The  Southern  Harp"
(Boston,  1840);  "The  Northern  Harp  "(New  York.
1841);  "The  Parted  Family,  and  other  Poems"
(1842);  " The  Temperance  Lyre"  (1842);  "Charles
Morton,  or  the  Young  Patriot "  (1843) ;  "  The  Young
Sailor"  (1844);  "  BV>recastle  Tour"  (1844);  and
"  Letters  to  Relatives  and  Friends  on  the  Trinity  "
(1845).  She  has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to
popular  periodicals.

SHIN(irASK  (swampy  ground  overgrown  with
grass),  called  by  the  whites  "  King  Shingask,"  In-
dian chief,  lived  in  the  18th  century.  He  was  a
brother  of  Tamaqua,  or  King  Beaver,  and  ranked
first  among  Indian  warriors  during  the  French  and
Indian  war.  The  frontiers  of  Pennsylvania  suf-
fered severely  from  the  forays  of  this  Delaware,
and  Gov.  W'illiam  Denny  in  1756  set  a  price  of
£200  upon  his  head  or  scalp.  Although  he  was  an
implacable  foe  in  battle,  he  was  never  known  to
treat  a  prisoner  with  cruelty.

SHINN,  Asa,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Jersey,  3
May,  1781 ;  d.  in  Brattleboro,  Vt.,  in  February,
1853.  When  he  was  seven  years  old  his  parents
removed  to  Virginia.  He  Was  entirely  self-edu-
cated, united  with  the  Methodist  church  in  1798,
and  in  1800  became  an  itinerant  preacher.  After
being  admitted  on  trial  by  the  Baltimore  circuit  in
1801,  he  was  sent  in  1803  to  form  a  new  circuit  in
the  wilderness  of  the  Ohio,  on  the  waters  of  the
Iloekhocking.  After  laboring  chiefly  in  the  west
and  in  Maryland,  he  withdrew  in  1829  from  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  and  united  with  the
newly organized Methodist Protestant church.


sniNN


SHIF'PKN


611


When  the  Ohio  annual  conference  of  that  UmIv
wius  or)^iii/.tMl  in  ()ctol»er.  1H2U,  he  was  ehn'tcd
prexitlent,  and  statii)nc<l  at  Cincinnati:  and  in
1m;{:{,  when  the  I'ittsluirjf  conference  was  fornie<i.
he  was  chosen  its  president.  From  IHiii  till  IHJid
ho  was  as.H<KMate  e<litor  of  the  "  MethcMlist  Vmt-
e8tant"at  Iialtirnon<.  lie  wan  sultject  to  attacks
of  insanity,  and  die<l  in  an  asyhitn.  lie  |iuhlish(>il
'*  An  Kvsay  on  the  Plan  of  Sidvation  "  (llaltiniore,
lHi;t),  and  "The  litMievolence  and  U«H-titu<le  of
the  Siipninc  Iteinji"  (I'hiiiMielphia,  1840).

SHINN,  <feor^A  Wolfe.  cler>;yinun,  1».  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa..  14  IVc.,  18.'}l».  He  was  educntiHi  at
the  public  schools,  at  Virjjinia  theolojjit-al  school,
and  the  Philadelphia  divinity-school,  and  wasfjrad-
uated  at  the  latter  in  18(W.  He  entered  the  min-
istry of  the  Pn)t«stant  Episcopal  church,  and  has
been  rector  of  churches  in  Pniliuiclnhia,  Shaino-
kin,  and  I»ck  Haven,  Pa.,  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  of
Grace  chun-h,  Newton,  Ma.ss.,  where  he  still  (IHHH)
remains.  He  has  bitni  head  master  of  St.  Paul's
school,  Troy,  e<Ute<l  for  ten  years  "The  Tea<!hers'
Assistant,"  contributed  articles  to  church  |K'riodi-
cals,  and  hjis  published  "  Manual  of  Instruction  upon
the  Collects, Ei)istles,  and  (lospels  for  the  Christian
Year"  (New  Yt)rk,  1874);  "  Manual  of  the  Praver-
Book  "  (187.")) ;  "  Manual  of  Church  History  "  (1870) ;
"Stories  for  the  Happv  Davs  of  Christmas  Time"
(1879):  "Questions  about' our  Church"  (1880);
"Questions  that  trouble  Bepinners  in  Religion"
(l}fti2);  and  edite<l  a  "  Prayer- Book  and  Hymnal
for  the  .Sundav-Sc-hool  "  (1885).

SHIPM.\N',  (ieorjfe  KUas  physician,  b.  in
New  York  city.  4  March,  1820.  IIo  entered  Mid-
dlebury  college  in  18Ii2,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  New  York  in  1839,  and  four  years  later
completeil  his  studies  at  the  New  York  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons.  In  184tt  he  removed  to
ChicAgo,  where  he  soon  hatl  a  large  and  lucrative

yractice.  In  1848  he  fouiide<l  the  "  Northwestern
ournal  of  Homax)pathy,"  and  was  its  successful
editor  four  years.  Since  that  date  he  has  contrib-
uted many  articles  to  medical  journals,  and  in  I860
he  became  editor  of  the  "  United  States  Medical
and  Surgical  Journal,"  and  the  next  year  published
"The  Hora«PO(>athic  Guide."  In  1871  he  conceived
the  iilea  of  establishing  a  home  for  foundlings;  or,
as  he  firmly  Jxilieves  and  declares,  he  founded  the
home  in  ol)eilience  to  the  expressed  desire  of  God.
With  177.38  in  hand  he  opened  It,  30  Jan.,  1871,
trusting  in  the  Lord  to  furnish  the  nee«led  funds
as  wante<l.  On  9  May,  1874,  possession  was  taken
of  a  new  building  that  cost  f40,8^i7.  To  this  an
addition  was  mjwio  in  1883-'4,  making  the  aggre-
gate cost  of  buildings  $88,090.  During  the  first
thirteen  years  4,978  children  were  received,  of
which  889  were  given  away,  and  1,097  were  restore<l
to  their  parents.  No  state  or  municiiml  aid  has
ever  been  contributed  to  the  support  of  the  home,
nor  has  Dr.  Shipman  ever  aske<l  for  any  assistance.
SHIPP,  Albert  Xieajali,  e<lucator,'b.  in  Strikes
county,  N.  C.,  15  Jan.,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1840.  and  re-
ceived into  the  South  Carolina  Methcnlist  confer-
ence in  1841.  In  1847  ho  l>ecame  president  of
Greenslxirough  female  college.  N.  C..  atid  in  1849
professor  of  history  and  French  in  the  University
of  North  Carolintu  He  was  made  in  1859  president
of  Woffonl  college,  Sfiartanburg Court-House,  S.  C,
in  1874  i)rf)fessorof  exegetical  and  biblical  theology
in  Vanderbilt  university,  and  in  1882  dean  of  the
(acuity  atid  chancellor  of  that  university.  He
originate<l  the  feature  of  biblical  professorships  in
all  Mctho<list  institutions  of  learning,  and  was
among  the  first,  to  luIviH-ate  liililical  institutes  for


tlie  f>ropere<lucation  of  preai-hers  for  the  MetlxNlist
lOpi-fopal  church,  south.  He  has  be«'n  a  memlier
of  every  general  conference  nince  1850.  He  has
pul)lishe<l  "The  History  of  MetlKxIism  in  South
Carolina"  (Nashville.  1«82).

SHIPP,  Bernard,  author,  b.  ne.ir  Natchez,
Miss.,  ;M)  April.  1813.  His  fatlier.  William  Shipp,
a  native  of  N'irginia,  was  a  merchant  of  Natchez
for  thirty  ye^rs.  He  was  ediicaliHl  at  Ix>xington,
Ky.,  and  at  Phila<Ielpliia,  and.  after  s[t«'nding  his

fouth  and  early  manhooil  at  Natchez,  removed  to
jouisville.  Kv.  He  publishe<I  "  P'ame,  and  other
Poems"  (Phi [adeljihia.  1848),  and  "The  Progri'ss
of  Fret><l«)m.  and  other  Ptx'ms  "  (New  York.  1K52).
SHIPPKN,  Kdn-ard,  mayor  of  Philadelphia,
b.  in  Hillhain.  Cheshire,  England,  in  WiU;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2  Oct.,  1712.  He  was  the  son  of
William  ShipiKjn.  His  brother,  Hev.  William
Shiprwn,  D.  I).,  was  rectf)r  of  Stockport,  Cheshire,
and  nis  nephew.  Itol)ert  Shippen.  I).  D..  was  prin-
cipal of  Brasenose  college,  and  vice-chancellor  of
Oxford  university.  Edward  was  bn-d  to  mer-
cantile pursuits,  and  emigrate<l  to  lioston,  Mass.,
in  1608,  where  he  became  a  wealthy  merchant.  In
1671  he  became  a  member  of  the  Ancient  an«l  hon-
orable artillery  company  of  lioston.  He  marric<l
Elizalx»th  Lybrand,  a  Quakeress,  united  with  that
sect,  and  shared  the  "  jailings,  whippings,  and  ban-
ishments, the  fines  and  imj»risonments."  that  were
inflictefl  on  the  Quakers.  In  1093  Mr.  Shipf)en  was
either  banished  or  driven  to  take  refuge  m  Phila-
delphia. He  did  not  quit  Boston  without  erecting
a  memorial  on  "a  green,"  near  to  "a  pair  of  gal-
lows, where  several  of  our  friends  had  suffered
death  for  the  truth,  and  were  thrown  into  a  hole."
He  asked  leave  of  the  magistrates  to  erect  some
more  lasting  monument  there,  but  they  were  not
willing.  Aix)ut  the  time  he  was  leaving  he  gave  a
piece  of  land  for  a  Friends'  meeting-house,  located
m  Brattle's  j)asture.  on  Brattle  street,  near  the  site
of  the  Quincey  house,  and  on  which  was  constructed
the  first  brick  church  in  Boston.  In  Philadelphia
I  his  wealth  and  character  obtained  for  him  i)osition
!  and  influence.  In  1095  he  was  electcnl  to  the  as-
'  sembly,  and  chosen  si)eaker.  In  1096  he  was
elected  to  the  provincial  council,  of  which  he  con-
tinued a  member  till  his  death,  and  for  ten  years
i  he  was  the  senior  memlK'r.  He  was  commissioned
1  a  justice  of  the  peace  in  the  same  year,  and  in  1697
!  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  the  presiding
I  jud^e  of  the  courts  of  common  pleas  and  quarter
[  sessions  and  the  orphan's  court.  In  1701  he  be-
'  came  mayor  of  Philadelphia,  iK'ing  -so  named  in
William  Penn's  city  charter  of  that  year,  and  dur-
ing this  year  he  w»is  appointed  by  Penn  to  l)e  one
of  his  commissioners  of  property,  which  office
Shippen  held  till  his  death.  As  president  of  the
council,  he  was  the  head  of  the  government  from
May  until  Decend)er,  1703.  In  1704,  and  for  sev-
eral years  thereafter,  he  was  chosen  one  of  the
aldermen,  and  from  1  June.  1705,  till  1712  he  was
the  treasurer  of  the  city.  He  contracted  his  third
marriage  in  1706.  whicH  led  to  his  withdrawal  from
the  Society  of  Friends.  His  house  lorjg  l)ore  the
name  of  "the  Governor's  House."  "  It  was  built
in  the  early  rise  of  the  city,  receive<l  then  the  name
of  'Shippi'n's  Great  House.'  while  Shippen  himsidf
was  proverbially  distinguishes!  for  three  great
things — •  the  l)iggest  j)erson,  the  biggest  house,  and
the  biggest  coach.*" — Ilisson.  Joseph,  b.  in  B«iston,
28  Feb.,  1679;  d.  in  Philadelphia  in  1741.  livwl  in
Boston  until  1704,  when  he  moveil  to  Philadelphia
He  was  among  the  men  of  science  in  his  «lay,  and
in  1?27  he  joined  Benjamin  Franklin  in  founding
the  Junto  "  for  mutual  information  and  the  public


612


SHIPPEN


SHIPPEN


good." — Joseph's  son,  Edward,  merchant,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  9  July,  1703;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,
25  Sept.,  1781,  was  brought  up  to  mercantile  pur-
suits by  James  Logan,  and  wa.s  in  business  with
him  in  1732,  as  Logan  and  Shippen;  afterward
with  Thomas  Lawrence,  in  the  fur-trade,  as  Shii>-
pen  and  Lawrence.  In  1744  he  was  elected  mayor
of  the  city.  In  1745,  and  for  several  years  there-
after, he  was  one  of  the  judges  of  the  court  of  com-
mon pleas.  In  May,  1752,  he  removed  to  Lancaster,
where  he  was  appointed  prothonotary,  and  contin-
ued such  until  1778.  He  had  large  transactions  as
paymaster  for  supplies  for  the  British  and  provin-
cial forces  when  they  were  commanded  by  Gen.
Forbes,  Gen.  Stanwix,  and  Col.  Bouquet,  anil  man-
aged them  with  so  much  integrity  as  to  receive
public  thanks  in  1760L  He  was  a  county  judge
under  both  the  provincial  and  state  governments.
In  early  life  he  laid  out  and  founded  Shippens-
burg,  Pa.  In  1746-'8  he  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  College  of  New  Jersey,  and  he  was  one  of  its
first  board  of  trustees,  which  post  he  resigned  in

1767.  He  was  also  a  subscrilier  to  the  Philadelphia
academy  (afterward  the  University  of  Peimsyl-
vania),  and  was  a  founder  of  the  Pennsylvania
hospital  and  the  American  philosophical  society.
Mr.  Shippen's  advanced  age  prevented  him  from
taking  an  active  part,  except  as  a  committee-man,
during  the  Revolution,  vet  his  sentiments  were
warmly  expressed  in  behalf  of  his  country. — WiU-
iam,  another  son  of  Joseph,  physician,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 1  Oct.,  1712;  d.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,  4
Nov.,  1801,  applied  himself  early  in  life  to  the
study  of  medicine,  for  which  he  had  a  remarkable
genius. He  speedily  obtained  a  large  and  lucrative

firactice,  which  he  maintained  throughout  his  life,
le  was  a  member  of  the  Junto,  and  aided  in
founding  the  Pennsylvania  hospital,  of  which  he
was  the  physician  from  1753  till  1778.  the  Public
academy,  and  its  successor,  the  College  of  Phila-
delphia (now  the  University  of  Pennsylvania),
being  chosen  in  1749  one  of  the  first  trustees  of
the  academy.  He  was  a  trustee  of  the  college  in
1755-'79,  and  a  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  of  which  he  was  vice-president  in

1768,  and  for  many  years  after.  He  was  for  nearly
sixty  years  a  member  of  the  2d  Presbyterian
church  of  Philadelphia,  being  (1742)  one  of  its
founders.  On  20  Nov.,  1778,  he  was  chosen  by  the
a-ssembly  of  Pennsylvania  to  the  Continental  con-
gress, and  he  was  re-elected  in  1779.  He  was  for
thirty  years  a  trustee  of  Princeton  college.  Dr.
Shippen  was  notably  liberal  toward  the  poor,  and,
it  is  said,  not  only  gave  his  professional  art  and
medicines  without  charge,  but  oftentimes  assisted
them  by  donations  from  his  purse.  He  retained
his  physical  powers  very  late  in  life,  and  it  is  said
that  "  at  the  age  of  ninety  he  would  ride  in  and
out  of  the  city  on  horseback  without  an  overcoat
in  the  coldest  weather." — William's  son,  WiHiani,
known  as  William  Shippen  the  vounger,  phvsician,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  21  Oct.,  1736 ;  d.  in  German-
town,  Pa.,  11  July,  1808,  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1754,  and  delivered  the  valedictory  for  his
class.  He  studied  medicine  with  his  father  imtil
1758.  when  he  went  to  England,  and  studied  under
Dr.  John  and  Dr.  William  Hunter  and  Dr.  McKen-
zie.  and  in  1761  was  graduated  M.  D.  at  Edinburgh.
Returning  to  Philadelphia  in  1762.  he  entered  on
the  practice  of  his  profession,  and  on  16  Nov.,
1762,  he  began  the  first  course  of  lectures  on  anat-
omy that  was  ever  delivered  in  this  country.  The
first  were  delivered  at  the  state-house,  and  the
subsequent  ones  in  rooms  that  were  constructed
by  his  father  for  the  purpose  in  the  rear  of  the


latter's  residence.  After  the  first  lecture  he  made
the  following  announcement  in  the  "  Pennsylvania
Gazette  " :  "  Dr.  Shipjien's  anatomical  lectures  will
liegin  to-morrow  evening,  at  six  o'clock,  at  his
father's  house  in  Fourth  street.  Tickets  for  the
course  to  be  had  of  the  doctor  at  five  pistoles  each;
and  any  gentlemen  who  incline  to  see  the  subject
prepared  for  the  lectures,  and  learn  the  art  of  dis-
secting, injecting,  etc.,  are  to  pay  five  pistoles
more."  Dr.  Shippen's  school  of  anatomy  was  con-
tinued until  23  Sept.,  1765,  when  he  was  chosen
professor  of  anatomy  and  surgery  in  the  newly
established  medical  school  of  the  College  of  Phila-
delphia, of  which  he  was  one  of  the  founders.
This  was  the  first  medical  school  in  this  country.
Dr.  Shippen  retained  this  post  till  1780,  when  he
was  elected  professor  of  anatomy,  surgery,  and
midwifery  m  the  University  of  the  state  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  in  1791,  on  the  union  of  these  insti-
tutions, under  the  name  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania, he  became  professor  of  anatomy  in  the
latter,  retaining  the  place  until  1806.  On  15  July,
1776,  he  was  appointed  chief  physician  of  the  Fly-
ing camp.  In  March,  1777,  he  laid  before  congress
a  plan  for  the  organization  of  a  hospital  depart-
ment, which,  with  some  modifications,  was  adopted,
and  on  11  April,  1777,  he  was  unanimously  elected
"  Director-General  of  all  the  Military  Hospitals  for
the  Armies  of  the  United  States."  He  was  charged
with  an  improper  administration  of  the  office,  and
arraigned  before  a  military  court,  which  led  him  to
resign  the  post,  3  Jan.,  1781.  The  investigation  did
not  develop  any  matters  reflecting  on  his  integrity.
In  1778-'9,  and  again  from  1791  till  1802,  he  was
one  of  the  physicians  of  the  Pennsylvania  hospitaL
He  was  for  more  than  forty  ^ears  a  member  of  the
American  philosophical  society,  in  which  he-  held
the  offices  of  curator  and  secretary.  His  skill  and
eloquence  as  a  teacher,  exercised  during  forty  years
in  the  first  medical  school  in  the  country,  made  him
widely  known  at  home  and  abroad,  and  won  for  him
permanent  distinction  and  respect  in  the  medical
world. — Edward,  son  of  the  second  Edward,  jurist,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  16
Feb.,  1729:  d.  there,
16  April,  1806,  at  the
age  of  seventeen  be-
gan the  study  of  the
law  with  Tench  Fran-
cis, and,  while  pursu-
ing his  studies,  draft-
ed the  first  common
recovery  in  Pennsyl-
vania. In  1748  "he
went  to  London  to
complete  his  law  stud-
ies at  the  Middle  Tem-
fle,  and,  returning  to
hiladelphia,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar.  On
22  Nov.,  1752,  he  was
appointed judge of /O /^  ^-O

came  one  of  the  com-
missioners to  wait  upon  Jthe  "  Paxton  Boys,"  who
were  engaged  in  an  insurrection,  to  persuaide  them
to  disperse,  which  mission  was  successful.  He  held
several  local  offices  until  the  Revolution.  He  took
a  deep  interest  in  the  provincial  wars,  and  watched
and  recorded  every  occasion  when  the  provincial
troops  were  successful.  In  1762  he  was  appointed
protnonotary  of  the  supreme  court,  retaining  this
post  till  the' Revolution.  He  became  a  member  of
the  provincial  council  in  1770,  in  which  office  he


oi-^vyL^'/f


SHIPPEN


SHIKLAW


513


wrretl  for  five  jean.  Durini^  the  wnr  for  indopcnil-
anoe  be  probftblj  sytnpathiZiHl  with  thu  iiiothvr
oountry.  as  he  wan,  by  order  of  thi<  i-ouncil,  placMl
on  hi»  '{tarole  to  give  ni>ithi-r  Hucrcfir  nor  inforiiiatioii
to  thf  ciiuiny.  lie  roinaintHl  in  Philii4l«-l(>hiu (luring
the  I^ritiith  o<'fu|»anov.  In  Miiy.  1 TH4,  he  wiu*  h|»-
[Miinted  iirv>iclent  jud^  of  the  court  of  coinnion
pleas,  ami  in  SfptenjU'rof  the  same  year  he  liccanio
a  judf^*  of  the  hijfh  court  of  errors  and  ap|>ealti.
which  latter  ofllce  he  n*laine<l  until  1H(N{,  when  the
oourt  was  iilKtlishtHl.  In  1785  he  was  chosiMi  a  jiitt-
tice  for  the  d(x.'k  ward  of  Philadelphia,  and  in  the
same  year  was  ap(M>intod  president  of  the  court  of
quarter  sessions  of  the  |)oa<'e  and  over  and  terminer.
In  171U.  at  which  time  he  was  still  at  the  heml  of
the  court  of  common  pleas,  he  was  aptKiinted  an  as-
!(Ociat«  justice  of  the  supreme  court,  in  which  ofllce
he  «erve<l  till  1799.  (Jov.  McKean  then  nominattnl
Judge  Shi|)pen  to  be  the  chief  justice,  which  ofllce
he  resigne<!  in  1805.  He  "was  a  man  of  large
views,"  said  Chief-Justice  Tilghman.  "  Everything
that  fell  fr<»m  that  venerated  man,"  .said  Judge
Duncan,  "is  entitUni  to  great  resj)eot."  The  Ix'st
extant  [)ortrait  of  him  is  that  by  (rillwrt  Stuart,
now  in  the  Corcoran  gallery  in  Washington,  an<l  is
represented  in  the  accompmying  vignette.  To  his
nen  we  owe  the  first  law  re|K)rts  in  Pennsylvania.
in  1790  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  from  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  of  which  institution
he  was  a  trustee  friim  1791  till  his  death.  His
thinl  daughter,  Maruaret,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in
1760:  d.  in  London,  24  Aug.,  1804.  was  second  wife
of  Benedict  .\rnold. — Joseph,  another  son  of  the
second  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  30  Oct.,
17:32;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Pa..  10  Feb.,  1810.  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  175;J,  and  shortly  after-
ward entered  the  provincial  armv.  in  which  he  rose
to  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  served  in  the  ex()edition
that  captured  Fort  I)u  Quesne.  After  the  troops
were  disbanded  he  went  to  EiirojH>,  partly  on  a
mercantile  venture,  but  chiefly  for  travel.  He  re-
tume<l  to  Philmlelphia  in  17(51.  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  was  chosen  to  succeed  the  Rev.  Richard
Peters  as  secretary  of  the  province,  in  which  post
he  served  until  the  Revolution,  when  the  provincial
council  ceased  to  exist.  He  sulisequently  removed
to  Lancaster.  Pa.,  where  in  1789  he  became  a  judge
of  the  county  courts.  He  was  fond  of  the  fine  arts,
earlv  noted  Benjamin  West's  genius,  and,  with
William  Allen  and  other  friends,  greatly  aided
him  with  means  for  pursuing  his  artistic  studies
in  Italy,  for  which  West  was  grateful  during  life.
He  was  for  more  than  forty  years  a  meinlxT  of  the
American  philosophical  society. — Edward,  great-
grandson  of  the  second  FMward.  lawyer,  b.  on  his
father's  estate,  "Elm  Hill,"  I^ancaster  co..  Pa..  U\
Nov.,  1821.  was  the  son  of  Dr.  Joseph  Galloway
Shippen.  He  received  an  academical  education,
studied  law,  and.  on  11  April.  1846.  was  a<lmitte(l
to  the  l)ar  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  has  since  prac-
tised, gaining  reputation  in  his  profession.  Mr.
Shippen  is  known  for  his  ac-tive  interest  in  educa-
tion. He  was  for  many  years  a  meml)er  of  the
boarti  of  public  wlucation  in  Philadelphia,  and
from  1864  till  1869  it,s  president.  He  has  been  a
delegate  to  several  national  educational  conven-
tions, before  some  of  which  he  has  delivennl  im-
portant addresses.  He  is  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Teachers'  institute  ami  of  the  Teachers'  U'uevo-
lent  a.ss<x'iat ion  of  Philadelphia.  By  an  apjioint-
ment  of  the  mikado,  he  was  for  many  years  in
charge  of  the  Jai)anese  boys  that  were  si'iit  l)y  the
government  of  Ja|ian  to  this  country  to  be  edu-
cated. During  the  civil  war  he  was  chief  of  the
-educational  de|)artinent  of  the  sanitary  commb-

TOL. T.— 83


sion.  During  the  Centennial  expotdtion  in  1876
Mr.  Ship|M^n  wa.H  the  president  of  the  (Chilian  cr>m>
mission.  For  his  lx>nevolent  inten*st  in  the  Ital-
ians in  Philiulelphia  he  receive<l,  on  10  (ict.,  1877.
from  Vi<-tor  Emanuel,  the  onler  of  Cavaliere  della
Corona  il'ltalia.  He  is  the  president  of  the  art
club  of  Philmlelphia.  He  is  rnnisul  for  the  .Argen-
tine Rt'piiblic,  Chili,  and  l'x'ua<lor.  at  Philadelphia,
and  has  filled  these  posts  for  many  ywirs.  Several
of  Mr.  .Shippen's  atldresses  on  cilucational  subiecta
have  been  publisheil,  among  them  one  on  the  dedi-
cation of  the  Hollingsworth  strhotd,  31  Oct..  1867
(Philailelphia.  1867):  "ComiH-nsation  of  Tem-hers"
(18?i);  and  "Pxlucational  Anti(|ues"  (1874)._E<|-
ward,  great-grandson  of  Chief-Justice  F^ilward,
surgeon,  b.  in  New  Jenn-y,  IH  June,  1826,  is  the  s^>n
of  Richard  Shipfntn.  He  was  graduate<l  at  Prince-
ton in  1845,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1848,  entere<l  the
navy  as  assistant  surgeon,  7  Aug.,  1849,  and  was
commissioned  sugeon.  26  April,  18<n.  He  was  on
the  "Congress"  when  she  was  <h>stroyed  by  the
"  Merrimac "  at  Newj)ort  News,  Va.,  and  was  in-
jure<i  by  a  shell,  and  in  1864-'5  wa.s  on  the  iron-
clad frigate  "New  Ironsides  "in  Ixtth  attacks  on
Fort  Fi.sher  and  the  o|K>rations  of  liermuda  Hun-
dred. He  made  the  Russian  cruise  under  Admiral
Farragut,  was  commissioned  medical  inspector  in
1871,  was  fleet-surg(?on  of  the  European  squadron
in  1871-'3,  in  charge  of  the  Naval  hospital  in
1874-'7,  commissioned  medical  director  in  1876,
and  was  president  of  the  naval  medical  examining
board  at  Philmlelphia  in  1880-'2.  Dr.  Shinpen
has  contributctl  largely  to  Hamersley's  "Naval
Encyclopanlia."  the  "  United  Service  Magazine,"
and  to  kindred  publications.

SHIPPIN,  nilliam,  soldier,  b.  aljout  1745;  d.
near  Princeton.  N.  J.,  3  Jan..  1777.  He  followed
the  sea  in  his  youth,  was  a  sf)ldier  in  the  royal
army  about  1769,  and  subsequently  eng8ge<l  in  the

Erovision  business  in  Philaddphia.'  In  March,  1776,
e  was  commissione<l  as  captain  (»f  a  privati'er,  and
later  in  the  year  he  command«>d  the  marines  in  a
schooner  cruising  in  Delaware  river,  which  took
several  prizes.  His  force  was  transferred  to  an
armed  boat,  and  afterwanl  joine<l  Washington's
armv. He  was  killed  in  the  Imttle  of  Princeton.

SHlRAS,  Alexander  Eakin,  soldier,  b.  in
Philadel[)hia.  Pa..  10  Aug.,  1H12;  d.  in  Washing-
ton. D.  C.  14  April,  1875.  His  grandfather  emi-
frate<l  from  Petershead,  Sc-otland,  alxmt  1765.
'he  son  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emv  through  his  uncle.  Maj.  Constantlne  .M.' Eakin.
and  was  graduatetl  there  in  18321  He  was  assigned
to  the  4th  artillery,  and  served  on  frontier  and
garrison  duty  till  1*19.  when  he  was  assistant  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  at  West  Point  till  1843.  lie
was  made  commissary  of  sulisistence,  3  March,
1847,  with  the  staff  rank  of  captain,  and  serveil  in
the  subsist^-nce  bureau  in  \Nasliington  till  his
death,  rising  to  the  heati  of  his  de[tartment,  with
the  rank  of  brigiulier-general,  which  he  attained
on  2ii  June.  1874.  A  large  share  of  the  cretlit  for
the  manner  in  which  the  National  armies  were
supplieil  during  the  civil  war  is  due  to  (Jen.  .Shiras.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  and  major-general.  V.  S.  armv.

SHIRLAW,  Walter,  artist,  b.  in  Paislev.  .Sc-ot-
land.  6  .\ug..  1838.  He  came  to  the  Uiiite<l  States
with  his  piirents  in  1840,  and  later  followe<l  for
some  time  the  occupation  «»f  Iwnk-note  engraving.
He  first  exhibited  at  the  National  academy  in
1861,  and  subsequently  decided  to  devote  himself
altogether  to  art.  He  was  elected  an  academician
of  the  Chicago  academy  of  design in 1868. In


614


SHIRLEY


SHOCK


1870-'7  he  studied  in  Munich,  under  George  Raab,
Richard  Wagner,  Arthur  George  von  iSimberg,
and  Wilhclm  Lindenschmidt.  His  first  worit  of
importance  was  the  "  Toning  of  the  Kell  "  (1874),
which  was  followed  by  "  bheep-shearing  in  the
Bavarian  Highlands"  (1876).  The  latter,  which  is
probably  the  best  of  his  works,  received  honorable
mention  at  the  Paris  exposition  in  1878.  Other
notable  works  from  his  easel  are  "  Gooti  Morning,"
in  the  Buffalo  academy  (1878) ;  "  Indian  Girl  "  and
"Very  Old "(1880);  " Gossip "  (1884) ;  and  "Jeal-
ousy '^  (1886),  owned  by  the  Academy  of  design.  New
York,  His  largest  work  is  the  frieze  for  the  dining-
room  in  the  house  of  Darius  O.  Mills,  New  York.
Mr.  Shirlaw  has  also  earned  an  excellent  reputation
as  an  illustrator.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Society  of  American  artists,  and  was  its  first
president.  On  his  return  from  Europe  he  took
charge  of  the  A  rt  students'  league.  New  York,  and
for  several  years  taught  in  the  composition  class.
He  became  an  associate  of  the  National  academy
in  1887,  and  an  academician  the  following  year.

SHIRLEY,  John  MHton,  lawyer,  b.  in  Sanbom-
ton,  N.  H.,  16  Nov.,  1831 ;  d.  in  Andover,  N.  H.,
21  May,  1887.  He  was  educated  at  Sanbornton
and  the  Northfield  conference  seminary,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1854.  He  rep-
resented Andover  in  the  legislature  in  1859-'60,
and  was  postmaster  of  that  |)lace  from  1856  till
1869.  He  published  '•  The  Early  Jurisprudence  of
New  Hampshire  " ;  *'  Complete  History  of  the  Dart-
mouth College  Case " ;  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the
Supreme  Judicial  Court,"  vols.  49-54  (Concord,
1872-'5) ;  and  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the  Superior
Court  of  Judicature,"  vol.  55  (1876).

SHIRLEY,  Paul,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Kentucky,
19  Dec,  1820;  d.  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  24  Nov.,  1876.
He  entered  the  navy  in  1839  became  master,  3
Dec,  1853  ;  lieutenant,  21  July,  1854 ;  commander,
5  Nov.,  1863 ;  and  captain,  1  July,  1870.  While  in
command  of  the  sloop  "Cj'ane,"  of  the  Pacific
squadron,  he  captured  the  piratical  cruiser  "J.  M.
Chapman  "  in  1863,  for  which  service  he  was  com-
plimented by  Rear- Admiral  Charles  H.  Bell.  He
also,  while  in  command  of  the  "  Suwanee,"  took
the  piratical  steamer  "  Colon,"  at  Cape  St.  Lucas,
Lower  California,  and  thereby  saved  two  mail-
steamers  that  would  have  been  captured.  He  was
fleet-captain  of  the  North  Pacific  squadron,  and
commanded  the  flag-ship  "  Pensacola  in  1867-'8,
and  was  in  charge  of  the  receiving-ship  "  Inde-
pendence," at  Mare  island,  Cal.,  in  1869-'70.

SHIRLEY,  WiUiain,  colonial  governor  of  Mas-
sachusetts, b.  in  Preston,  Sussex,  England,  in  1693 ;
d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  24  March,  1771.  He  studied
law  and  came  to  Boston  in  1734,  where  he  prac-
tised his  profession.  He  was  a  commissioner  for
the  settlement  of  the  boundary  between  Massa-
chusetts and  Rhode  Island,  and  acted  as  such
when  he  was  appointed  governor  of  Massachusetts
in  1741.  He  administered  the  government  of  the
colony  until  1745,  and  in  this  year  planned  the
successful  expedition  against  Cape  Breton.  He
was  in  England  from  1745  till  1753,  and  was  one
of  the  commissioners  at  Paris  for  settling  the
limits  of  Nova  Scotia  and  other  controverted
rights  in  1750.  In  1753  he  returned  as  governor
of  Massachusetts,  treated  with  the  eastern  Indians
in  1754,  explored  Kennebec  river,  and  erected
several  forts.  He  was  commander-in-chief  of  the
forces  in  British  North  America  at  the  opening  of
the  French  war  in  1755,  planned  the  expedition
of  Gen.  John  Prideaux  against  Niagara,  and  went
with  it  as  far  us  Oswego.  In  1759  he  was  made
lieutenant-general,  and  he  afterward  became  gov-


ernor of  one  of  the  Bahama  islands,  but  returned
to  Massachusetts  in  1770  and  built  the  mansion  in
Roxbury  that  was
afterward  the  resi-
dence of  Gov.  Eus-
tis.  He  published
"  Electra,"  a  t  ragedy ;
"  Birth  of  Hercules,"
a  mask  ;  a  "  Letter  to
the  Duke  of  New-
castle," with  a  jour-
nal of  the  "  Siege  of
Louisburg"  (1745);
and  the  "  Conduct  of
Gen.  William  Shirley
brifly  stated  "  (Lon-
don, 1758).— His  son,
William,  was  killed
with  Gen.  Braddock
in  1755.  —  Another
son.  Sir  Thomas,  b.  in
Boston ;  d.  in  March,
1800,  was  a  major-
general  in  the  Brit-
ish army,  created  a  baronet  in  1786,  and  was  gov-
ernor of  the  Leeward  islands.

SHOBER,  Gottlieb,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bethle-
hem, Pa..  1  Nov.,  1756 ;  d.  in  Salem,  S.  C,  27  June,
1838.  His  parents  removed  when  he  was  young  to
Bethabara,  a  Moravian  settlement  in  the  south,
and  gave  him  a  common-school  education.  He
taught  for  a  few  years,  then  learned  the  trade  of
a  tinsmith,  and  began  business  in  Salem,  S.  C,
where  he  soon  combined  a  bookstore  with  his  tin-
shop,  became  postmaster,  and  built  the  first  paper-
mill  south  of  the  Potomac.  While  an  apprentice
he  had  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
soon  acquired  an  extensive  practice  among  the
German  settlers.  Later  he  became  a  large  land-
owner, had  numerous  slaves,  and  was  frequently
elected  to  the  legislature.  After  his  fiftieth  year
he  desired  to  enter  the  ministry,  but,  finding  it  im-
possible to  take  the  long  theological  course  that
was  required  by  the  Moravian  church,  he  induced
the  village  authorities  to  make  a  change  in  their
laws,  which,  being  confirmed  by  the  legislature,
permitted  another  denomination  within  their
borough.  He  then  took  a  course  of  reading,  and
in  1811  was  appointed  by  the  Lutheran  synod
pastor  at  Salem.  The  indignant  Moravians  tried
to  compel  him  to  leave  the  town,  but  he  proved
his  right  to  remain  by  their  own  recent  enact-
ment, and  labored  there  gratuitously  till  a  few
years  before  his  death.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  '
general  synod  of  the  Lutheran  church,  of  which
he  was  president  in  1825,  and  one  of  the  com-
mittee to  prepare  a  Lutheran  hymn-book,  and  to
publish  the  translation  of  Luther's  catechism.  In
1825  he  was  a  director  of  the  theological  institu-
tion which  adopted  measures  for  the  formation  of
the  seminary  at  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  to  which  he  left
three  thousand  acres  of  land.  He  translated  Stel-
ling's  "  Scenes  in  the  World  of  Spirits,"  and  pre-

?ared  "  A  Comprehensive  Account  of  the  Rise  and
'rogress  of  the  Christian,  Church  by  Dr.  Martin
Luther"  (Baltimore.  Md.,  1818),

SHOCK,  WiUiam  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Baltimore.  Md.,  15  June,  1821.  He  entered  the
navy  as  3d  assistant  engineer,  18  Jan.,  1845.  and
served  in  the  Mexican  war.  He  was  promoted  2d
assistant  engineer,  10  July,  1847,  became  1st  assist-
ant engineer,  31  Oct.,  1848,  was  senior  engineer  of
the  coast-survey  steamer  "  Legaree  "  in  1849,  and
su{)crintended  the  constniction  of  the  machinery
of  the  steamer  "  Susquehanna  "  at  Philadelphia  in


8I10KMAKKR


SHOLES


615


18B0-*1.  lie  WM8  promoted  to  chief  enfoneer,  11
March,  IMI,  8U{>orintcnded  the  constniction  of
the  m«U--|jinerv  of  the  xtvafner  "Princeton"  at
Boston  in  18.Hl-'2,  and.  after  a  year's  «ervic«j  as
enffineor  inspector  of  U.  S.  mail  Htenmers,  made  a
cruise  as  chief  enfpnoer  of  the  "  Princeton  "  and
suiM'rintenihHl  the  construction  of  niarine-cnffines
at  West  Point,  N.  Y..  in  1854-*5.  He  was  president
of  the  pxaminin);  l)oard  of  engineers  in  1800-'2,
after  which  he  sui)erinten<led  tiie  building  of  river
monitors  at  St.  liouis.  Mo.,  in  1K«2-";J.  He  was
fleet  -  engineer  under  Admiral  Karrngut  during
the  oiK'rations  at  Mobile,  where  he  rendered  vulu-
able  services,  as  also  under  Admiral  Thatcher  in
lH(;;i-'5.  In  the  summer  of  1870  he  was  tempo-
rarily ap[K)intxHl  chief  of  the  bureau  of  steam
engineering,  which  post  he  fllle«l  again  in  1871,
and  receive*!  the  written  thanks  of  the  dejMirtment
for  the  efTlcient  manner  in  which  he  hml  dis-
charged the  duties.  In  1873  he  went  to  Europe  to
insfiect  foreign  dock-yards  and  to  re[)rcsent  the
bureau  of  steam  engineering  at  the  Vienna  exhibi-
tion, ancl  was  appointed  one  of  the  American
judges  of  award  by  the  president.  He  was  ap-
pointed engine<'r-in-chief  of  the  navy,  3  March,
1877,  in  which  capacity  he  served  until  15  June,
1883,  when  he  was  retired.  He  has  been  for  many
years  an  active  member  of  the  Franklin  institute
of  Philadelphia  and  a  contributor  to  the  journal  of
that  institution.  In  1808  he  designed  and  construct-
ed projectiles  to  have  a  rotary  motion  when  fired

from  smooth  -  bore
guns,  the  experi-
ments with  which
re8ulte<l  satisfactori-
ly. He  has  also  in-
vented and  patented
a  relieving  cushion
for  wire  rigging  for
ships,  whidi  has  been
adopted  in  the  navy
(1869),  a  projectile
for  small  anns,  im-
proving the  efficien-
V^MM^^  ''^^^P  cy  of  muskets  (1870),
A  ^^vlBf%  *  ^^If  and  steam  radiators
and  attachments  for  |
heating  purposes  i
(1874).  He  is  the
author  of  "  Steam
Boilers :  their  De-
sign, Construction,
and  Management"  (New  York,  1881).  This  became
the  text-lKiok  of  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  on  the
subject  and  is  a  standard  work.

SHUEMAKER,  <jeorge  Washington,  invent-
or, b.  near  Willianis|>ort.  Pa..  14  Dec.,  18G1.  He
received  his  education  at  Keystone  academy,  Fac-
toryville.  Pa.,  and  then  enteretl  his  father's  woollen-
mill.  Having  mechanical  abilitv,  he  made  various
improvements  in  the  plant,  and  In  1886  invented  a"
ring-machine,  by  which  wcnd-spinning  may  be  car-
rietl  on  continuously.  With  the  ('rom{)ton  mule,
now  in  general  use,  an  output  of  l.*)0  pounds  is  ob-
tained in  ten  hours  with  250  spindles,  while  the
new  system,  with  an  equal  number  of  spindles,  has

fiven  during  the  same  time  640  pounds  of  yam.
t  is  estimate<l  that,  under  favorable  conditions,
from  800  to  1,000  |M)unds  of  yarn  can  be  produced
in  ton  hours.  The  cost  of  a  machine  of  the  Shoe-
maker tviM'  is  much  less  than  that  of  the  othe^.

SH0^:MAKER,  \^'niiam  LnkenH.  i>oet,  b.  in
Georgetown,  D.  V..  19  July,  1S22.  Ho  is  of  Quaker
descent.  After  graduation  at  Jefferson  college  in
1841  he  entered  the  medical  department  of  the


^hfT^^c/g


'  University  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  took  his  de-
gree in  1H40,  but  has  never  practisetl.  lie  ha«  writ-
ten manv  imh'Iiis.  sr>nnets,  and  translations  of  Ger-
man balfmls  and  lyrics,  but  they  have  never  l)een
published  in  lHM)k-foriii.  The  liest  known  of  them
are  "The  Sweetheart  liird-Song,"  which  was  set  to
music  by  Michael  Balfe,  "The  Sabbath  of  the
Year,"  and  "  Twill  S<K)n  be  Dark."  .Some  of  bis
verses  are  included  in  John  J.  Piatt's  "  Union  of
American  I'lK'try  and  Art"  (Cincinnati,  1880-'!).

SHOLES,  Charles  Clark,  journalist,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  8  Jan.,  1816; d.  in Kenosha,  Wis.,
5  Oct., 1867. He  was  brought up in I)anville,
Pa.,  and  there  learned  the  trade  of  printing,  after
which  he  went  to  Harrisbiirg  and  engage<l  as  a
journeyman in the newspaper  -  office  of  Simon
Cameron. In 1836 he went to Wisconsin and
conducted  in  Green  Bay  the  first  journal  in  that
imrt  of  the  west. Mr.  Sholes  was  s<K)n  apiiointed
clerk  of  the  territorial  district  court,  and  in  1837
was  elected to  the territorial legislature from
Brown  county. In  1838  ho  purchase*!  in  Matiison
the  "  Wisconsin  Inquirer,"  and  early  in  1840  the
"  Kenosha  Telegraph,"  but  subsequent  business  en-
gagements compelled  him  to  relinouish  these  jour-
nals. He  fixed  his  residence  in  Kenosha  in  1847,
of  which  plac-e  he  was  several  times  mayor,  fre-
quently represented  Kenosha  county  both  in  the
a-ssembly  and  senate  of  the  state,  and  in  one  ses-
sion was  chosen  s|)eaker  of  the  former  body. In
1856  he  wa.s  the  Kcpublican  candidate  for  lieuten-
ant-governor, but  lailed  of  election. Mr.  .Sholes
was  one  of  the  early  organizers  of  what  afterward
grew  into  the  Northwestern telegraph  company,
with  which  corporation  he  was  connected  at  the
time  of  his  death. He  was  an  active  Aljolitionist
and  zealous  promoter  of  the  cause  of  jiopular  edu-
cation.— His  brother,  Christopher  Latham,  in-
ventor, b.  in  Moorcsburg,  Pa.,  14  Feb..  1819.  was  e<lu-
cated  in  private  schools  in  Columbia  and  North-
umberland counties.  Pa.,  and  then  followed the
printer's  trade. In  1819  he  went  to  Wisconsin  and
was  postmaster  of  Kenosha  during  Polk's  admin-
istration. He  was  a  meml)cr  from  liacine  county,
of  the  first  state  senate  in  1848,  and  was  elected  to
the  assembly  in  1851-'2,  and  again  to  the  senate  in
18o6-'8. Duringtheadininistrationsof  Lincoln  and
Johnson  he  held  the  office  of  collector  of  customs  of
the  r>ort  of  Milwaukee  and  he  was  commissioner  of
public  works  for  Milwaukee  in  1869-'73,  and  again
m  1876-'8. Mr.  Sholes  was  a  member  of  the  school
board  of  Milwaukee  in  1870-'l,  part  of  which  time
he  was  its  president. In  addition  to  his  work  as  a
iournalist,  which  has  been  his  profession  when  not
holding  office,  ho  has  interested  himself  in  inven-
tions, the  most important  of  which is  the  ty|>e-
writing  machine  that  was  introtluced  through' the
firm  of  K.  Remington  and  Sons. It  was  begun  in
1866.  and  when  patented  in  1868  was  about  the
size  of  a  sewing-machine. It  is  worked  with  let-
tered keys  arrange<l  in  four  rows,  each  tyiH»-carrier
being  thrown  up  as  its  key  is  struck. The  type
letters  are  engraved  on  the  ends  of  steel  bars,  which
are  pivotwl  in  the  circumference  of  a  circle,  so  that
the  end  of  each  bar  will  strike  at  the  same  {)oint
in  the  centre  of  the  circle. An  inked  riblntn  jtasses
over  the  centre  of  the  circle,  and  over  the  whole
a  cylinder  carries  the  j>af»er  to  receive  the  impres-
sion. The  cylinder,  by  a  spring  and  ratchet  move-
ment, revolves  the  width  of  a  letter,  and  when  a  line
is  coini)lete<l  it  is  also  given  a  lateral  movement.
In  1873  this  invention  fmssed  into  the  handsuf  the
Keiningtons for inanufactun>,  since which time
many  minor  impr«>vements  have  been  added  to  it,
increasing  its  u^fulness.


516


SHORT


SHOUP


SHORT,  Charles,  educator,  b.  in  Haverhill,
Macss.,  28  May,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24  Dec,
1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  184().  From
1847  till  18(53  he  was  classical  instructor  in  Roxbury
and  Philadelphia,  and  in  the  latter  year  he  became
president  of  Kenvon  college,  Ohio,  and  professor
of  moral  and  intellectual  philosophy.  In  1868  he
was  called  as  professor  of  Latin  to  Columbia  col-
lege, where  he  remained  until  his  death.  In  1871
Dr.  Short  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Ameri-
can committee  for  the  revision  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  subsequently  he  was  secretary  of  that
body.  "Dr.  Short,"  savs  the  Rev.  Talliot  W.
Chambers,  "  was  remarkable  as  a  painstaking
scholar,  who  would  have  contributed  more  to  clas-
sical literature  but  for  his  reluctance  to  let  any-
thing pass  from  his  pen  till  he  had  exhausted  his
ability  upon  it."  lie  was  a  member  of  many
learned  societies,  to  which  he  contributed  papers
of  much  originality.  He  was  also  a  member  of
the  Century  club,  and  a  vestryman  in  St.  Thomas's
church.  New  York  city,  where  a  tablet  has  been
erected  to  his  memory.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Kenyon  college  in  1868.  His  works
include  revisions  of  Schmitz  and  Zumpt's  "Ad-
vanced Latin  Exercises  "  (1860).  and  Mitchell's  new
"  Ancient  Geography  " ;  translations  from  the  Ger-
man for  Herzog's  "Real  Encyclopjcdia "  (1860):
the  essay  "  On  the  Order  of  Words  in  Attic-Greek
Prose,"  prefixed  to  Yonge's  "  English-Greek  Lexi-
con," the  most  exhaustive  treatise  that  has  yet  ap-
peared on  the  subject  (1870) ;  and,  with  Charlton
T.  Lewis,  a  new  edition  of  Andrews's  Freund's
"  Latin  Lexicon  "  (1876).  He  was  also  a  contribu-
tor to  various  reviews.

SHORT,  Charles  Wilklns,  botanist,  b.  in
Woodford  county,  Ky.,  6  Oct.,  1794 ;  d.  in  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  7  March,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at
Transylvania  universitv  in  1810,  and  at  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  Univei-sity  of  Pennsylvania
in  1815,  and  in  1825  was  called  to  the  chair  of  ma-
teria medica  and  medical  botany  in  Transylvania
university.  In  1838  he  removed  to  Louisville,  Ky.,
where  he  was  associated  with  Dr.  Charles  Caldwell,
Dr.  Lunsford  P.  Yandell,  Dr.  John  Esten  Cooke,
and  Dr.  Daniel  Drake  in  founding  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Louisville,  and
continued  to  hold  a  chair  in  that  institution  until
1849,  when  he  retired.  He  then  devoted  himself
to  the  collection  of  plants  and  flowers,  and,  with
Dr.  Robert  Peter,  and  Henry  A.  Griswold,  prepared
"  Plants  of  Kentucky."  Dr.  Short  was  one  of  the
editors  of  the  "  Transylvania  Journal  of  Medicine  "
in  1828-'39,  and  the  author  of  various  botanical
notices.  At  his  death  his  vast  herbarium,  the  re-
sult of  his  life-long  collections  and  exchanges,  was
bequeathed  to  the  Smithsonian  institution.  It  is
now  in  the  possession  of  the  Academy  of  natural
sciences  in  Philadelphia.

SHORT,  Williani,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Spring
Garden,  Va.,  30  Sept.,  1759;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  5  Dec,  1849.  He  was  educated  at  William
and  Mary  college,  and  at  an  early  age  was  chosen
a  member  of  the  executive  council  of  Virginia.
When  Thomas  Jefferson  was  appointed  minister
to  France  in  1785,  Short  accompanied  him  as
secretary  of  legation,  and  after  his  departure  was
made  charge  d'affaires  on  26  Sept.,  1789,  his  com-
mission being  the  first  one  that  was  signed  by  Gen.
Washington  as  president,  but  he  was  not  regularly
commissioned  till  20  April,  1790.  He  was  trans-
ferred to  the  Hague  as  minister-resident  on  16
Jan.,  1792.  On  19  Dec.  of  the  same  year  he  left
for  Mmlrid,  having  been  appointed  on  18  Man-h
commissioner  plenipotentiary  with  "William  Car-


michael  to  treat  with  the  Spanish  |fovemment  con-
cerning the  Florida  and  Mississippi  boundaries,
the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  commercial
privileges,  and  other  open  questions.  When  Car-
michael,  who  was  charge  d'affaires,  left  for  home
Short  was  commissioned  as  minister-resident,  28
May,  1794,  with  power,  as  sole  commissioner,  to
conclude  the  negotiations,  which  resulted  in  the
treaty  of  friendship,  commerce,  and  boundaries
that  was  signed  on  27  Oct.,  1795.  He  left  for
Paris  three  days  later,  and  returned  to  the  United
States  soon  afterward.  His  state  papers,  especially
those  relating  to  the  Spanish  negotiations,  are
marked  by  ability  and  research.

SHORTALL,  John  O^orge,  humanitarian,  b.
in  Dublin,  Ireland,  20  Sept.,  1838.  He  came  to
the  United  States  with  his  parents  when  he  was
about  six  years  of  age,  and  from  his  thirteenth  till
his  sixteenth  year  was  in  the  employ  of  Horace
Greeley  in  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "  office.  After
working  a  few  weeks  on  the  Chicago  "  Tribune "
he  entered  upon  the  business  of  making  records  of
abstracts  of  title  to  lands  in  Cook  county.  111,  His
records  were  so  complete  and  reliable  that,  with
those  of  other  firms,  they  formed  a  sufficient  bas\a
to  establish  titles  of  the  real  estate  in  Cook  county
after  the  destruction  of  most  of  the  county  records
in  the  great  fire  of  1871.  Mr.  Shortall  did  great
service  in  the  collection  and  preservation  of  his
valuable  abstracts  of  title.  His  services  and  ma-
terial aid  in  efforts  for  the  elevation  of  humanity
and  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals  have
made  his  name  revered  as  one  who  had  done  and
is  doing  for  Chicago  in  the  way  of  reform  what
Henry  Bergh  and  George  T.  Angell  have  done  for
New  York  and  Boston.  He  is  president  of  the
Illinois  humane  society,  and  is  associated  with  the
National  and  State  humane  associations.

SHORTER,  James  Alexander,  A.  M.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  4  Feb.,  1817.  He
is  of  African  descent.  After  entering  the  itinerant
ministry  of  the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  church
in  April,  1846,  he  held  a  pastorate  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  in  1863,  and  organized  the  women  of  his
church  into  bands  for  the  relief  of  the  freedmen
that  flocked  thither.  He  was  elected  bishop  in
1868,  and  sent  more  fully  to  organize  the  church
in  the  extreme  southwest,  Arkansas,  Louisiana,
and  Texas.  He  was  one  of  the  delegates  to  the
Methodist  ecumenical  council  in  London,  Eng-
land, in  1881,  and  continued  his  travels  into  France
and  Switzerland.  As  president  of  the  missionary
society  of  his  church,  he  has  succeeded  in  opening
the  work  in  Hayti  and  Africa,  whither  missionaries
have  been  sent.

SHORTER,  John  Gill,  governor  of  Alabama,
b.  in  Jasper  county,  Ga.,  in  1818;  d.  in  Eufalau,  Ala.,
29  May,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Georgia  in  1837,  and  soon  afterward  began  the
practice  of  law  in  Eufaula,  Ala.  In  1842  he  was  ap-
pointed state's  attorney,  and  he  subsequently  was
a  member  of  both  branches  of  the  legislature.  He
was  appointed  circuit  judge  in  1852,  and  continued
in  this  office  for  nine  years.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  was  appointed  commissioner  from
Alabama  to  Georgia,  and  in  1861  he  was  a  member
of  the  provisional  Confederate  congress.  In  the
same  year  he  was  elected  governor  of  the  state,
serving  till  1863.  He  was  an  active  member  of
the  Baptist  denomination.

SHOUP.  Francis  Asbury,  soldier,  b.  in  Laurel,
Franklin  co.,  Ind.,  22  March,  1834.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1855,  and
assigned  to  the  artillery,  but  resigned,  10  Jan.,  1860.
He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at


SHREVK


8HUBRICK


517


IiidiAnapoliK,  and  mored  to  St.  Aujruxtine,  Fla.,  '
early  in  1861.  He  ereot«d  a  Imttprv  nt  FcrnaiulinM
under  onlers  of  the  (jovemor  of  Pl«>ridii,  wjw  h|»-  ,
point(Ml  lii'Utcnant  in  theConfiHliTHtoaniiv,  iMM-aiHf
major  of  artillery  in  <K«t<ilH'r.  1S«>I.  niul  wa«  a**-
siirned  to  duty  with  (Jen,  Hartlef  in  the  trans-
MiiiMiNiinpi  deiwirtinent.  He  was  afterwanl  with
Gen.  Alliert  Siduev  Johnston  at  Shiloh  as  senior
artillery  officer  of  his  arniv,  an<l  ina8se<l  the  artil-  [
lery  ajntinst  (ten.  Prentiss's  |H)sition.  He  was  in-  j
8|>e<'torof  artillery  under  (len.  Heaurejjanl  after  the  !
latter's  succession  to  the  command,  sul>sc<iuently  i
8erve<l  under  Hindman  as  chief  of  artillery,  com-  |
niande<l  a  division,  as  major,  at  tite  tuittle  of
Prairie  Grove,  and  was  ap|H>inte<l  brijfa<lier-ifen-
eral,  12  Sept,,  1862,  and  ordere<l  on  duty  at  Mohile,
Ala.  Afterward  he  commande<l  a  Ijoiiisiana  bri-
mde  at  Vicksburff,  an<l  n»ceive«l  the  first  attack  of
uie  National  forces,  lie  surrendered  at  that  place,
and  after  his  exchauKo  was  chief  of  artillery  to
Oen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  and  constructeil  the  de-
fensive works  on  Chattaho<x;he<f  river.  On  the
succession  of  Gen.  John  B.  Hood  to  the  command
of  the  armv  in  July,  1864,  Gen.  Shoup  was  made
chief  of  staff.  He  was  relieve<l  at  his  own  nnjuest,
and  prepared  a  pamphlet,  which  was  submitted  to
the^Confwlerato  confirrcss,  recommending  the  en-
listment of  negro  troops.  After  the  close  of  the
war  in  1H({6  he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  applied
mathematics  in  the  University  of  Mississippi.  He
then  studietl  for  the  ministry,  took  orders  in  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and  has  been  rector
of  churches  in  Waterford,  N.  Y.,  Nashville,  Tenn,,
Jackson,  Miss.,  and  New  Orleans,  Ija.  He  was
professor  of  metaphvsics  in  the  University  of  the
south  in  1883-'8.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Infantry
Tactics  "  (Little  Rock.  Ark..  1862)  ;  "  Artillery
Division  Drill"  (Atlanta,  1864);  and  "Elements
of  Aljrebra"  (New  York.  1874).

SHREVE,  Henry  Miller,  inventor,  b.  in  Bur-
lington county,  N.  J„  21  Oct,  1785 ;  d,  in  St,  Louis,
Mo.,  6  March,  1854.  He  was  e<lucated  in  western
Pennsylvania,  and  as  a  \x>y  became  intereste<l  in
the  navigation  of  western  rivers.  In  1810  he
carricnl  the  first  cargo  of  lead  that  was  taken  by
an  American  from  Galena  river  to  New  Orleans,
thus  establishing  a  business  that  previously  ha<l
been  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  the  British,  Dur-
ing the  war  of  1812  ho  conveyed  supplies  to  Fort
St.  Philip  past  the  British  batteries  by  protecting
his  vessel  with  cotton-lwles.  At  the  battle  of
New  Orleans  he  had  charge  of  one  of  the  field-
pieces  that  proved  so  destructive  to  that  column
of  the  British  army  that  was  led  by  Gen,  Sir
John  Keane,  In  May,  1815, he  ascended  the  Missis-
sippi to  Louisville  in  the  "  Enterprise,"  the  first
steam  vessel  that  ever  perfonned  tnat  voyage,  and
subsequently  he  built  the  "  Washington  "  on  a  plan
of  his  own  invention,  with  improvements  that
made  it  superior  to  Ilol)ert  Fulton's  boat.  By
using  a  cam  cut-off  that  he  devisetl,  he  was  able  to
save  three  fifths  of  the  fuel.  In  March,  1817,  hi,s
vesst'l  mmle  its  first  trip  laden  with  |)assengers  and
freight,  and  demonstrated  its  superiority.  When
its  success  was  thoroughly  shown,  Fulton  and  his
associates,  having  the  exclusive  right  "  to  navigate
all  vessels  propelled  by  fire  and  steam  in  the  rivers
of  said  territory,"  entered  suit  against  him  and
seized  his  boats :  but  the  case  was  decidetl  in  his
(avor.  In  1826  ho  was  appointed  superintendent
of  western  river  improvements,  which  plwo  he
held  until  1841.  During  that  time  he  had  charge
of  the  removal  of  the  gn*at  IUmI  river  raft,  "con-
sisting of  an  actrumulation  of  trees,  logs,  and  drift-
wood of  every  description  firmly  imbedded  in  its


channel  for  more  than  100  miles."  and  in  conse-
quemre  the  river  was  o|K-mHl  for  a  distam-o  of  1,900
miles.  He  built  the  snag-boat  "  Helioiiolis  "  in
1H20  for  removing  snags  and  *•  sawyers  "  from  Ohio
river,  and  during  the  same  year  invented  a  steam
tiiarine  iMitteriiig-nim  for  hartM>r  defence.

SHRKVE,  ThonisM  H.,  jounialist,  b.  in  Alex-
andria, Va„  in  180H;  d,  in  Ijouisville,  Ky.,  2^1
Dec,,  1853.  He  was  educate<l  in  the  academy  at
.-Vlexandria,  engage<l  in  mercantile  pursuits,  settled
in  Cincinnati  in  IKIO,  and  in  lXi4  pun-hased  a
share  in  the  "  .Mirror,"  a  weekly  literary  iournal.
In  18!i8  he  established  himself  as  a  merchant  in
Ijouisville,  and  sul>se<juently  he  lH-<*ame  one  of  the
e<litors  of  the  Ix)uisviile  "Journal,"  From  the
time  of  his  editorial  connection  with  the  Cincin-
nati "  Mirror"  he  contributwl  essays  and  poems  to
magazines.  He  published  "  Draytcm,  an  American
Tale  "(New  Yorlt.  1851),  Some  of  his  verses  are
reprinted  in  William  T.  Coggeshall's  "  Poets  and
Poetry  of  the  West  "  (Columbus,  I860), — His  cousin,
Saniiiel  Henry,  engineer,  b.  in  Trenton.  N.  J..
2  Aug.,  1829;  d,  in  New  York  city,  27  Nov.,
1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1848.
and  at  Harvard  law-school  in  1850,  an<l  after-
ward studied  civil  engineering.  He  ha<l  charge  of
the  construction  of  several  railroads,  and  l»e<'ame
in  1875engineer  of  the  New  York  rapid  transit  com-
mission, lie  wasconsulting  engineerof  the  Metro-
Bjlitan  elevated  railroml  and  engineer-in-chief  f)f  the
rooklyn  elevated  railroad.  He  was  the  author  of
a  work  on  "  The  Strength  of  Bridges  and  Roofs  "
(New  York,  1873),  which  was  translated  into
French,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  had  almost
completed  a  treatise  on  the  "  Thefiry  t»f  the  Arch."

SHIHRICK,  John  Templar,  naval  officer,  b.
on  Bull's  island,  S,  (',,  12  Sent,.  1788;  d,  at  s«'a  in
the  summer  of  1815,  His  lather  was  colonel  in
the  Revolutionary  army  under  Gen,  Nathanael
Greene,  and  his  aide  at  the  battle  of  Eutaw  Springs.
The  son  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  19  Aug.,
1806,  was  attached  to  the  "  Chesajieake "  during
the  surrender  to  the  British  ship  "  Ijcopard,"  and
remained  in  that  vessel  under  Decatur  until  1808.
He  was  commissione<l  lieutenant,  28  May,  1812,
attached  to  the  "Constitution"  during  her  escape
from  the  British  fleet  in  July.  1812,  and  participated
in  the  capture  of  the  "  Guerriere  "  and  "  Java.  On
8  Jan.,  1813,  he  was  transferred  to  the  "  Hornet,"
and  was  executive  officer  at  the  capture  of  the
British  brig  "Peacock,"  24  Feb.,  1813.  He  was
next  transferred  to  the  "  President,"  of  which  he
actetl  as  executive  at  its  capture  by  a  British  fleet,
15  Jan.,  1815,  He  was  carriwl  a  prisoner  to  Ber-
muda, but  released  at  the  end  of  the  war.  He
rec>eived  three  silver  medals  and  votes  of  thanks
from  congress  for  assisting  in  the  capture  of  the
"Guerriere."  "Java,"  and  "Peacock."  South
Carolina  gave  him  a  vote  of  thanks  and  a  swonl.
On  20  May,  1815.  he  sailed  as  executive  of  the
"Guerriere"  to  Algiers,  where  he  a.ssistetl  at  the
capture  of  an  Algerine  frigate  and  brig,  and  in
the  demonstration  by  which  Decatur  obtainetl  the
treaty  with  Algiers.  He  was  assigned  to  command
the  brig  "  ftpervier,"  and  sailetl  from  Algiers  early
in  July,  1815,  with  a  copy  of  the  treaty  for  ratifi-
cation. The  brig  was  lost  at  sea  with  all  on  l>oard,
—His  brother,  nHliam  Branford,  naval  officer,
b.on  Bull's  island.  S.  C.,3l  Oct.,  171H>:  d.  in  Wash-
ington. D.  C,  27  May,  1874,  enteretl  the  navy  as
midshipman.  19  Aug.,  1806,  was  commissioned
lieutenant.  5  Jan..  1813,  commande<l  a  gun-boat  in
Hampton  Rotids  in  1813,  and  assistetl  in  defending
Norfolk  against  the  British.  He  was  3<1  lieutenant
of  the  "  Constitution  "  at  the  capture  of  the  "  Cy-


518


SHUBRICK


SHUCK


/C^y/rpyi-^ry^.^AA^i<^


ane  "  and  "  Ijevant,"  23  Feb.,  1815,  and  executive  in
her  subsequent  escape  from  a  liritish  fleet.  He  re-
ceived a  Sliver  medal,  and  wjis  included  in  the  vote
of  thanks  by  congress  to  Stewart  and  his  oflicers,  and

South Carolina
^^^~.  gave  hira  thanks

jf^ '^ll^>  '^"'^ * sword

I  ''h^X  '"'"  ^•'^  services.

M^p. A^^^iV''  H^ ^'^ com-

r"^ iwri  missioned mjis-

ter-conunandant,
28  March,  1820,
and  captain,  21
Feb..  1831,  com-
manded the  West
India  squadron
in  1838-'40,  and
was  chief  of  the
bureau  of  provis-
ions and  cloth-
ing in  1845 -'6.
On  22  Jan.,  1847,
he  arrived  on  the
coast  of  t'alifor-
niain  the  "  Inde-
pendence," and  assumed  command-in-chicf  of  the
U.  S.  naval  force  in  the  Pacific.  He  captured  the
city  of  Mazatlan,  11  Nov.,  1847,  and,  landing  the
naval  brigade,  held  it  against  superior  forces.  He
also  took  Guaymas,  La  Paz,  ana  San  Bhus,  which
places,  together  with  other  j>orts  in  Mexico  and  Cali-
fornia, he  held  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He  com-
manded the  "  Princeton  "  in  1853,  with  a  small
squmlron,  to  protect  the  fisheries  in  a  dispute  with
the  British,  was  chief  of  the  bureau  of  construc-
tion in  1853,  chairman  of  the  light-house  board  in
1854-'8,  and  in  1858  was  appointed  to  command  a
fleet  of  19  vessels  with  200  guns  and  2,500  men,  fly-
ing the  flag  of  a  vice-admiral,  to  operate  against
Paraguay  for  firing  upon  the  U.  S.  steamer  "  Water-
Witch."  He  reached  Asuncion,  25  Jan.,  1859,  and  by
display  of  force  obtained  apologies  and  pecuniary
indemnity  on  10  Feb.  The  president  highly  com-
mended his  zeal  and  ability  m  the  conduct  of  this
mission,  and  the  president  of  the  Argentine  Confed-
eration presented  him  with  a  sword.  In  1861  unsuc-
cessful efforts  were  made  to  induce  him  to  join  the
Confederates  in  behalf  oi  his  native  state.  In  De-
cember, 1861,  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list,  but  he
continued  on  dutv  as  chairman  of  the  light-house
board  from  1860  till  1870.— Another  brother,  Ed-
ward Riitledge,  naval  oflicer,  b.  in  South  Caro-
lina in  1794 ;  d.  at  sea,  12  March,  1844,  entered
the  navy  as  midshipman,  16  Jan.,  1809.  He  served
during  the  war  of  1812 -'15  on  the  "  President,"
in  the  long  cruises  of  Com.  John  Rodgers,  and
became  lieutenant,  9  Oct.,  1813.  He  was  commis-
sioned commander,  24  April,  1828,  had  charge  of
the  sloop  "Vincennes"  in  the  West  Indies  in
1830-'3,  and  became  captain,  9  Feb.,  1837.  He
took  command  of  the  frigate  "  Columbia,"  22  July,
1842,  on  the  Brazil  station,  and  died  at  sea. — An-
other brother,  Irvine,  naval  officer,  b.  in  South
Carolina  in  1798;  d.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  5  April,
1849.  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  12  May,
1814,  served  in  the  "President"  under  Decatur
when  that  vessel  was  captured  by  the  British,  15
Jan.,  1815,  was  in  the  "  Guerriere '  in  the  Algerine
war  in  1815.  when  Decatur  captured  the  Algerine
frigate,  and  assisted  in  suppressing  piracv  in  the
West  Indies  while  attached  to  the  sloop  "  fiornet  "
in  1821-'3.  He  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  13
Jan.,  1825,  was  executive  officer  of  the  "  Potomac,"
on  the  Pacific  station,  in  1831-'4,  and  commanded
the  landing-party  from  that  vessel  on  6  Feb.,  1832,


in  the  attack  on  the  Malay  town  of  Quallah  Battoo,
Sumatra,  which  he  destroyed  to  avenge  the  capture
and  plunder  of  the  American  ship  "Friendship"
the  year  U'fore.  He  was  highly  commended  for
ability  and  gallantry  in  the  conduct  of  this  expedi-
tion. After  being  comnussioned  commander,  8
.Sept,  1841,  he  toolc  charge  of  the  "Saratoga,"  on
the  Brazil  station,  in  1844-'7,  and  was  inspector  at
the  Philadelphia  navy-yard  in  1848-'9. — Irvine's
son,  Thomas  Branforil,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Wil-
mington, Del.,  3  June,  1825;  d.  in  Vera  Cruz,
Mexico,  25  March,  1847,  was  off  Vera  Cruz  in  the
steamer  "  Mississippi "  when  he  was  .sent  on  shore,
23  March,  1847,  m  charge  of  one  of  the  guns  in
the  naval  battery  in  the  works  against  that  city.
He  was  killed  while
in  the  act  of  point-
ing this  gun  during
the  bombardment  of
Vera  Cruz.  A  monu-
ment called  the  Mid-
shipmen's Monu-
ment (see  engrav-
ing) was  erected  at
Annapolis  in  the
grounds  of  the  na-
val academy,  to  com-
memorate his  death
and  that  of  Passed
Midshipmen  Henry
A.  Clemson,  John  R.
Hynson,  and  Mid-
shipman Wingate
Pillsbury,  who  were
drowned when  the

brig  "  Somers  "  was  capsized  and  lost  in  a  squall
off  Vera  Cruz  in  December,  1846.

SHUCK,  Jehu  Lewis  (shook),  missionar)',  b.  in
Alexandria,  Va.,  4  Sept.,  1812;  d.  in  Barnwell,
S.  C,  20  Aug.,  1863.  He  was  educated  at  the  Vir-
ginia Baptist  seminary  (now  Richmond  college),
and  on  22  Sept.,  1835,  embarked  with  his  bride  for
China.  He  began  his  labors  in  Macao,  where  he
baptized  the  first  Chinese  converts,  met  with  suc-
cess also  at  Hong  Kong,  whither  he  removed  in
1842,  and  subseqiiently  settled  at  Canton.  In  1844
he  came  to  the  United  States  with  his  Chinese  as-
sistant, and  visited  various  parts  of  the  country  in
the  interest  of  the  missions.  He  returned  to  China
in  1846,  and  settled  at  Shanghai,  where  he  preached
for  years  with  good  results,  having  completely
mastered  the  Chinese  idioms.  When  the  Chinese
were  attracted  in  considerable  numbers  to  Cali-
fornia after  the  discovery  of  gold,  the  missionary
board  selected  Mr.  Shuck  for  that  field,  and  he
labored  there  for  seven  years,  retiring  in  1861  to
Barnwell,  where  he  preached  to  the  neighboring
churches  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  He
published  "  Portfolio  Chinensis,  or  a  Collection  of
Authentic  Chinese  State  Papers"  (Macao,  1840). —
His  wife,  Henrietta  HaU,  b.  in  Kilmarnock,  Va.,
28  Oct.,  1817;  d.  in  Hong  Kong.  27  Nov.,  1844,  was
the  daughter  of  a  Baptist  minister.  She  soon
learned  Chinese  after  arriving  at  the  field  of  her
intended  labors,  and  was  an  earnest  teacher  of
Christianity  among  the  heat)ien  till  her  death.  She
was  the  author  of  "Scenes  in  China,  or  Sketches
of  the  Countrv,  Religion,  and  Customs  of  the  Chi-
nese "  (Philadelphia,  1852).  Jeremiah  B.  Jeter
published  her  "Life"  (Boston,  1848).— Their  son,
Lewis  Hall,  clergyman,  b.  in  Singapore,  India,  3
Aug.,  1836,  was  graduated  at  Wake  \  orest  univer-
sity, N.  C,  in  1856,  taught  for  some  years,  studie<l
theology,  and  since  1883  has  been  pastor  of  a  Bap-
tist church  in  Charleston,  S.  C.


SHUKhl.I>i


SnUBTLEKP


519


SHrFFLDT.  Robert  WIlHon,  naval  officer,  b.  i
in  U»-.l  H.K.k.  Ihjtihr.sM  i-«)..  N.  V..  21  Kcl...  1H22.
lie  i-iitfrctl  liii-  navy  hs  a  nii<l.shi|tiiian^  II  May,
183U,  wa.«i  altnfhwl  to  llu«  naval  s<-lnMtl  at  l'hila«U>I-
phia  in  1^^4-'5,  and  UH-anie  a  iia>sf<l  ntid>hi|>nmM,
2  Julv,  IH4.V  lie  was  promoted  to  master,  21  Feb..
185;i,'an(l  to  lieutenant,  2(5  (Kft.,  IS-VJ,  but  n*.siKne<l
from  the  navv,  20  June,  IHW,  and  wai«  eonnei'ttil
with  the  Collins  line  of  Liver|>ool  steamers  as
chief  offieer  for  two  vean«.  He  then  commande<l
the  steamers  "  Hlaek  Warrior"  and  "('ata\vl»a"  on
the  line  Ijetween  New  York  and  New  Orleans,  and
had  eharge  of  the  jwrty  that  surveyed  the  Isthmus  '
of  Tehuant«'|>ee  for  a  niilroa<l  and  interoceanic  ea-
nal.  When  the  eivil  war  U-pin  he  was  in  c«»m-
mand  of  the  steamer  "(^jiaker  City."  of  the  New
York  and  Havana  line  of  steamers,  and  was  aj>-
pointed  I'.  S.  consul-general  at  Havana.  In  April,
ISfiH,  he  resij^eil,  and  was  reinstated  in  the  navy
with  a  conunission  of  commander,  ilate<l  ID  Nov.,
1862.  He  was  given  the  steamer  "  Conemaugh,"
on  the  blockade  at  Charleston,  where  he  |wirlici-
patiHl  in  the  engagements*  on  Morris  island.  He
commande<l  the  steamer  "  IJoteus."  of  the  Kastem
Gulf  bltK'kading  stjuadron,  in  IHM-'ii.  After  the
war  he  had  the  "Hartford."  of  the  East  India
squadron,  in  t8(y>-'0,  and  the  "  Wachusett,"  of  the
Asiatic  souadron.  in  IHOO-'H.  He  was  commis.sioneil
captain,  31  Dec.,  1809,  and  comnumded  the  moni-
tor "  Miantononjoh  "  in  1H70,  after  which  he  had
chargt"  of  the  TehuantejK'c  and  Nicaniguan  sur-
veying expeditions  of  1870-'l. He  wjus  chief  of  the

bureau  of  equip-
ment and  rei-niit-
ingin  the  navy  de-
jHirtment  in  1875-
8.  and  was  com-
missioninl  commo-
dore,21Sept..l87«.
In  1879 -*80  he
sailed  in  the  "Ti-
con«leroga"  on  a
special  mission  to
Africa  and  the
East  Indies,  to  as-
certain and  report
on  the  prospects
for  the  revival  of
American  trade
with  those  coun-
.  tries. While he

'^^ y  ff  ,  ji- was  on  this  expe-
i^/UA^U^ dition the  sultan
of  Zanzibar,  Said
Barghash.  prrsente<l  him  with  a  sword. He  was
promoted  to  rear-admiral  on  7  May,  1883,  and  was
retin-d.  21  Feb..  18H4.

SHl'LTZ,  Theodore,  missionary,  b.  in  Ger-
dauen,  Prussia.  17  Dec..  1770;  d.  in  Sjilem.  N.  C.
4  Aug..  18,50.  He  entered  the  foreign  mission  field
of  the  Moravian  church  in  1799,  and  was  sent  to
Surinam.  South  America,  where  he  served  seven-

J  ears.  He  was  then  transferred  to  the  United
tates.  an<l  until  1821  laUm-d  in  the  ministry,
after  which  he  was  ap|>oi[ited  administrator  of  the
estate's  of  the  s<iuthern  dicx-ese.  retiring  in  1844.  He
revisetl  an«l  improved  a  "Dictionary,"  and  trans-
lated a  "  Ilarmonv  of  the  Gos|>els"  into  the  Arra-
wak  language. — His  s«in.  Henry  AnfrnstUH,  Mora-
vian bisnop.  b.  in  Surinam.  .South  .\merica.  7  Feb.,
1806;  d.  in  IJethlehem.  Pa..  21  Oct.,  188.').  was  a
graduate  of  the  Moravian  theological  seminary.
and  fllle<l  various  pastoral  offices.  In  1848  lie
was  elwted  a  delepite  to  the  general  synixl  that
convened  at  Herrnhut,  Saxony,  and  on  MI  .luly.


1864,  he  was  conwM-rat4*<l  to  the  episcopncy  at  Ik-th-
lehem.  He  promotiid,  with  gri'at  zeal,  the  cause
of  home  missions.

SHIMWAY.  Henry  Cotton,  artist,  b.  in  Mid-
dletown.  Conn.,  4  .lulv,  IMOT;  d.  in  New  York,  6
May,  1>^.  He  studi<>d  at  the  Academy  of  de-
sij;n.  New  York,  during  lH2M-'9,  and  was  one  of
the  early  memlwrs  of  the  lU'ademy,  beinff  elected
iiii  iivMiciate  in  18:M,  and  a<-ademician  the  follow-
ing  year.  For  many  years  he  followed  his  profes-
sion as  a  miniature-|uiinter  succ«-ssfully  in  New
York  and  other  cities.  Among  the  numerous  emi-
nent men  that  L'at  to  him  wen*  Henry  Clay.  Daniel
Webster,  and  Prince  Na|Mileon  (afterward  Napo-
leon III.),  whose  |M>rtrails  he  ^taintetl  in  1838.  lie
was  for  many  years  a  captain  in  the  New  York  7th
ri'giment  and  a  memlK-r  of  the  veteran  c-ori»s.

SHl'NK,  FranclH  Kawn,  governor  of  Penn-
sylvania, b.  in  TrapiH'.  Montgomerv  co..  Pa.,  7  Aug.,
r788;  d.  in  Harrisburg.  Pa.,  :W  .luly.  1848.  He  ol>-
taiiuvl  an  education  by  his  own  exertions,  taught
at  the  age  of  fifteen.  I)ccame  a  clerk  in  the  office
of  Andrew  Porter,  the  surveyor-general,  at  Har-
risburg. in  1812.  and  while  thus  employed  studied
law.  He  was  for  many  years  clerk  of  the  state
house  of  representatives,  and  sulisequently  secre-
tary of  the  Ijoard  of  canal  commissioners.  In  1838
Gov.  Porter  anpointed  him  secretary  of  state.  In
1842  he  establishe<l  hims<'lf  as  a  lawyer  at  Pitts-
burg, and  in  1844  he  was  el«'<-ted  governor.  He
wii-s  re-elected  in  1847,  and  resigned  on  9  July,  1848,
when  sickness  prevented  the  further  discharge  of
his  duties. — His  son.  William  Finulay.  is  the  au-
thor of  a  *' Practical  Treatise  on  Railway  Curves"
(Philadelphia,  1854).  —  His  grandson.  Francis
Raw.v.  graduated  at  the  head  of  the  class  of  1887
at  the  U.  S.  milit^rv  aca<lemv.

SHTRTLEFF.  Ernest  tiarbnrton,  noot,  b.
in  Bt>ston,  Mass.,  4  April,  1802.  He  was  educated
at  lioston  Ijatin  sch(:K)l  and  Harvanl,  was  gradu-
ated at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1888,
and  l)ecame  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  at
Palmer,  Mass.  He  began  to  write  for  newspapers
and  magazines  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  received  a
thon)ugn  musical  education,  and  has  published
songs  and  other  compositions  and  sevenil  volumes
entitled  "  Poems  "(Boston.  1882):  "  t^sterCJIeams"
(1884) ;  "  Song  of  IIojx? "  (New  York,  1885) ;  "  When
I  was  a  Child"  (lioston,  1886);  and  "New  Year's
Peace"  (1887).

SHTRTLEFF,  Nathaniel  Rradstreet,  anti-
quary, b.  in  Boston,  Ma.ss..  29  June.  1810;  d.  there,
17  Oct.,  1874.  He  was  the  son  of  \)r.  Benjamin
ShurtlefT,  whose  donations  to  the  college  in  Alton,
III.,  caused  that  institution  to  assume  his  name.
The  son  was  graduattnl  at  Harvanl  in  IK'H,  and
at  the  medical  department  in  lH:i4.  but  gave  his
attention  to  literary  and  si-ientific  pursuits.  His
list  of  works  on  genealogy  shows  Ins  devotion  to
that  subject,  and  he  tracetl  his  desc'ent  to  eleven
of  the  Pilgrims  of  the  "Mayflower."  a  number
probably  exceeding  that  of  any  of  his  contempo-
raries. For  three  terms  he  was  mayor  of  Boston
(1808-'70).  and  he  prided  hims«'lf  on  the  fact  that
he  was  the  first  to  hold  that  ofllco  who  had  always
l)elongcd  to  the  IK-mocratic  {<arty.  During  his  ad-
ministration extensive  improvements  in  the  streets,
made  necessary  by  the  rapid  gmwth  of  South  Bos-
ton, were  elTectwl  in  that  district,  and  Dorchester
became  a  jmrt  of  lioston.  His  lxx>ks  include
"Epitome  of  Phrenology  "  (Boston,  1885);  "  Per-
I)etual  Calendar  for  Old' and  Now  Style"  (1848);
"  Pass<'ngers  of  the  'Mayflower' in  1620"  (1849);
"  Brief  Notice  of  William  Shurtlefl,  of  Marsh-
field  "  (1850);  "Genealogical  Memoir  of  the  Fami-


620


SIIURTLEPP


SIBLEY


Ijr  of  Elder  Thomas  Leavett,  of  Boston"  (1850);
"Thunder  and  Lightning,  and  Deaths  in  Marsh-
field  in  1658  and  1660  "(1850);  "Records  of  the
Governor  of  and  Company  of  the  Massachusetts
Bay  in  New  England,  1628-1686"  (5  vols,  in  6,
1853-'4) ;  with  David  Pulsifer  edited  "  Records  of
the  Colony  of  New  Plymouth  fn  New  England "'
(11  vols.,  i855-'61);  "Decimal  System  for  Libra-
ries" (1856);  and  "Memoir  of  the  Inauguration
of  the  Statue  of  Franklin  "  (1857).

SHURTLEFF,  Roswell  Morse,  artist,  b.  in
Rindge,  Cheshire  co.,  N.  H.,  14  June,  1838.  About
1857  ho  went  to  Buffalo,  where  for  two  years
he  studied  drawing.  In  1859  he  was  in  Boston,
studying  at  the  Lowell  institute,  and  drawing
on  wood  for  John  Andrew.  In  1861  he  enlisted
in  the  National  army,  and  he  afterward  con-
tinued to  furnish  drawings  to  various  periodicals
and  to  the  wood-engravers.  About  1870  he  be-
gan to  devote  himself  entirely  to  painting.  His
animal  paintings  fti-st  gained  him  distinction,  and
of  these  the  best  known  are  "The  Wolf  at  the
Door"  and  "  A  Kace  for  Life"  (1878),  Among  his
later  works  in  oil,  most  of  which  are  scenes  in  the
Adirondacks,  are  "  On  the  Alert "  (1879) ;  "  Autumn
Gold  "  (1880) ;  "  Gleams  of  Sunshine  "  (1881) ;  and
"A  Song  of  Summer  Woods"  (1886).  His  water-
colors  include  "  Harvest  Time,"  "  Basin  Harbor,
Lake  Champlain,"  and  "  The  Morning  Draught "
(1881),  and  "  A  Mountain  Pasture  "  (1882).  He  was
elected  an  associate  of  the  National  academy  in
1880,  and  is  a  member  of  the  Water-color  society.

SHUTE,  Samuel,  colonial  governor,  b.  in  Lon-
don, England,  in  1653 ;  d.  in  England,  15  April,
1742.  Ho  was  brought  up  as  a  dissenter  in  re-
ligion, being  a  grandson  of  the  Puritan  divine.  Jo-
seph Caryl,  and  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Leyden,  but  adhered  later  to  the  Church  of  Eng-
land. Entering  the  army,  he  served  under  the
Prince  of  Orange,  and  afterward  under  the  Duke
of  Marltwrough  in  the  Netherlands,  attaining  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  In  1716  he  obtained  a
commission  as  royal  governor  of  Massachusetts,
paying  a  bonus  of  £1,000  to  Col.  Elisha  Burgess,
the  first  appointee  of  George  I.  He  was  honest
and  well-meaning,  but  obstinate,  and  from  the  be-
ginning was  engaged  in  a  struggle  with  the  assem-
bly over  the  prerogative.  The  financial  depression
resulting  from  Indian  wars  he  attempted  to  relieve
by  the  emission  of  treasury  bills,  condemning  a
banking  scheme  that  was  favored  by  the  legisla-
ture. He  endeavored  to  make  treaties  with  the
eastern  Indians,  and  wean  them  from  the  influence
of  Sebiistian  Rasle.  A  controversy  with  Elisha
Cooke  with  regard  to  the  royal  rights  to  ship  tim-
ber in  the  forests  of  Maine  and  the  conduct  of  the
king's  surveyor,  led  him  to  annul  Cooke's  elec-
tion to  the  council  in  1718.  The  assembly  retorted
by  choosing  Cooke  their  speaker ;  but  the  governor
refused  to  recognize  the  election. He  had  a  dis-

Eute  with  the  general  court  also  over  the  impost
ill,  and  when  he  demanded  a  fixed  salary  the
representatives  reduced  the  amount  voted  to  him
in  the  form  of  a  present  to  £500,  and,  on  his  in-
sisting on  an  annual  payment  of  £1,000,  gave  him
that  amount  in  currency,  worth  but  £360.  In  1723
he  went  to  England  to  urge  his  charges  against
the  general  court,  and  was  there  met  by  counter
demands.  The  points  at  issue  were  settled  by  an
explanatory  charter  that  was  signed  on  12  Aug.,

1725,  and  adopted  by  the  general  court  on  15  Jan.,

1726,  which  denied  the  right  of  the  legislature  to
adjourn  at  will  for  more  than  two  days,  and  gave
the  governor  a  negative  over  the  choice  of  speak-
er, but  contained  no  injunction  for  fixing  the  sala-


ries of  the  crown  officials.  When  Shute  was  about
to  take  ship  again  for  Massachusetts,  in  June,  1727,
the  king  died,  and  the  new  cabinet  that  came  into
office  ajmointed  another  governor.

SHUTE,  Samuel  Moore,  educator,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa..  24  Jan..  182Ji.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1844,  and  studied
theology  in  the  seminary  of  the  Reformed  church,
Philadelphia.  He  was  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church
in  Pemberton.  N.  J.,  from  1853  till  1856,  and  then
of  one  at  Alexandria,  Va.,  till  1859,  when  he  be-
came professor  of  the  English  language  and  litera-
ture in  Columbian  university,  Washington,  D.  C.
He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Manual  of  Anglo-Saxon  "
(New  York.  1867).

SIBIEL,  Alexander,  known  as  Pray  Domingo,
German  antiquary,  b.  in  Saarlouis  in  1709;  d.  in
Dessau  in  1791.  He  studied  at  Mechlin,  became  a
Jesuit,  and  was  sent  to  New  Spain  in  1734.  After
being  for  several  years  a  professor  in  the  college  of
the  order  in  Mexico,  he  was  appointed  vicar  of  a
remote  parish  in  the  northern  part  of  the  country,
where  he  discovered  some  half-buried  monuments
of  the  Aztec  architecture  covered  with  hiero-
glyphs. He  devoted  several  years  to  their  study,
buying,  meanwhile,  Aztec  antiquities  whenever  he
could  find  them,  and  at  last  was  enabled  to  read
part  of  the  inscriptions.  Distinguished  men  of
science,  like  Ventura  and  Boturini,  had  previously
labored  vainly  for  years  to  decipher  Aztec  inscrip-
tions. Toward  1770  Sibiel  returned  to  Germany
and  was  appointed  chaplain  at  the  court  of  Anhalt.
His  works  include  "De  arte  Hierogliphum  Mexi-
canorum"  (Dessau,  1782);  "Reisen  m  Mexico"
(2  vols.,  1785);  and  "  Litteras  annua?  Societatis  Jesu
in  provincia  Mexicana"  (5  vols.,  1787).

SIBLEY,  (ieorge  Champlain,  explorer,  b.  in
Great  Barrington,  Mass..  in  April.  1782 ;  d.  in  Elma,
St.  Charles  co..  Mo.,  31  Jan.,  1863.  He  was  the  son
of  John  Sibley,  a  surgeon  in  the  Revolutionary
army,  and  a  daughter  of  Samuel  Hopkins,  of  New-
port, and  was  brought  up  in  North  Carolina.  He
went  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  during  Jefferson's  adminis-
tration as  an  employe  of  the  Indian  bureau,  and
was  subsequently  sent  among  the  Indians  as  an
agent  of  the  government.  Escorted  by  a  band  of
Osage  warriors,  he  explored  the  Grand  Saline  and
Salt  mountain,  publishing  an  account  of  the  expe-
dition. After  retiring  from  the  Indian  depai'traent,
he  was  appointed  a  commissioner  to  survey  a  road
from  Missouri  to  New  Mexico,  and  made  several
treaties  with  Indian  tribes.  He  and  his  wife,  Mary
Easton,  were  the  founders  of  Lindenwood  college,
St.  Charles,  Mo.,  giving  the  land  on  which  it  is
built.  He  was  interested  in  the  scheme  of  African  ■
colonization  and  other  philanthropic  objects. — His
nephew,  Henry  Hopkins,  soldier,  b.  in  Nachi-
toches,  La.,  25  May,  1816;  d.  in  Fredericksburg,
Va..  23  Aug.,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1838,  served  in  the  Florida  war
as  2d  lieutenant  of  dragoons,  was  promoted  1st
lieutenant  on  8  March,  1840,  took  part  in  the  expe-
dition against  the  Seminoles  in  the  Everglades,  and
served  as  adjutant  of  his  regiment  till  1846.  He
was  engaged  in  the  military  occupation  of  Texas,
was  made  a  captain  on  16^eb.,  1847,  and  took  part
in  all  the  principal  operations  of  the  Mexican  war,
gaining  the  brevet  of  major  for  gallantry  in  the
affair  at  Medelin,  near  Vera  Cruz.  He  served  for
several  years  on  the  Texas  frontier  against  the  In-
dians, was  stationed  in  Kansas  during  the  anti-
slavery  conflict,  took  part  in  the  Utah  expedition
and  in  the  Navajo  expedition  of  1860.  and,  while
stationed  in  New  Mexico,  was  promoted  major,  but
resigned  on  the  same  day,  13  May,  1861,  in  order


SIHLKY


SIBLEY


621


to  join  the  ('onfp<IcrHt«  nrmr.  He  soon  received  a
oommis-sioti  us  briKHdior-(;onpraI.  nml  on  5  Julj  was
awifrnml  to  tho  eoinmaml  of  tlu>  IK'pnrtment  of
Mexico,  and  intrusUMl  with  the  tiisk  of  drivinf;
therffn>ni  the  NHtionni  forces.  Ho  nisctl  a  hripide
in  northwestern  TexaH.  left  Fori  Bliss  in  Jantiary,
\H&2.  to  effect  the  c<»nquest of  New  Mexico,  at*-

{H-arv*!  U'fore  Fort  C'raij;  on  U\  Feb.,  and  on  21
•'eb.  fou);ht  with  Col.  f^lwanl  U.  S.  Canbv  the  en-
ffa^ement  of  Valvenlo,  which  resulted  in  the  with-
drnwHl  of  the  National  tnnjjw.  He  «K'cupied  Al-
bunuer(]ue  and  Sant-a  Fe,  but  in  April  was  com-
[jclled  to  evacuate  the  territory.  Subse<juently  he
serve<l  with  his  bripide  under  (Jen.  Richard  Taylor
and  (ten.  K.  Kirby  Smith.  In  DeceinU-r,  1869,  he
entert'd  the  service  of  the  khe<live  of  K^vpt  with
the  rank  of  brijfatlier-pcneral,  and  was  asstjfned  to
the  duty  of  construct iiifj  .sea-coast  and  river  de-
fences. At  the  termination  of  his  five  years'  con-
tract he  returniHl.  with  broken  health,  to  the  United
States.  He  was  the  inventor  of  a  tent  for  troops
modelled  after  the  wijfwaras  of  the  Sioux  and  Co-
manche Indians.  He  obtained  letters-patent,  and
the  U.  S.  government,  while  he  was  In  its  service,
contracted  for  the  use  of  the  tent.  At  the  close  of
the  civil  war  the  U.  S.  oflicials  refused  to  carry
out  the  terms  of  the  contract,  and  after  his  death
the  claim  was  brought  before  congress  in  the  inter-
est of  his  family,  lie  occasionally  lectured  on  the
condition  of  the  Egyptian  fellaheen.

8IBLGY,  John  Langrdon,  librarian,  b.  in
Union,  Me..  29  Dec.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
9  Dec.,  1885.  He  was  graduatetl  at  Harvard  in
1835,  and  entered  the  divinity-school.  While  he
was  in  college  much  of  his  time  was  spent  in  work-
ing in  the  fibrarv,  and  he  was  assistant  librarian
in  the  divinity-school  in  1825-'6.  In  1829  he  was
onlained  pastor  of  the  first  church  in  Stow,  Mass..
where  he  remained  four  years.  From  18;W  till
1841  he  was  engaged  in  literary  work  in  Cambridge,
and  during  part  of  this  pcrioil  he  was  editor  and
proprietor  of  the  "American  Mamzine  of  Useful
and  Entertaining  Knowledge."  When  Gore  hall,
the  present  library  building  of  Harvard,  was  opened
in  1841,  Mr.  Sibley  was  amiointed  assistant  libra-
rian under  Dr.  Thaddeus  William  Harris.  On  the
latter's  death  in  1856,  Mr.  Sibley  was  appointed
librarian,  which  post  he  held  for  twenty-one  years,
until  1877,  when,  owing  to  his  age  and  the  failure
of  his  sight,  he  was  retired  from  active  work,  and
made  librarian  emeritus.  Owing  to  his  persistent
requests  for  all  kinds  of  printed  matter,  and  his
earnest  appeals  for  pecuniary  aid,  the  number  of
volumes  increase<l  from  41,000  in  1841  to  164,000
volumes,  and  almost  as  many  pamphlets,  in  1877,
and  its  i)erinanent  fund  from  $5.(KJ<)  to  11170,000  in
the  same  j>eriod.  From  18;J9  till  his  retirement  he
was  the  editor  of  the  triennial  and  quinquennial
catalogues.  He  first  inserted  obituary  dates  in  the
triennial  of  1845.  and  from  1849  solicited  and  pre-
served biographical  notes  of  the  graduates.  After
1860  he  insertetl  in  the  triennials  his  "  Ap[>eal  Ux
Graduates  and  Others  "  for  biographical  sketches,
giving  a  list  of  questions  for  guidance  in  their
prejiaration.  From  1850  till  1870  ho  also  e<lite<i
the  annual  catalogues.  He  was  indefatigable  in
his  quest  for  biographical  information  and  exact
daU>s,  and  ha<l  the  reverence  of  a  Chinaman  for
scraps  of  pa|)er,  utilizing  o<lds  and  ends,  es|>ecially
the  olank  insides  of  envelo|)es,  upon  wliich  many
of  his  most  valuable  memoranda  were  made.  These
notes,  accumulatiHl  during  more  than  half  a  cen-
tury, together  with  the  letters  that  he  rt>ceived
during  about  forty  years,  were  chronologically
arranged  and  bound,  and  his  very  large  collection


of  news(«jier-cuttingM  relating  to  graduate*  was
carefully  indexed  and  arranged  in  iwrap-lKiokii.
For  thirty-s«!Ven  years  he  1«hI  the  ringing  of  the
7Hth  I'salm  at  the  commencement  dinner.  Itow-
doin  conferred  uimhi  him  the  h<morary  degree  of
A.  M.  in  I85<K  lie  was  a  fellow  of  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  from  1H4U  an
active  memU'r  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  so-
ciety, and  he  was  also  a  memlK>r  ctf  other  historical
societies.  In  remembrance  of  the  aid  that  he  had
n'ceive<l  as  a  Ktu«lent  from  the  charity  fund  of
Phillips  p]xeter  academy,  he  U'gan  in  1862  a  wri«»s
of  gifts  to  that  institution,  which  amounte4l  at  the
time  of  his  death  to  more  than  $^{9,(NI0.  the  income
from  which  is  to  be  used  for  the  supfwrt  of  meri-
torious and  needy  students.  He  was  not  known  as
the  donor  until  the  dedication  of  the  new  academy
building  in  18?2.  He  published  "Index  to  the
Writings  of  George  Wa.shington"  (Boston.  1837):
"History  of  the  Town  of  Union.  Me."  (1851):
"  Index  to  the  Works  of  John  Adams  "  (1853) ;  and
"  Notices  of  the  Triennial  anil  Annual  (Catalogues
of  Harvard  University,  with  a  Keprint  <»f  the
Catalogues  of  1674.  1682.  and  1700 ''(186.5).  His
last  and  greatest  work,  upon  which  he  ha<l  sftent
nearly  forty  years  of  constant  reM*arch  and  unre-
mitting labor,  is  "  Bio^rraphical  Sketches  of  Gradu-
ates of  Harvard  University."  three  volumes  of
which have lieen published (1873-'85). In the

Ereface  to  his  third  volume,  written  nine  months
efore his death, he  says : "  I have  passed  my
eightieth  birthday,  and  have  expended  such  work-
ing power  as  remained  to  me  in  the  volume  now
given  to  the  public. I  can  do  no  more. But  the
work  will  be  continued  by  younger  hand.s,  into
which  will  fHi-ss  a  large  mass  of  materials — the  ac-
j  cumulated  collections  of  more  than  half  a  century."
' SIBLEY,  Mark  Hopkins,  jurist,  b.  in  Great
Barrington,  Mass.,  in  1796: d.  in Canandaigua,
I  N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1852,  received  a  classical  education,
removed  to  Canandaigua  in  1814,  studied  law,  was
I  admitted  to  the  bar.  and  gained  a  high  reputation
I  as  an  advocate. He  was  a  member  of  the  New
I  York legislature in  1834-'5,  and was  electe<i  as
a Whig  to  congress,  serving  from  4  Sept.,  1837,
till  3  March,  18^39. At  the  cU>se  of  his  term  he
was  clecteil  a  state  senator,  and  in  1846  became
county  ^udge. He  was  a  member  of  a  charming
social circle in Canandaigua, including  Francis
'  and  Gideon  Granger, John Greig,  and William
j  Wo<k1. — His  cousin.  Hiram,  financier,  b.  in  North
j  Adams.  Mass.,  6  Feb.,  1807:  d.  in  Rochester,  N.
Y.,  12  July,  1888,  receive<l  a  common-sc-hool  edu-
cation, lie  practised  the  shoemaker's  trade  with-
^out  preparatory  training,  and,  emigrating  to  west-
ern New York at the age of sixteen, worketl
as  a  journeyman  machinist  in  a  manufactory  of
carding-machines in Lima, and mastered three
other  trades  before he  was  twenty-one  years  old.
He  carrieil  on  the  wool-carding  business  at  .Sjiarta
and  Mount  Morris,  next  establishe<l  a  foundry  and
machine-shop  at  Alendon.  and  in  184^3  ronuived  to
R<K'hester. on being  electetl sheriff of Monroe
county. He  was  instrumental  in  obtaining  from
congress  an  appropriaticm  in  aid  of  Sjimuel  F.  B.
Morse's  exj)eriments, and interested himself in
telegraphy  from  the  lieginning. When  the  inven-
tion came  into  practical use.  the  business  being
divided  between  many  comj>anies.  Mr.  Sibley,  who,
with  other  citizens  of  Rochester,  was  interested  in
two  of  the  largest — viz.,  the  Atlantic.  I<ake.  and
.Mississippi  Valley  and  the  New  York,  Alluiny,  and
Buffalo — conceived  the  plan  of  uniting  the  sc-attered
plantjj  and  conflicting  patents  in  the  hands  of  a
I  single  corporation. Lines that liad  proved un-


622


SIBLEY


SICKEL


profitable  were  purchased  at  nominal  prices,  and  the
telegraphs  that  extended  over  |mrts  of  thirteen
states  were  consolidated  under  the  name  of  the
Western  Union  telegraph  company,  of  which  Sib-
ley was  president  for  seventeen  years,  during  which
period  the  value  of  the  property  grew  from  $220,-
(KX)  to  $48,000,000,  He  was  unable  to  interest  his
associates  in  a  line  to  the  Pacific  coast,  and  con-
structed it  alone  in  1861,  transferring  it  to  the
company  after  its  completion.  With  the  other
managers,  he  distrusted  the  practicability  of  sub-
marine telegraphy,  and  entered  into  the  project  of
telegraphic  communication  with  Europe  by  way  of
Bering  strait  and  Siberia.  He  visited  St.  Peters-
burg in  18G4,  and  obtained  a  promise  of  co-opera-
tion from  the  Russian  government.  The  Western
Union  company  expended  $3,000,000  in  building
1,500  miles  of  the  projected  line,  but  abandonee!
the  enterprise  as  soon  as  the  first  message  was  sent
over  the  Atlantic  cable.  Mr.  Sibley  was  the  prin-
cipal promoter  of  the  Southern  Michigan  and
Northern  Indiana  railroad.  He  purchased  large
tracts  of  land  in  Michigan,  and  was  interested  in
the  lumber  and  salt  manufacturing  business  at
Saginaw.  After  the  civil  war  he  engaged  largely
in  railroad  building  and  various  industrial  enter-
prises in  the  southern  states,  and  did  much  to  re-
vive business  activity.  He  has  become  the  largest
owner  of  improved  lands  in  the  United  States,  and
has  in  recent  years  engaged  in  farming  operations
on  a  great  scale.  The  Burr  Oaks  farm,  of  nearly
40,000  acres,  in  Illinois,  the  Howland  island  farm,
comprising  8.500  acres,  in  Cayuga,  N.  Y.,  and
many  others,  are  mainly  devoted  to  seed-culture.
Mr.  Sibley  gave  $100,000  for  a  building  to  hold  a
public  library  and  the  collections  of  Rochester  uni-
versity, and  a  like  sum  for  the  establishment  of  the
Sibley  college  of  mechanical  engineering  and  the
mechanic  arts  connected  with  Cornell  university.

SIBLEY,  Solomon,  jurist,  b.  in  Sutton.  Mass.,
7  Oct.,  1769:  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  4  April,  1846.
He  studied  law,  and  began  practice  in  Marietta,
Ohio,  in  1795,  removing  in  tne  following  year  to
Cincinnati,  and  a  year  later  to  Detroit,  Mich.  He
was  elected  to  the  first  legislature  of  the  North-
western territory  in  1799,  and  was  a  delegate  to
congress  from  the  territory  of  Michigan  in  1820-'3.
He  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
Michigan,  and  held  that  office  until  he  was  com-
pelled bv  deafness  to  resign  in  1836. — His  son,
Henry  Ulnstings,  pioneer,  b.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  20
Feb.,  1811  :  d.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  18  Feb.,  1891.  He
began  the  study  of  law,  but  abandoned  it  to  engage
in  mercantile  business  at  Sault  Sainte  ^larie,  soon
afterward  entered  the  employment  of  the  Ameri-
can fur  company,  became  a  partner,  and  on  7  Nov.,
1834,  during  one  of  his  trips,  reached  the  mouth  of
the  Minnesota  river,  and  was  so  delighted  with  the
spot  that  he  made  it  his  permanent  home,  building
at  Mendota  the  first  stone  house  within  the  present
limits  of  the  state  of  Minnesota.  He  devoted  much
of  his  time  to  the  sports  of  the  frontier,  which  he
described  in  graphic  style  in  the  "  Spirit  of  the
Times"  and  "Turf,  Field,  and  Farm,"  over  the
pen-name  of  "  Hal,  a  Dacotah."  When  the  state
of  Wisconsin  was  admitted  into  the  Union,  29
May,  1848,  the  western  boundary  was  fixed  at  St.
Croix  river,  leaving  an  area  of  about  23,000  square
miles,  on  the  east  of  Mississippi  river,  including
some  organized  counties,  w^ithout  a  government.
The  acting  governor  of  the  territory  issued  a  proc-
lamation providing  for  the  election  of  a  delegate  to
represent  this  district  in  congress,  and  Mr.  Sibley
was  chosen  in  November,  1848.  After  much  delay
and  discussion,  he  was  admitted  to  his  seat,  15  Jan.,


^^^  y^.<^£Ay


1849,  and  secured  the  passage  of  an  act  creating
the  territory  of  Minnesota,  which  embraced  the
rest  of  Wisconsin  and  a  vast  area  west  of  the  Mis-
sissippi. He  was  elected  a  delegate  to  congress
from  Minnesota
in  1849,  and  re-
elected in  1851,
when  he  declined
longer  to  be  a
candidate.  He
was  a  member  of
the  Democratic
branch  of  the
convention  that
framed  in  1857  the
state  constitution
that  was  adopted
by  the  people  in
November  of  the
same  year.  The
state  was  admit-
ted to  the  Union
on  11  May,  1858,
and  he  was  in-
augurated as  gov-
ernor in  the  same  month.  He  opposed  the  loan
of  state  credit  to  railroad  companies,  and.  when  a
constitutional  amendment  was  carried  authorizing
the  issue  of  bonds,  he  refused  to  send  them  out  ex-
cept on  security  of  trust  deeds  from  the  companies
giving  a  priority  of  lien  upon  all  their  property.
But  this  ruling  was  negatived  by  the  decision  of
the  supreme  court,  thus  leaving  the  way  open  for
the  issue  of  an  indefinite  amount  of  first  mortgage
bonds,  and  resulting  in  the  bankruptcy  of  the  com-
panies and  the  repudiation  of  the  bonds  by  the
people  of  Minnesota.  When  the  great  Sioux  rising
occurred  on  the  Iowa  and  Minnesota  frontier  in
1862  (see  Little  Crow)  he  commanded  the  white
forces  composed  of  volunteer  citizens.  Notwith-
standing the  delay  in  procuring  arms  and  ammuni-
tion, only  five  weeks  elapsed  before  the  decisive  bat-
tle of  Wood  Lake,  23  Sept.,  broke  the  f)ower  of  the
savages.  Their  capture  followed  two  days  later.
He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, and  afterward  brevetted  major-general.  He
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  lx)ard  of  Indian
commissioners  during  President  Grant's  adminis-
tration, and  in  1871  was  elected  to  the  legislature,
where,  during  the  ensuing  session,  he  made  a  vig-
orous speech  against  the  repudiation  of  the  state
railroad  bonds,  being  thus  instrumental  in  restor-
ing the  credit  of  Minnesota.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  from  Princeton  in  1888.  Gen.  Sib-
ley held  the  offices  of  president  of  the  Chamber  of
commerce  of  St.  Paul,  where  he  resided,  of  the
board  of  regents  of  the  State  university,  and  of
the  State  historical  society,  to  whose  "Collections"
he  made  many  contribution!?.

SICKEIi,  Horatio  (Jates,  soldier,  b.  in  Bel-
mont, Bucks  CO.,  Pa..  3  April,  1817;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  18  April,  1890.  He  was  engaged  in
the  business  of  coach-making,  invented  in  1848
a  new  method  of  producing  artificial  light,  and
became  an  extensive  manufacturer  of  lamps.  Be-
fore the  civil  war  he  wtis  connected  with  various
militia  organizations.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  service
on  17  June,  1861,  as  colonel  of  the  3d  regiment  of
the  Pennsylvania  reserve  corps,  and  succeeded  Gen.
(ileorge  G.  Meade  in  the  command  of  the  brigade.
He  commanded  a  brigade  in  Gen.  George  Crook's
Kanawha  valley  expedition  of  1864,  and  afterward
one  in  the  5th  army  corps  till  the  close  of  the  war.
He  participated  in  the  principal  Imttles  of  the
Army  of  the  Potomac,  lost  his  left  elbow-joint,  be-


SICKLES


SlDKIili


523


sides  receiving  two  other  wouihIh  in  the  sprvicc,
and  WH8  bruvpttitl  I»ripi<lit>r-K»'iipriil  on  21  Oft.,
1864,  and  niHJorjreniTiil  on  Vi  Marfh,  IWtt.  Ilf
was  h(>Alth  officer  of  ttu>  |)ort  of  I'hiladelphiu  in
1865-'».  in  IH«W>-'7I  follwtor  of  inti'mnl  n-venuc.
and  in  1h71-'S4  U.  S.  |H.'n«ion-np»'nt.  Il«  wnn  an
ofllcor  in  iMnkin);  and  railroA<l  <-or|K)rationH,  was
fur  I'iKht  years  a  n»enil»erof  the  l*hihuieli>hiaM-li<H)I
board,  anil  after  IfWl  he  wa«  pri-sideiil  of  the  board
of  health  of  IMiila<h'lt>liia.

SICKLES,  Daniel  Kdrar,  sohlier.  b.  in  New
York  city,  20  Oct.,  182:3.  He  was  p«lucate<l  at  the
University  of  the  city  of  New  York,  t)iit  le/t  to  learn
the  printer's  trade,  which  he  followetl  for  several
years.  Ho  then  studied  hiw,  was  a<iniitted  to  the
bar  in  1S44.  and  Itojjan  practice  in  New  York  city.
In  1K47  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  in  which
iHKly  he  t(M)k  rank  as  a  leader  of  the  Democrats.
In  IH.'M  he  was  appointed  corix>ration  counsel  of
New  York  city,  ann  on  30  July  of  the  same  year
he  was  commissioned  as  secretary  of  lofration  at
Ij<ni<lon.  and  accompanied  James  Buchanan  to  F^ng-
land.  He  returned  in  1855,  was  electe«l,  after  an
enerj^tic  canvas-s,  to  the  state  senate  in  the  autumn,
and  a  year  later  was  chosen  a  mender  of  congress,
takinghissi'aton?  Dec.,  1857.  Discovering  a  guilty
intimacy  between  his  wife,  who  was  the  daughter  of
Antonio  liagioli.  and  Philip  Barton  Key,  IT.  S.  at-
torney for  the  District  of  Columbia,  he  shot  the
latter  in  the  street  on  27  Feb.,  185y.  He  was  in-
dicted for  murder,  and  after  a  trial  of  twenty  days
was  a<vjuitted.  He  hml  Ix'en  elected  for  a  second
term  in  1858. and  served  till  H  March,  1801.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  the  Excelsior
brigade  of  U.  S.  volunteers  in  New  York  city,  and
was  commissioned  by  the  president  as  colonel  of
one  of  the  five  regiments.  On  3  .S'pt.,  1861,  the
president  nominated  him  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers. The  senate  rejected  his  name  in  March,
1862,  but  confirmed  a  second  nomination.  He  com-
manded a  brigade
under  General  Jo-
seph Hooker,  and
gained  distinction
at  Williamsburg,
F'air  Oaks,  an<l
Malvern  Hill.  His
brigade  saw  se-
vere service  in  the
seven  davs'  fight
before  Richmond
and  in  the  Mary-
land cam|>aign,
and  l)ore  a  con-
spicuous part  at
Antietam.  Hesuc-
ceededCien.  Hook-
er in  the  command
of  the  division,
and  was  engaged
at  Fre<lerick.sburg.
On  the  reorganization  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  3«i
army  cor{>s.  and  was  ap|>ointed  major-general  on
7  Mun-h.  18IW,  his  commission  dating  from  29
Nov..  1862.  At  Chancellorsville  he  displayed  gal-
lantry and  energy,  gaining  the  first  success  of  the
day  by  cutting  off  an  ammunition-train  of  the  en-
emy, arresting  a  general  ^mnic  by  rallying  the  re-
treatuig  artillery,  and  withstanding  the  force  of
Stonewall  Jacksf>n's  attack  with  determination  after
the  line  was  formetl.  At  Gettysburg  his  corps  was
po8te<l  l)ctween  Cemetery  hilf  and  Little  Round
Top.  He  mlvanced  to  an  elevation  which  he  thought
desirable  to  hold,  and  in  this  position  was  assail«jd


by  Oen.  .Tames  Ijong^treet'it  column,  while  (Jen.
John  H.  HimmI  (•n<leavore<l  to  gain  the  un<KXMipied
8U)|M>of  liittle  Round  Toii.  In  the  de.»[M'rale  »tnig-
gle  that  followetl,  the  llil  corps  effe<lively  aided  in
preserving  that  i!n|M>rtant  |M>siiion  f  mm  the  enemy,
out  was  shattere<l  bv  the  onwt  of  overwhelming
numlM'rs.  After  theline  was  broken,  (ien.  Anibn»«e
P.  Hill  followe<l  the  Confinlerate  advantage  with
an  attack  on  Sickles's  right,  during  which  Gen.
Sickles  lost  a  leg.  He  continue<l  in  active  service
till  in  the  lieginning  of  18(Vi,  and  was  then  sent  on
a  confidential  mission  to  Colombia  and  otherSouth
American  countries.  On  28  July.  18156,  he  joined
the  regular  army  as  colonel  of  the  42d  infantry.
On  2  March,  1867,  he  was  brevet  ted  brigiulier-
general  for  bravery  at  Fredericksburg,  and  major-
general  for  gallant  and  meritorious  service  at
Gettysburg.  He  commamled  the  military  district
of  tlie  Carolinas  in  18<i5-'7,  an<l  carried  out  the
work  of  reconstruction  so  energetically  that  Presi-
dent Johnson  relieved  him  from  his  command,  after
first  offering  him  the  mission  to  the  Netherlands,
which  he  declined.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the
volunteer  service  on  1  Jan.,  18<W,  and  on  14  April,
1869,  was  {)lace<l  on  the  retireil  list  of  t  he  U.  S.  army
with  the  full  rank  of  major-general.  He  wasa<-tive
in  promoting  the  candidacy  of  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant
for  the  pri'sidency,  and  on  15  May,  1869,  was  H\y-
pointed  minister  to  Spain.  He  n'lin<juished  this
post  on  20  March,  187."5,  and  resumed  his  residence
in  New  York  city.  He  was  president  of  the  New
York  state  boanl  of  civil  service  commissioners,
and  likewise  of  the  lK)ard  of  commissioners  for  the
erection  of  New  York  monuments  at  Gettysburg.

SICOTTE,  Louis  V.,  Canwlian  jurist,  b.  in  St.
Famille,  Lower  Canada,  7  Nov.,  1812.  He  was
admitted  as  an  advocate  in  18;W,  entered  the  par-
liament of  Canada  in  1851,  liecame  a  member  of  the
executive  council  in  1853,  and  was  made  s|)eaker  in
1856.  He  was  apj)ointed  queen's  counsel  in  1854,
and  puisne  judge  o(  the  supreme  court  of  the  prov-
ince of  Quebec  in  1863.

SIDELL,  William  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city,  21  Aug.,  1810;  d.  there,  30  June,  1873.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  militar)-  academy  in
18:^3,  and  assigned  to  the  artillery,  but  resignetl  in
order  to  follow  the  profession  of  civil  engineering.
He  was  successively  city  surveyor  of  New  York,
assistant  engineer  of  the  Crot  on  a»jueduct,and  divis-
ion engineerof  railroads  in  Massachusetts  and  New
York.  In  the  construction  of  the  Panama  railroad
he  acted  as  chief  engineer.  He  was  employe<l  by
the  U.  S.  government  on  surveys  of.  the  delta  of
Mississippi  river.  In  1849- '55  lie  was  chief  engi-
neer of  the  railroad  l>etween  Quincy  and  Galesburg,
III.  He  was  ap|>ointe<l  in  18.')9  chief  enginwr  of  the
projectetl  Tehuantejwc  railroad,  and  had  completed
the  surveys  when  the  political  trouitles  in  the  I  nited
States  caused  the  abandonment  of  the  enterprise.
He  volunteered  at  the  In'ginning  of  the  civil  war,
but  l)efore  he  receivtHl  an  ap|H)intmeiit  he  was
restorwl  to  the  regular  army  on  its  enlargement,
with  the  rank  of  major,  14  .May,  1861.  He  nnisteretl
and  organized  re<Tuitsin  liouisville.  Ky.,  and  Nash-
ville, 'I  enn.,  was  also  disbursing  oHicer.  and  planmni
a  system  by  which  more  than  2<K).000  soldiers  were
niusterefi  in,  and  at  the  en<l  of  their  terms  of  ser-
vice disbande<l,  without  errors  or  delays.  From
May,  1865J,  till  the  cU)se  of  the  war  he  was  acting
assistant  provost-marshal  for  Kentucky.  He  was
proniote<l  lieuteiiant-c<i|onel  of  the  10th  infantry
on  6  May,  1864.  and  n-ceive*!  the  brevets  of  ctdonel
an«l  brigadier-general  on  30  March,  1865,  and  on
15  De<-..  1870,  was  retired  from  service,  in  conue-
quence  of  a  {>aralytic  attack.


624


SIGEL


SI6EL


SIOEL,  Franz,  soldier,  b.  in  Sinsheim,  Baden,
18  Nov.,  1824.  After  completing  his  studies  at  the
gymnasium  of  Bruchsal,  he  entered  the  militair
school  at  Carlsruhe,  and  was  graduated  in  1843.
While  a  lieutenant,  stationed  at  Mannheim,  he  a.s-
sailed  the  standing  army  in  public  writings,  and
thus  became  involved
in  quarrels  with  his
brother  officers.  To-
ward the  close  of  1847,
after  a  duel  that  termi-
nat«d  fatally  for  his  an-
tagonist, he  resigned.
When  the  Baden  revo-
lution began, in  Febru-
ary, 1848,  he  raised  a
corps  of  volunteers,  or-
ganized the  Lake  dis-
trict at  Constance,  led
a  body  of  more  than
4,000  volunteersagainst
Freiburg,  and  was  beat-
/7^ ^ /^  en in  two  encounters

'  with  the  royal  troops.

He  escaped  across  the
French  border,  28
April,  and  made  his  way  into  Switzerland.  The  in-
surrection of  May,  1849,  recalled  him  to  Baden.  He
was  made  commandant  of  the  Lake  and  Upper
Rhine  district,  then  placed  in  charge  of  the  army
of  the  Neckar,  met  the  royal  forces  at  Heppenheim
on  30  May,  became  minister  of  war.  and  finally  suc-
ceeded to  the  chief  command  of  the  troops.  He
fought  in  several  battles  under  Gen.  Louis  Miero-
slawski,  whom  he  succeeded,  conducted  the  army  of
15,000  men  in  retreat  through  three  hostile  army
corps,  and  crossed  the  Rhine  with  the  remnant  into
Switzerland  on  11  July.  While  residing  at  Lugano
he  was  arrested  by  the  Federal  authorities  in  the
spring  of  1851  and  delivered  over  to  the  French
police,  who  conducted  him  to  Havre  with  the  in-
tention of  placing  him  on  a  ship  bound  for  the
United  States.  He,  however,  went  to  England,
lived  in  London  and  Brighton,  and  in  May,  1852,
sailed  for  New  York.  After  his  marriage  to  a
daughter  of  Rudolf  Dulon,  he  taught  in  the  lat-
ter's  school,  at  the  same  time  translating  manuals
of  arms  into  German,  and  conducting  •'  Die  Revue,"
a  military  magazine,  till  1858,  when  he  was  called
to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  as  teacher  of  mathematics  and
history  in  the  German  institute.  He  was  elected  a
director  of  the  public  schools  of  that  city,  edited  a
military  journal,  and  during  the  secession  crisis
defended  northern  principles  in  newspaper  articles.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  organized  a
regiment  of  infantry  and  a  battery,  which  rendered
efficient  service  at  the  occupation  of  the  arsenal
and  the  capture  of  Camp  Jackson.  In  June,  1861,
he  was  sent  with  his  regiment  and  two  batteries  to
RoUa,  whence  he  marched  to  Neosho,  compelled  the
retreat  of  Gen.  Sterling  Price  into  Arkansas,  then
turned  northward  in  order  to  confront  Claiborne
Jackson,  at  Carthage  sustained  a  long  conflict  on
the  open  prairie  with  a  force  much  greater  than  his
own,  and  finally  retreated  in  good  order,  with  con-
stant fighting,  to  Springfield  and  Mt.  Vernon.  He
took  part  in  the  fight  at  Dug  Springs,  and  after
the  Dattle  of  Wilson's  Creek  conducted  the  re-
treat of  the  army  from  Springfield  toward  Rolla.
He  was  commissioned  as  brigadier-general,  to
date  from  17  May,  1861.  In  the  autumn  campaign
of  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont  he  had  command  of
the  advance-guard,  and  in  the  retreat  from  Spring-
field he  commanded  the  rear-guard,  consisting
of  two  divisions. He  took  command  of  the  right


wing  of  the  troops  assembled  under  Gen.  Sam-
uel R.  Curtis  at  Rolla,  and  gained  the  battle  of
Pea  Ridge  by  a  well-timed  assault,  lie  was  there-
upon made  a  major-general,  dating  from  21  March,
1862,  and  was  ordered  to  the  east  and  placed  in
command  of  the  troops  at  Harper's  Ferrv.  He  co-
operated in  the  movement  againt  Gen.  'Thomas  J.
Jackson  at  Winchester.  When  Gen.  John  Pope
was  placed  in  command  of  the  newly  created  army
of  Virginia,  Sigel,  in  command  of  the  1st  corps,  took
part  in  the  engagements  beginning  with  Cedar
Creek  and  ending  with  Bull  Run,  where  he  com-
manded the  right  wing,  and  won  in  the  first  day's
fight  a  decided  advantage  over  Jackson.  A  fter  the
battle  he  covered  the  retreat  to  Centreville.  His
corps  held  the  advanced  position  at  Fairfax  Court-
House  and  Centreville.  He  commanded  the  4th
grand  reserve  division  until  that  organization  was
abolished,  when  he  resumed  command  of  the  11th
corps,  took  leave  of  absence  on  account  of  failing
health,  and  was  superseded  by  Gen.  Oliver  0.  How-
ard. In  June,  1863,  he  took  command  of  the  reserve
army  of  Pennsylvania,  and  organized  a  corps  of
10,000  men  to  aid  in  repelling  Lee's  invasion.  In
February,  1864,  President  Lincoln  appointed  him  to
the  command  of  the  Department  and  the  Army  of
West  Virginia.  He  fitted  out  an  expedition  that
operated  under  Gen.  George  Crook  in  the  Kanawha
valley,  and  led  a  smaller  one  of  7,000  men  through
the  Shenandoah  valley  against  Lynchburg  and
Staunton,  but  was  defeated  by  Gen.  John  C.  Breck-
inridge at  New  Market.  He  was  thereupon  relieved,
and  in  June,  1864,  put  in  command  of  the  division
guarding  Harper's  Ferry.  He  repelled  the  attack
of  Gen.  Jubal  A.  Early  on  Maryland  Heights,  but
was  relieved  of  his  command  soon  afterward,  and
retired  to  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  to  recruit  his  health.
He  resigned  his  commission  on  4  May,  1865,  and
became  editor  of  the  Baltimore  "  Wecker."  In
September,  1867,  he  removed  to  New  York  city.  In
1869  he  was  the  Republican  candidate  for  secretary
of  state  in  New  York.  He  was  appointed  collector
of  internal  revenue  in  May,  1871,  and  in  October
was  elected  register  of  the  city  of  New  York.  After
his  three  years'  term  expired  he  lectured,  and  edited
a  weekly  paper.  Since  1876  he  has  been  an  adherent
of  the  democratic  party,  and  in  1886  he  was  ap-
pointed pension-agent  in  New  York  city.  He  con-
tributed a  memoir  of  his  part  in  the  German  revo-
lution to  Friedrich  Hecker's  "  Erhebung  des  Volkes
in  Baden  f  iir  die  deutsche  Republic  "  (Basel,  1848),
and  while  in  Switzerland  published  a  republican
brochure  entitled  "  Fiirstenstaat  und  Volkstaat "
(St.  Gall,  1848),  the  circulation  of  which  was  for-
bidden in  Germany,  and  the  author  was  sentenced*
m  contumaciam  to  four  years'  imprisonment. — His
brother.  Albert,  soldier,  b.  in  Sinsheim,  Baden,  13
Nov.,  1827;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  15  March,  1884,
was  graduated  at  the  military  academy  at  Carlsruhe
in  1845,  and  served  as  an  officer  in  the  grand-ducal
army.  He  was  sentenced  to  a  year's  confinement
in  the  fortress  of  Kislau  for  his  sympathy  with  the
revolutionary  movement,  but  was  liberated  in  time
to  take  part  in  the  general  uprising  of  the  army  and
people  in  1849  in  command  of  a  regiment  of  volun-
teers. He  emigrated  to  England,  and  in  1852  came
to  the  United  States.  Joining  the  2d  New  Jersey
volunteers  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  he  was
elected  captain.  After  taking  part  in  the  battle  of
Bull  Run.  he  assisted  in  organizing  a  New  York
regiment,  and  afterward  organized  and  commanded
a  regiment  of  Missouri  cavalrv  militia,  and  was
stationed  for  some  time  at  Waynesville,  Mo.,  in
command  of  a  brigade.  He  was  made  U.  S.  land-
recorder  after  the  war,  and  was  appointed  adjutant-


SIQNAY


SIOOURNEY


general  of  Missouri  bjr  Oov.  Gratz  Brown.  ITe  was
oonnecU>«I  with  the  pnvs  asenlitorial  writor  and  cur-
rNipondiMit.  and  publishiHl  a  voliuno  of  Uemuui
poems  (St.  lioiiis,  1803;  enlarj^tnl  chI.,  188.5).

SItiNAY,  JoHeph  (•Mfn-yay).  Camulian  an;h-
bishop,  b.  in  (^lu-Ur,  H  Nov.,  1778;  d.  then»,  3  Oct.,
18A0.  He  !itu*li«>d  philosophy  and  theology  in  the
Seminary  of  QuoImt,  wiw  orduini'<l  prii-st  in  Lon-
jfui-ii,  28  Miin-h.  1M<)2,  and  was  ap|M)nitod  assistant

Itnstor  at  Chanihly,  and  stil>si>4|iu*ntly  at  Louf^Ufil.
n  18()4  he  Uvanie  parish  priest  of  St.  Constant,
and  he  was  transfurreil  to  8ainte-Marie-<le  Itanisay
in  18(K'i. He  went  as  missionary  to  Lake  Cham-

Jilain  in  180<{,  to  take  charge  of  tl>e  French  C'ana-
lians  that  had  settled  in  its  neighl>orhood,  hut  in

1814  ho  was  a|>|Mjinted  pastor  of  (Quebec.  He  was
chosen  coa<ljutor  to  Uishon  Panel  in  1H2<5,  named
bishop  of  Kussala  by  a  bull  of  Leo  XII.  the  same
year,  and  consecrated  under  this  title  on  20  May,

1827.  He  iKH-'ame  a<^lministrator  of  the  diocese  on
18  Oct.,  1832,  and  on  14  Feb.,  18;«,  succeeded  to
the  bishopric  of  Quel)ec.  Bishop  Signay  excited
hostility  among  part  of  his  fl<x!k  by  his  efforts  to
prevent  the  Irish  from  building  a  church  in  Que-
bec, and,  after  it  was  erected,  by  his  refusal  to  visit
it.  During  the  cholera  epidemic  of  18JJ3  he  dis-
played the  utmost  zeal  and  devotion.  The  same
year  he  selected  Pierre  Flavien  Turgeon  as  his  co-
adjutor. The  letter  that  he  wrote  on  this  <x;ca.sion
to  the  British  ministry,  nniying  them  to  sanction
his  choice,  was  considerea  by  a  large  number  of  his
flock  to  be  humiliating  and  unnecessary,  as  the  ap-
proval of  the  English  authorities  in  the  case  of  Ca-
noilian  bishops  was  no  longer  required.  In  1844
the  dicK-eses  of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada  were
erecte«l  into  an  ecclesiastical  province,  on  the  de-
mand of  the  Canadian  clergy,  and  the  dioceses  of
Montreal,  Kingston,  and  Toronto  were  placed  un-
der the  metropolitan  jurisdiction  of  Quebec,  which
was  created  an  archbishopric.  Although  the  title
of  archbishop  had  been  given  to  his  two  predeces-
sors, he  was  the  first  that  was  entitled  to  it  offi-
cially. Several  months  after  his  nomination  he
received  the  pallium,  which  was  brought  to  him
from  Rome.  He  showed  great  activity  and  dis-
interestedness during  the  conflagration  that  de-
stroyed part  of  Quebec  in  184.'},  sharing  his  means
with  those  that  were  ruined  ;  and  during  the  ship
fever  of  1847  and  1848  he  rivalled  his  priests  in
his  personal  sacrifices  for  the  victims.  In  1849  he
found  it  necessary,  from  physical  weakness,  to  con-
fide the  administration  of  the  archdiocese  to  his  co-
adjutor. The  pastorals  and  other  letters  of  Arch-
bishop Signay  are  published  in  the  3d  volume  of
the  "  Mandements  des  eveques  de  Quebec,"  which
also  contains  a  biography.

SUiKMiNE,  Mande  (se-jfone),  Canadian  clergy-
man, I),  in  Tours,  France,  m  the  latter  half  of  the
18th  century:  d.  in  Nova  Scotia  about  IS.'H).  He
emigrated  to  England  in  1791,  and  in  1798  sailed
for  Nova  St'otia,  to  lttl)or  among  the  French  Cana-
dians and  Indians,  and  took  charge  of  the  Acadians
that  had  settled  along  .Sisibout  river.  He  was  a
man  of  extraordinary  courage  and  activity,  and
with  few  resources  built  two  large  churches,  St,
Mary,  of  Frenchtown,  and  St,  Anne,  of  Argyle,
He  was  regarde<i  by  the  Acadians  of  the  coast  of
St,  Mary's  Imy  as  their  father  and  protector,  and
the  influence  he  obtained  over  them  was  so  great
and  so  justly  acfpiire*!  that  the  English  government
of  Halifax  made  him  a  judge,  ami  delepited  to  him
entire  temjKtral  authority  over  his  nock.  After
this  he  erected  a  third  church,  in  the  village  of
Mountegan,  t<i  which  the  bishop  of  Quebec  gave
the  name  St.  Mande,  in  his  honor.


8IftOURNEY,  Lydia  Hnntley,  author,  b,  in
Norwich,  Conn,,  1  .Sept,.  1791;  d.  in  Hartfonl,
Conn.,  10  ilune,  I84J5.  She  was  the  daughter  of
Kzekiel  Huntley,  a  soldier  of  the  llevolution.  She
read  at  the  age  of  threi>,  and  at  Hcven  wrote  simple
verses.  After  nn-eiving  a  8U|>crior  eilucation  at
Norwich  and  Hartford,  she  taught  for  flve  years
a  sele<-t  class  of  young  ladii>s  in  tlio  latter  city.  In
1815.  at  the  suggest i<m  and  under  the  pat n mage  of
Daniel  Wadsworth,  she  piiblish(*d  her  first  volume,
"  Moral  Pieces  in  Pros**  and  Verse,"  In  1819  she
became  the  wife  of  Charles  .Sigoumey.  a  Hartford
merchant  of  literary  and  artistic  tastes.  Without
neglecting  her  domestic  duties,  she  thenceforth
devote<l  her  leisure  to  literature,  at  first  to  gratify
her  own  inclinations  and  sul>s(.>(|ucntlv,  after  her
husband  had  lost  the  greater  part  of  his  fortune,
to  odd  to  her  income.  She  soon  attained  a  reputa-
tion that  secured  for  her  luxiks  a  reiwly  sale.  In
her  posthumous  "  Ijetters  of  Life  "  (18«<J)  she  enu-
merates forty-six  distinct  works,  wholly  or  ]>artially
from  her  pen,  besides  more  than  2.000  articles  in

Srose  and  verse  that  she  had  contributed  to  nearly
00  |K,'rio<licals.  S<>veral  of  her  lx)oks  also  at-
tained a  wide  circulation  in  England,  and  they
were  also  much  read  on  the  continent.  She  re-
ceived fn)m  the  queen  of  the  French  a  handsome
diamond  bnicelet  as  a  token  of  that  sovereign's
esteem.  Her  poetry  is  not  of  the  highest  order.
It  portrays  in  graceful  and  often  felicitous  lan-
guage the  emotions  and  sympathies  of  the  heart,
rather  than  the  higher  conceptions  of  the  intel-
lect. Her  prose  is  gracefid  and  elegant,  and  is
modelled  to  a
great  extent  on
that  of  Addison
and  the  Aikins,
who,  in  her  youth,
were  regarued  as
the  standards  of
polite  literature.
All  her  writings
were  penned  m
the  interest  of  a
pure  morality.and
many  of  them
were  decidedly  re-
ligious. Perhaps
no  American  writ-
er has  been  more
frequently  called
upon  for  gratui-
tous occasional
poems  of  all  kinds.
To  these  requests
she  generally  ac-
cede«l.  and  often  greatly  to  her  own  inconvenience.
But  it  was  not  only  through  her  literary  labors  that
Mrs.  Sigoumey  became  known.  Her  whole  life  was
one  of  active  and  earnest  philanthropy.  The  poor,
the  sick,  the  deaf-mute,  the  blind,  the  idiot,  the  slave,
and  the  convict  were  the  objects  of  her  constant
care  and  benefaction.  Her  jwiisioners  were  nu-
merous, and  not  one  of  them  was  ever  forpotten.
During  her  early  married  life,  she  economized  in
her  own  warflrolie  and  personal  luxuries  that  she
might  be  able  to  relieve  the  needy,  while  later
in  lier  career  she  saved  all  that  was  not  abso-
lutely needed  for  home  comforts  and  expenses
for  the  same  purpose.  Her  character  and  worth
were  highly  appn««iated  in  the  city  that  for  more
than  fifty  years  was  her  home.  She  never  left
it  after  her  marriage,  except  when  in  1840  she  vis-
ited Europe,  a  record  of  which  journey  she  pub-
lished in  "  Pleasant  Memories  of  Pleasant  Lands  "


OC.  ^l\  <J'lCrc<yL4y>tZcy>


626


sigCenza  y  g6ngora


SILKMAN


(Boston,  1842).  During  her  residence  abroad  two
volumes  of  her  poems  were  issued  in  London.  Be-
sides the  foregoing  and  an  etlition  of  i)oetical  se-
lections from  her  writings,  illustrated  by  Felix  O.
C.  Darley  (Philadelphia,  184^),  her  books  include
"Traits  of  the  Aborigines  of  America,"  a  poem
(Hartford,  1822);  "Sketch  of  Connecticut  Forty
Years  Since  "  (1824) ;  '•  Letters  to  Young  Ladies
(New  York,  1833  ;  20th  ed.,  1853 ;  at  least  flye  Lon-
don eds.) ;  "  Letters  to  Mothers  "  (18v{8 ;  several
London  eds.) ;  "  Pocahontas,  and  other  Poems "
(1841);  "Scenes  in  My  Native  Land"  (Boston,
1844);  "Voice  of  Flowers"  (Hartford,  1845);
"Weeping  Willow  "  (1846) ;  "Water- Drops,"  a  plea
for  temperance  (New  York,  1847) ;  "  Whisper  to  a
Bride  "  (Hartford,  1849) ;  "Letters  to  My  Pupils"
(New  York,  1850);  "Olive  Leaves"  (1851 ;  Lon-
don, 1853);  "The  Faded  Hope," a  memorial  of  her
only  son,  who  died  at  the  age  of  nineteen  (1852) ;
"Past  Meridian  "  (1854) ;  "Lucy  Howard's  Jour-
nal "  (1857) ;  "  The  Daily  Counsellor,"  a  volume  of
poetry  (Hartford,  1858);  "Gleanings,"  from  her
poetical  writings  (18()0);  and  "  The  Man  of  Uz,  and
other  Poems"  (18G2).

SKitJENZA  Y  (iONOORA,  Carlos,  Mexican
historian,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  1()45 ;  d.  there,
22  Aug.,  1700.  He  studied  mathematics  and  as-
tronomy in  his  native  city  under  the  direction  of
his  father,  and  in  1660  entered  the  Company  of
Jesus.  In  1662  he  published  his  first  poem.  He
continued  his  mathematical  and  scientific  studies,
and  in  1665  left  the  Jesuit  order,  being  appointed
chaplain  of  the  hospital  "  Amor  de  Dios,  There
he  became  intimate  with  Juan  de  Alva  Ixtlilxot-
chitl,  who  put  at  his  disposal  the  rich  collection  of
documents  of  his  ancestors,  the  kings  of  Texcoco,
and  in  1668  Sigiienza  began  the  study  of  Aztec
history  and  the  deciphering  of  the  hieroglyphs  and
symbolical  writings  of  the  Toltecs.  In  1681  he
was  appointed  by  Charles  II.  royal  cosmographer
and  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  University  of
Mexico,  and  in  1693  he  was  sent  by  the  viceroy,
Gaspar  de  Sandoval  (q.  v.),  to  accompany  Admiral
Andres  de  Pez  on  a  scientific  exploration  of  the  Gulf
of  Mexico.  On  his  return  he  entered  the  Jesuit
order  again,  and,  after  falling  heir  to  Ixtlilxot-
chitl's  collection  of  documents,  gave  the  last  years
of  his  life  in  the  retirement  of  the  hos{)ital  to  the
completion  of  his  works  on  ancient  Mexican  his-
tory. Siguenza  was  a  very  prolific  writer.  His
published  works  include  "  Primavera  Indiana "
(Mexico,  1662) ;  "  Las  Glorias  de  Queretaro,"  a
poem  (1668) ;  "  Libra  Astronomica  "  (1681) ;  "  Mani-
nesto  filos()fico  contra  los  Cometas"  (1681);  "Los
infortunios  de  Alonso  Ramirez,"  describing  the
adventures  of  a  man  that  was  captured  by  pirates
in  the  Philippines,  but  escaped  in  a  boat  and  was
thrown  on  tiie  coast  of  Yucatan  (16SK)) ;  "  Relacion
historica  de  los  sucesos  de  la  Armada  de  Barlovento
en  la  isla  de  Santo  Domingo  con  la  quema  del
Guiirieo "  (1691);  "Mercurio  Volante  6  Panel
Periodico  "  (1693) ;  and  "  Descripcion  de  la  bahia
de  Santa  Maria  de  Galve,  alias  Panzacola,  de  la
Mobila  y  del  Rio  Misisipi  "  (1694).  Of  his  numerous
manuscripts,  only  fragments  were  preserved  after
the  expulsion  of  the  Jesuits,  but  there  is  a  move-
ment on  foot  to  print  them.  The  most  interesting
are  "  Historia  del  Imperio  de  los  Chichimecas, '
"  Genealogia  de  los  Reyes  Mexicanos,"  "  Un
Fragmento  de  la  Historia  antigua  de  los  Indios"
(with  illustrations),  "  Calendario  de  los  meses  y
fiestas  de  los  Mexicanos,"  "  Cidografia  Mexi-
cana,"  "  Anotaciones  criticas  a  la.s  obras  deBernal
Diaz  del  Castillo  y  P.  Torquemada,"  and  "  Historia
de  la  Provincia  de  Tejas."


SIKES,  William  Wirt,  author,  b.  in  Water-
town,  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1836 ;  d.  in  London,
England,  19  Aug.,  1883.  In  childhood  he  was  an
invalid,  and  he  was  to  a  grejit  extent  self-educated.
He  learned  type-setting  in  Watertown  at  the  age
of  fourteen,  and  ever  afterward  was  engaged  m
journalism  or  other  literary  occupations.  He  con-
tributed largely  to  newspapers  in  Utica,  working
at  the  same  time  as  a  type-setter,  thence  went
to  Chicago,  and  was  employed  on  the  "Times"
and  "  Evening  Journal."  At  the  age  of  twenty-
four  he  was  appointed  state  canal  inspector  of
Illinois.  In  1867  he  came  to  New  York,  was  em-
ployed on  various  journals,  and  became  an  earnest
student  of  the  lower  classes  of  city  life.  He  wrote
many  poems,  and  published  stories  of  adventure
in  the  "  Youth's  Companion  "  and  "  Oliver  Optic's
Magazine."  At  one  time  he  purchased  an  interest
in  a  paper  called  "  City  and  Country,"  published
at  Nyack,  N.  Y.,  which  he  edited  and  filled,  to  a
considerable  extent,  with  his  own  contributions  in
prose  and  poetry.  He  married  Olive  Logan  {q.  v.)
on  19  Dec,  187i.  Mr.  Sikes  was  an  incessant  and
conscientious  worker.  He  was  known  by  his  inti-
mate friends  to  have  employed  as  many  as  thirty
pen-names  in  contributing  to  the  American  press.
Some  of  his  writings  were  printed  under  a  feminine
signature.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Car-
diff, Wales,  by  President  Grant  in  June,  1876,
which  post  he  held  until  his  death.  Shortly  after
his  appointment  he  began  a  series  of  papers  on
Welsh  history,  archipology,  and  social  conditions,
which  attracted  wide  attention,  and  the  works  that
he  subsequently  published  in  London,  on  these  or
kindred  topics,  were  received  with  praise  by  British
critics.  He  was  an  accomplished  art  critic,  and  his
criticism  of  the  Wiertz  gallery  of  Brussels,  which
he  contributed  to  "  Harper's  Magazine,"  has  been
selected  by  the  authorities  of  that  institution  for
printing  with  their  catalogue.  He  was  the  author
of  "A  Book  for  the  Winter  Evening  Fireside"
(Watertown,  1858) ;  "  One  Poor  Girl :  the  Story  of
Thousands"  (Philadelphia,  1869):  "British  Gob-
lins :  Welsh  Fairy  Mythology "  (London,  1880) ;
"  Rambles  and  Studies  in  Old  South  Wales  "  (1881);
and  "  Studies  of  Assassination  "  (1881).

SILKMAN,  James  Bailey,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bed-
ford, Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  9  Oct.,  1819 :  d.  in
New  York  city,  4  Feb.,  1888.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1845,  studied  law,  and  after  laboring  as
a  journalist  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1850,  soon
establishing  a  good  practice.  Prior  to  the  civil
war  he  caused  much  excitement  by  introducing
resolutions  against  slavery  in  the  New  York  dioce-  .
san  convention  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.
After  the  war  he  became  greatly  interested  in  re-
ligious matters,  and  was  at  one  time  identified
with  the  Fulton  street  prayer-meeting.  Subse-
quently he  wa.s  converted  to  Spiritualism,  and  re-
mained until  his  death  one  of  its  foremost  adher-
ents. So  pronounced  were  his  views  on  this  sub-
ject that  his  family  had  him  examined  to  decide
with  regard  to  his  sanity,  and  in  1883  he  was
committed  to  the  Utica  asylum.  From  this  de-
cision he  appealed,  and  after  a  long  litigation  in
the  courts  he  recovered  a  Verdict  of  $15,000  dam-
ages against  his  son  and  his  son-in-law  for  false
imprisonment. An  appeal  from  this  verdict  was

f>ending  at  the  time  of  his  death.  On  being  re-
eased  from  Utica  he  reopened  his  law-office  and
recovered  a  portion  of  his  practice,  but  made  it
thenceforth  the  chief  aim  of  nis  life  to  procure  the
release  of  those  inmates  of  the  Utica  asylum  that
he  claimed  were  unjustly  confined.  In  this,  owing
to  his  ability  as  a  lawyer  and  his  persistence  in


SILL


SlLUMAN


627


ererrthinfr  he  iindprt(x>k,  he  wm  unustudlr  suo-
oen/iil,  and  n  nuinlN>r  wore  released  at  dineront
tinM»s  throii^'ti  his  i«(T<irtx.

Sllili,  Kdnard  Konltiiid.  educator,  b.  in  Wiiul-
mr,  C'tHin..  2»  Anril.  1H41  ;  d.  in  Cli'vcland,  Ohio,
27  Fi'l)..  1SH7.  Ih-  was  ffnulimtt'd  hI  Yal»>  in  1H(U,
ami.  owinc  tu  f<>chl(>  licalth,  ivsi(I(><l  on  thi*  Pucitlc
(ttast  till  July,  lH(Mt.  when  hu  n>tiirnt><l  to  the  eaxt.
and.  aftor  studying  theology  at  Harvard  divinity-
8cho<il  for  some  tune,  devottnl  himself  to  lit<»rary
work  in  New  York  city. After  teaching  f<»r  three

Jearsin  Medina  county  and  atCuvahoga  Kails,  Ohio,
e  accept imI  t  he  ofTlce  of  |>rinci|>al  of  t  he  high-school
at  Oakland.  C'al..  in  1H71,  and  in  1H74  wals  apnoint-
tnl  professor  of  the  Knglish  language  and  litera-
ture in  the  University  of  Culifornia,  where  he  re-
maine<l  for  eight  years.  He  resigned  his  chair  in
1882  to  resume  literary  work,  and  returne«l  to
Curahoga  Falls,  where  he  remained  until  his  death,
which  (K'curred  in  a  hospital  at  Cleveland  after  he
had  undergone  an  o[>eration.  Klizabcth  Stuart
Phelps  says:  "  He  has  left.  I  think,  no  volume  but
the  '  IJooklet.'  as  ho  us-ed  to  call  it,  privately  print-
ed as  a  farewell  to  his  friends  in  Caliiornia.  .  .  .
It  contains?  some  of  the  most  delicate,  most  Ri\-
ishe<l,  and  most  musical  poetic  work  that  the  coun-
try has  produced,  ...  He  was  personally  beloved
as'  I  believe  few  men  of  our  day  have  been."  The
volume  referre<l  to  is  "The  Hermitage,  and  other
Poems"  (New  York.  18G7).

SILU  John  Mahelon  Berry,  educator,  b.  in
Black  It<Kk.  Erie  co.,  N.  Y.,  2:^  Nov..  18:^1.  He
was  educated  at  Jonesville.  and  at  the  Michigan
state  normal  school,  of  which  he  was  the  first  male
graduate,  concluding  his  course  of  study  in  1854.
He  also  received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  from
the  University  of  Michigan  in  1871.  From  his
graduation  until  30  June,  1863,  he  was  professor
of  the  Knglish  language  and  literature  in  the
Michigan  state  normal  school.  He  was  then
chosen  superintendent  of  the  public  schools  of
Detroit,  which  office  he  held  until  1805.  In
1865-'7J5  he  was  principal  of  the  Detroit  female
seminary,  an<l  from  the  latter  year  until  his  resig-
nation in  1886  he  was  again  superintendent  of  the
public  schools.  Since  that  date  he  had  been  prin-
cipal of  the  Michigan  stAte  normal  school.  He
was  president  of  the  Michigan  state  teachers'  asso-
ciation in  186l-'2,  a  member  for  two  years  of  the
Detroit  board  of  education,  and  one  of  the  board
of  regents  of  the  University  of  Michigan  in
1867-'9.  Mr.  Sill  has  published  "  Synthesis  of  the
English  Sentence"  (New  York.  1856).  and  "Prac-
tical licssons  in  English  "  (1880).

SILL,  JoHhua  noodrow,  soldier,  b.  in  Chilli-
cothe.  Ohio,  6  Dec,,  IKH  ;  d.  near  Murfreesl)oro,
Tenn,,  31  Dec,.  1862,  He  was  grmluated  at  the  U.  S,
military  wiwlemy  in  1853.  assigne<l  to  the  ordnance,
and.  after  being  on  duty  at  Watervliet  arsenal,
returned  to  the  academy,  where  he  was  assistant
professor  of  geogra[>hv.  history,  and  ethics  from  23
S««pt.,  1854.  till  2»  Aug..  1857,  He  was  promoted
2<1  lieut4>nant  in  1854.  and  1st  lieutenant  in  1856.
He  was  engage»l  in  n)utine  duty  at  various  arse-
nals iind  ordnance  de|)ots  until  25  Jan..  1861.  when
he  n'signe<l  t4»  accept  the  professorship  of  mathe-
matics and  civil  engineering  in  the  Hnniklyn  col-
legiate and  |M)lytechnic  institute.  At  the  l)egin-
ning  of  the  civil  war  in  April  he  at  once  ofTere<l
his  services  to  the  governor  of  Ohio,  and  was  com-
mLssione<l  assistant  adjutant-general  of  that  state.
On  27  Aug.  he  was  commissione<l  colonel  of  the
83d  Ohio  V(ilunte4>rs.  after  taking  luirt  in  the  Imttle
of  Rich  Mountain  on  11  July.  From  S<'pteml)er.
1861,  till  September,  1862,  he  [)artici{tatcd  in  the


operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennemc«,  and  Alalwma,
•Iter  80  Nov..  1861.  U'ing  in  command  of  a  brigade.
On  16  July,  18412.  he  wa.H  ap|>ointe4l  brigiulier-gen-
eral  of  volunteers,  nnd  in  the  following  autumn
and  winter  he  t<M(k  part  in  the  Imttle  of  Perryville,
the  pursuit  of  (Ji-n.  Hntxtnn  Hragg's  army,  and
the  Tennessee  campaign  of  the  Army  of  the  Cum-
berland. He  was  killfHl  at  the  battle  of  Stone  Kiv-
er  while  endeavoring  to  rally  his  men.

8ILLE,  NicsMiiiM  de,  lawyer,  b.  in  Holland
about  1600.  He  was  commissionetl  by  the  Dutch
West  India  company  in  16:t:{  as  flrst  councillor  in
their  provincial  government  of  New  Amsterdam,
and  arrived  in  that  town  on  24  July.  He  was  a
thorough  statesman  and  an  experience*!  lawyer,
and,  having  built  a  iargi^  house;  on  the  corner  of
Broad  street  and  Exchange  jilwe,  entertained  his
friends  in  the  same  elegant  manner  as  that  to  which
he  had  been  accustomwi  in  the  Hague,  De  Sille
brought  to  this  country  more  silver  plate  than  anv
one  before  him,  and  took  special  pride  in  its  exhi-
bition. He  built  the  flrst  stone  house  in  New
Utn^'ht.  n'side<l  there  for  many  years,  and  left  a
brief  history  of  the  settlement  of  that  town.

SILLERY,  Noel  Brulart  de,  French  mission-
ary, b.  in  France  in  De<'ember.  1577 ;  d,  there,  26
Sept,,  1640,  He  l)elonge<l  to  a  noble  family  in
F'rance,  at  an  early  age  entered  the  Knights  of
Malta,  and  wa.s  afterward  ambassador  at  Madrid  and
Rome.  Ho  Anally  renounce<l  the  world.  l>ecame  a
priest,  and  devote<l  his  large  fortune  to  works  of
charity.  The  Jesuits  having  suggestetl  to  him  the
founding  of  a  town  in  Canada  for  Indian  converts,
he  was  please<l  with  the  idea,  and  in  1638  sent
workmen  to  Quel)ec  to  execute  the  plan.  The  re-
sult was  the  establishment  of  the  town  that  bears
his  name.  In  a  few  years  it  was  filled  with  Algon-
quin Christians,  who  cleared  a  large  tract  around
it,  and  were  taught  the  duties  of  civilize«l  society.
See  "  Vie  de  I'illustre  serviteur  de  Dieu.  Noel  Bru-
lart de  Sillerv.  Chevalier  de  Malte.  et  Bailly  Com-
mandeur  (Jrand'  Croix  dans  I'ordre  "  (Paris.  1843).

SILLIMAN,  Gold  Selleok,  soldier,  b.  in  t^air-
field.  Conn.,  7  May.  1732;  d,  there  21  July.  1790.
His  father.  Judge  Ebenezer  SUliman  (17'07-'75),
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1727,  and  there  stud-
ied theology,  but  turned  his  attention  to  law.
In  1730  he  was  sent  as  deputy  to  the  general  as-
sembly, and  in  1739-'66  was  a  member  of  the
house  of  assistants,  after  which  he  returned  to  the
lower  house,  of  which  he  was  s|>eaker  for  many
years. He  was  annually  chosen  judge  of the  su-

Eerior  court  of  the  colony  from  1743  to  1766.  and
eld  the  rank  of  major  in  the  4th  regiment  of
militia.  His  son.  Gold,  was  graduateil  at  Yale  in
1752,  and.  after  being  educatwl  as  a  lawyer,  Ufame
attorney  for  the  crown  in  Fairfield  county  during
colonial  times.  He  had  interested  himself  in  mili-
tary affairs,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolu-
tionary war  was  colonel  of  cavalry  in  the  local
militia.  During  the  greater  jwrt  of  the  war  he
held  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  and  was  charged
with  the  defence  of  the  southwestern  frontier  of
Connecticut,  which,  owing  to  the  long  occupation
of  New  York  city  by  the  British,  was  a  duty  that
remiired  much  vigilance.  He  servinl  at  the  head
of  his  regiment  in  the  Iwttle  of  Long  Island,  and
also  in  that  of  White  Plains,  where  he  wjis  [M>sted
in  the  rear-guard.  In  1777  he  was  active  in  re-
pelling the  raid  on  Danbury.  In  May,  1770,  a
party  that  w»is  sent  from  Lloyd's  neck  by  Sir
Henry  Clinton  surprisetl  him  in  his  own  house,
and  for  a  year  he  remainwl  a  prisoner  <in  (mrole
at  Flatbush  and  (iravesend.  Ij<mg  Island,  Sub-
setiuently  he  was  exchanged. — His  son,  Gold  Sel-


628


SILLIMAN


SILLIMAN


C^  D  J^<.J!Ji<A.,^^^..,C^^\A^


leek,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  26  Oct.,  1777;
d,  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  3  June,  1868,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1796,  and  then  studied  law.  He  entered
upon  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  where  he  had  a  large  and  successful  business
until  1815,  when  he  came  to  New  York  city,  where
he  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits.  Onretiring
from  this  occupation,  he  settled  in  Brooklyn,  where
for  several  years  he  held  the  office  of  postmaster.
—Another  son,  Benjamin,  scientist,  b.  in  North
Stratford  (now  Trumbull),  Conn..  8  Aug.,  1779;
d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  24  Nov.,  1864,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1796,  and,  after  spending  a  year  at
home,  taught  at  Wethersfleld,  Conn.  In  1*798  he
returned  to  New  Ha-
ven, where  he  began
the  study  of  law  with
Simeon  iJaldwin,and
in  1799  was  appoint-
ed tutor  at  Yale,
which  place  he  held
until  he  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1802.
Natural  science  was
at  that  time  begin-
ning to  attract  the
attention  of  educa-
tors, and.  at  the  solic-
itation of  President
Dwight,  he  aban-
doned the  profession
of  law  and  devoted
himself  to  science.
In  September,  1802,
he  was  chosen  professor  of  chemistry  and  natu-
ral history  at  Yale,  with  permission  to  qualify
himself  for  teaching  these  branches.  Procuring
a  list  of  books  from  Prof.  John  MacLean  {q,  v.),
of  Princeton,  he  proceeded  to  Philadelphia,  where,
during  two  winters,  he  studied  chemistry  under
Prof.  James  Woodhouse,  then  professor  of  chem-
istry in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1804
he  delivered  a  partial  course  of  lectures  on  chem-
istry, and  during  the  following  year  he  gave  a
complete  course.  He  went  abroad  in  March,  1805,
to  procure  scientific  books  and  apparatus,  and
spent  about  a  year  in  study  in  Edinburgh  and
London,  also  visiting  the  continent  and  making
the  acquaintance  of  distinguished  men  of  science.
On  his  return  he  devoted  himself  to  the  duties  of
his  chair,  which  included  chemistry,  mineralogy,
and  geology,  until  1853,  when  he  was  made  pro-
fessor emeritus,  but,  at  the  special  request  of  his
colleagues,  continued  his  lectures  on  geology  until
1855,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  his  son-in-law,
James  D.  Dana.  While  in  Edinburgh  he  became
interested  in  the  discussions,  then  at  their  height,
between  the  Wernerians  and  Huttonians,  and  at-
tended lectures  on  geology;  and  on  his  return  he
began  a  study  of  the  mineral  structure  of  the
vicinity  of  New  Haven.  About  1808  he  persuaded
the  corporation  of  Yale  to  purchase  the  cabinet  of
minerals  of  Benjamin  D.  Perkins,  and  a  few  years
later  he  secured  the  loan  of  the  magnificent  col-
lection of  George  Gibbs  (9.  t'.),  which  in  1825  be-
came the  property  of  the  college.  His  scientific
work,  which  was  extensive,  began  with  the  ex-
amination in  1807  of  the  meteor  that  fell  near
Weston,  Conn.  He  procured  fragments,  of  which
he  made  a  chemical  analysis,  and  he  wrote  the
earliest  and  best  authenticated  account  of  the  fall
of  a  meteor  in  America.  In  1811  he  began  an  ex-
tended course  of  experiments  with  the  oxy-hydric
or  compound  blow-pipe  that  was  invented  by  Rob-
ert Hare,  and  he  succeeded  in  melting  many  of  the


most  refractory  minerals,  notably  those  containing
alkalies  and  alkaline  earths,  the  greater  part  of
which  had  never  been  reduced  before.  After  Sir
Humphry  Davy's  discovery  of  the  metallic  bases  of
the  alkalies.  Prof.  Silliroan  repeated  the  experiments
and  obtained  for  the  first  time  in  this  country  the
metals  sodium  and  potassium.  In  1822,  while  en-
gaged in  a  series  of  observations  on  the  action  of
a  powerful  voltaic  battery  that  he  had  made,  simi-
lar to  Dr.  Hare's '*  deflagrator,"  he  noticed  that
the  charcoal  points  of  the  negative  pole  increa.sed
in  size  toward  the  positive  pole,  and,  on  further  ex-
amination, he  found  that  there  was  a  correspond-
ing cavity  on  the  point  of  the  latter.  He  inferred,
therefore,  that  an  actual  transfer  of  the  matter  of
the  charcoal  points  from  one  to  another  took  place,
and,  on  careful  examination,  he  found  that  the  char-
coal harl  been  fused.  This  fact 'of  the  fusion  of
the  carbon  in  the  voltaic  arc  was  long  disputed  in
Europe,  but  is  now  universally  accepted.  In  1830
he  explored  Wyoming  valley  and  its  coal-forma-
tions, examining  about  one  hundred  mines  and
localities  of  mmes;  in  1832-'3  he  was  engaged
under  a  commission  from  the  secretary  of  the
treasury  in  a  scientific  examination  on  the  subject
of  the  culture  and  manufacture  of  sugar,  and  in
1836  he  made  a  tour  of  investigation  among  the
gold-mines  of  Virginia.  His  popular  lectures  be-
gan in  1808  in  New  Haven,  wnere  he  delivered  a
course  in  chemistry.  He  delivered  his  first  course
in  Hartford  in  1834,  and  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  in  the
autumn  of  that  year.  During  the  years  that  fol-
lowed he  lectured  in  Salem,  Boston,  New  York,
Baltimore,  Washington,  St.  Louis,  New  Orleans,
and  elsewhere  in  the  United  States.  In  1838  he
opened  the  Lowell  institute  in  Boston  with  a  course
of  lectures  on  geology,  and  in  the  three  following
years  he  lectured  there  on  chemistry.  This  series
was  without  doubt  the  most  brilliant  of  the  kind
that  was  ever  delivered  in  this  country,  and  its
influence  in  developing  an  interest  in  the  growing
science  was  very  great.  Many  of  the  present  lead-
ers in  science  trace  their  first  inspiration  to  these
popular  expositions  of  Prof.  Silliman.  Through
his  influence  in  1830  the  historical  paintings  of
Col.  John  Trumbull,  and  the  building  in  which
they  were  formerly  deposited  (now  the  college
treasury),  were  procured  for  Yale.  He  opposed
slavery  in  all  its  forms.  Among  the  various  colo-
nies sent  out  from  the  eastern  states  during  the
Kansas  troubles  was  one  that  was  organized  in
New  Haven,  and,  at  a  meeting  held  prior  to  its  de-
parture in  April,  1856,  the  discovery  was  made
that  the  party  was  unprovided  with  rifles.  A_
subscription  was  proposed  at  once,  and  Prof.  Silli- '
man  spoke  in  favor  of  it.  This  insignificant  ac-
tion was  soon  noised  abroad,  and,  owing  to  the
strong  feeling  between  the  partisans  of  slavery
and  those  opposed  to  it,  the  matter  was  discussed
in  the  U.  S.  senate.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
a  firm  supporter  of  President  Lincoln,  and  exerted
his  influence  toward  the  abolition  of  slavery.  The
degree  of  M.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Bowdoin
in  1818.  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Middlebury  in
1826.  Prof.  Silliman  was  chosen  first  president  in
1840  of  the  American  association  of  geologists
and  naturalists,  which  has  since  grown  into  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, and  he  was  one  of  the  corporate  members
named  by  congress  in  the  formation  of  the  Na-
tional academy  of  sciences  in  1863.  Besides  his
connection  with  other  societies  in  this  country  and
abroad,  he  was  corresponding  member  of  the  Geo-
logical societies  of  Great  Britain  and  France,  In
1818  he  founded  the  "  American  Journal  of  Sci-


SILLIMAN


SILLIMAN


629


•noe,"  which  ho  coiuluctecl  H8  hoIc  e<litor  until
1888,  and  iik  M<nior  e<litor  until  1H44),  when  he
traojfernHl  the  journnl  to  hist  s«in  und  to  Jamos
D.  Dana.  This  lournul  is  now  the  olde^tt  ttcientiflc
paper  in  the  Vnited  States.  Pmf.  Silliman
oditiHl  three  (nlitions  of  William  Henry's  "  Kle-
nients  of  Chemistry  "  (Boston.  Ib08-'14),  also  thn>e
editions  of  ll4^lK>rt  liakewell's  "  IntriMluction  to
Geolosry  "  (Xew  Haven,  1829,  l&Hi,  and  IWW),  and
was  the  author  of  "  Jounials  of  Travels  in  Kngland,
Holland,  and  Sct)tland"  (New  York,  IHIO);  "A
Short  Tour  l:H?tween  Hartford  and  yueU'c  in  the
Autumn  of  1H19"  (1820);  "  Klement.s  of  C'henustrv
in  the  Order  of  Ijcctures  given  in  Yale  College ''
(2  vols..  New  Haven,  18w-'l);  "Consistency  of
Discoveries  of  Mo<lem  Geology  with  the  Sacred
History  of  the  Creation  ancf  Deluge "  (London.
1837) ;  and  "  Narrative  of  a  Visit  to  Kurope  in  1851  "
(2  vols.,  1853).  He  was  called  by  Mwartl  Everett
the  "  Nestor  of  American  Science."  Prof.  Silliman
was  married  twice.  His  first  wife  was  Harriet
Trumlnill.  the  daughter  of  the  second  Gov.  Jona-
than Trumbull.  One  of  his  daughters  inarrie<l  Prof.
Oliver  P.  Hubbard,  and  another  Prof.  James  D.
Dana.  A  bronze  statue  of  Prof.  Silliman  was  erected
on  the  Yale  grounds  in  front  of  Famam  college  in
1884.  See  "Life  of  Benjamin  Silliman,"  by  George
P.  Fisher  (2  vols..  New  York,  1866). — Benjamin's
son,  Benjamin,  chemist,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
4  Dec,  1816 ;  d.  there,  14  Jan.,  1885,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1837,  and  at  once  became  assistant  to
his  father,  under  whom  he  had  served  in  a  similar
capacity  during  the  explorations  in  the  gold
region  of  Virginia  in  1836.  Some  of  the  lectures
in  the  departments  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and
geology  were  delivered  by  him,  and  he  also  de-
voted himself  assiduously  to  the  acquirement  of
a  sfHJcial  knowledge  of  chemistry.  In  1842  he
fitted  up  at  his  own  expense  an  apartment  in  the
old  laboratory  of  the  college,  where  he  received
private  pupils,  notably  John  P.  Norton  and  T.
Sterry  Hunt,  and  there  he  likewise  conducted  his
earliest  scientific  researches.  In  1846  he  urged
upon  the  corporation  of  Yale  the  foundation  of  a
department  for  the  study  of  advancetl  science,  and
in  consequence  the  School  of  applied  chemistry
was  organized,  with  himself  as  its  professor  of
chemistr)',  without  salurv.  The  movement  was
suooessful,  and  in  1847  tfie  Yale  scientific  school
was  formetl  on  the  basis  of  this  beginning,  which,
since  1860,  in  recognition  of  the  gifts  of  Joseph  E.
Sheffield,  has  borne  his  name.  Prof.  Silliman  con-
tinued a  member  of  the  faculty  of  the  scientific
school  until  1869,  except  during  the  years  1849-'54,
when  he  held  the  chair  of  medical  chemistry  and
toxicology  in  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Louisville,  Ky.  In  1854  he  was  calle<l
to  give  instruction  in  the  academic  and  medical
departments  of  Yale,  in  consequence  of  the  resig-
nation of  the  elder  Silliman.  He  held  the  chair  of
general  and  applied  chemistry  in  the  college  until
1870,  but  retamed  the  ap[X)intmcnt  in  the  medical
de()artment  until  his  death.  On  the  invitation  of
citizens  of  New  Orleans,  he  delivered  in  1845-'6
what  is  believetl  to  have  l)een  the  first  series  of
lectures  on  agricultural  chemistry  in  the  United
States,  and  subst^^uently  he  gave  popular  lectures
on  scientific  topics  throughout  the  country.  Prof.
Silliman  was  a  member  of  the  common  council  of
New  Haven  in  1845-'9,  and  one  of  the  trustees  of
the  Pealxwly  museum  of  natural  history.  His  sci-
entific work  includi^  many  investigations  in  min-
eralogy, at  first  chiefly  from  the  chemical  side,  in-
cluding rust>arches  on  meteorites  as  well  as  studies
in  geology  and  physical  optics. Later  he  turned

TOL. T. — S4


his  attention  more  to  applie<l  science,  including
the  examination  of  mines  and  the  pn>[)aration  of
re|M)rts  on  (piestions  connecte*!  with  th»'  chemical
arts  and  manuftu-tures :  ancl  he  fri*<|uently  &\y-
{»eared  as  an  exjM'rt  in  the  courts.  In  1869  Prof.
Silliman  iMKiame  one  of  the  state  chemists  of  Con-
necticut, and  in  that  cafiacity  was  employed  as  a
scientific  witness  in  the  courts.  The  collection  of
minerals  that  he  accumulated  during  his  ex|iedi-
tions  over  the  country  was  sold  in  1868  to  Cornell
university,  where  it  bears  the  name  «»f  the  Silliman
cabinet.  The  niinentlogical  cf>lle<,-tions  of  Yale
are  indebtetl  to  him  for  various  gifts,  and,  through
his  personal  solicitation  of  funds,  the  Itaron  Ijed-
erer  collection  was  secured  in  1843  for  the  college.
The  honorary  degree  of  M.  D.  was  conferred  on
him  by  the  University  of  South  Carolina  in  1849,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Jefferson  medical  college  in
1884.  Prof.  Silliman  was  a  member  of  many  sci-
entific societies,  and  was  secretarv  of  the  Ameri-
can association  of  geologists  an<l  naturalists  in
1843-'4.  He  was  named  as  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences  by
act  of  congress  in  1863,  and  served  on  several  of
its  most  important  committees,  notably  that  ap-
pointed in  1882  to  report  on  the  use  of  sorghum  as
a  source  of  sugar,  rrof.  Silliman  had  charge  of
the  chemical,  mineralogical,  and  geological  depart-
ments of  the  World's  fair  that  was  held  in  New
York  during  1853,  and  at  that  time  edited  with
Charles  R.  Goodrich  "  World  of  Science,  Art,  and
Industry  "  (New  York,  1853),  and  "  The  Progress
of  Science  and  Mechanism  "  (1854),  in  which  the
chief  results  of  the  great  exhibition  were  recorded.
In  1838-'45  Prof.  Silliman  became  associated  in
the  editorship  of  the  "  American  Jounial  of  Sci-
ence," and  with  James  D.  Dana  he  was  its  editor
from  the  latter  year  until  his  death.  His  scientific
papers  were  nearly  one  hundred  in  number,  of
which  over  fifty  were  published  in  the  "  American
Journal  of  Science,"  and  they  cover  a  wide  range
of  topics.  In  addition,  he  published  "  First  Prin-
ciples of  Chemistry  "  (Philatlelphia,  1846;  revised
ed.,  1856),  of  which  more  than  50,000  copies  were
sold;  "Principles  of  Physics"  (1858;  revised  ed.,
1868) ;  and  "American  Contributions  to  Chemistrj- "
(1875). — The  second  Gold  Sellecks  son,  Benjamin
Donglas,  lawver,  b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  14  Sept.,
1805,  was  graciuated  at  Yale  in  1824,  and^  then
studied  law  with  James  Kent  and  his  son,  William
Kent,  until  1829,  when  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  opened  an  office  in  New  York  during  that  year,
and  nas  since  been  steadily  engaged  in  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession  in  that  city,  with  his  resi-
dence in  Brooklyn.  He  has  often  served  as  a
delegate  from  Kings  county  to  National  and  state
conventions  of  the  Whig  and  Republican  parties,
including  the  one  at  Harrisburg  in  1839,  at  which
William  Henry  Harrison  was  nominatetl  for  the
presidency.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in
1838,  and  was  nominated  by  the  Whigs  for  con-

frress  in  1843,  but  failed  of  election,  although  he
ed  the  ticket  of  his  party  at  the  polls.  In  1852
he  received,  but  declineti,  the  Whig  nomination
for  the  state  senate.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
an  earnest  supporter  of  the  government,  and  in
March,  1865,  he  was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln
U.  S.  attorney  for  the  eastern  district  of  New  York.
He  held  this  office  until  .Sentember,  1866,  and  dur-
ing that  time  argued  in  benalf  of  the  government
im(x)riant  questions  that  grew  out  of  the  civil
war.  In  1872  he  was  a  member  of  the  commission
for  revising  the  c<institution  of  the  state,  and,  as
a  chairman  of  one  committee  and  a  memlter  of
others,  took  an  active  part  in  the  proceedings  of


630


SILLIMAN


SILVA


that  body.  He  was  nominated  in  1873  by  the  Re-
publican party  as  their  candidate  for  the  office  of
attorney-general  of  New  York,  but  failed  of  elec-
tion. I'he  de^ee  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Columbia  m  1873,  and  by  Yale  in  1874.  Dur-
ing his  career  in  the  state  legislature  he  introduced
the  charter  of  Greenwood  cemetery,  and  he  is  a
trustee  of  that  corjwration.  He  has  long  been  con-
nected with  the  Long  Island  historical  society,  of
which  he  is  a  director,  and  for  more  than  twenty
years  he  has  Iwen  president  of  the  Brooklyn  club.
Mr.  Silliman  was  president  of  the  New  England
society  of  Brooklyn  from  its  beginning  until  1876,
when  lie  declined  a  re-election,  and  is  president  of
the  Yale  alumni  association  of  Long  Island.  He
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  York  bar  as-
sociation, one  of  its  yice-presidents,  and  a  trustee
of  various  charitable  and  benevolent  associations.
— Benjamin  Douglas's  brother,  Augustus  Ely,
financier,  b.  in  Newport.  R.  L.  11  April,  1807;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  30  May,  1884,  early  entered
commercial  life  and  became  connected  with  the
Merchants'  bank  of  New  York.  He  was  its  presi-
dent from  1857  until  1868,  when  failing  health  com-
pelled his  retirement  from  active  business.  He
took  part  in  the  establishment  of  the  Clearing
house  association  in  1853,  and  was  one  of  the  com-
mittee that  during  the  first  six  years  of  its  exist-
ence directed  its  proceedings.  Mr.  Silliman  was
a  member  of  the  Long  Island  historical  society,
and  was  in  1840-'l  president  of  the  New  York
mercantile  library  association.  He  published  "  A
Gallop  among  American  Scenery,  or  Sketches  of
American  Scenes  and  Military  Adventure "  (New
York,  1843;  enlarged  ed.,  1881),  and  translated
from  the  French  "  Fenelon's  Conversations  with
M.  de  Ramsai  on  the  Truth  of  Religion,  with  his
Letters  on  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul  and  the
Freedom  of  the  Will"  (1869).  In  honor  of  the
memory  of  his  mother  he  bequeathed  to  Yale  uni-
vei-sity  nearly  $1(X),(X)0  for  the  foundation  of  an  an-
nual seriesof  lectures  in  that  university,"  the  general
tendency  of  which  may  be  such  as  will  illustrate
the  presence  and  wisdom  of  God  as  manifested  in
the  natural  and  moral  world."

SILLIMAN,  Justus  Mitchell,  mining  engi-
neer, b.  in  New  Canaan,  Conn.,  25  Jan.,  1842.  He
studied  at  New  Canaan  academy,  enlisted  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war,  and  served  for  three  years,
being  wounded  at  Gettysburg.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  settled  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  where  he  taught  in
an  academy,  and  was  graduated  at  Rensselaer  poly-
technic institute  in  1870  with  the  degree  of  M.  E.
In  September  of  that  year  he  was  called  to  the
charge  of  the  department  of  mining  engineering
and  graphics  in  Lafayette  college,  which  place  he
still  (1888)  holds.  Prof.  Silliman  has  invented  an
instrument  for  orthographic,  clinographic.and  crys-
tallographic  projection,  also  a  water  manometer
and  anemometer.  He  is  a  fellow  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science  and  a
member  of  the  American  institute  of  mining  en-
gineers, and  has  been  president  of  the  Lehigh  val-
ley microscopical  society.  His  special  work  has
included  various  investigations,  of  which  his  ex-
amination of  the  Bessemer  flame  with  colored
glasses  and  the  spectroscope  is  the  best  known.
Prof.  Silliman 's  writings  have  been  confined  to  pro-
fessional papers  that  nave  been  published  in  the
transactions  of  societies  of  which  he  is  a  member.

SILLOWAY,  Thomas  William,  architect,  b.
in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  7  Aug.,  1828.  He  received
a  good  education,  especially  in  the  arts  of  design,
and  devoted  himself  to  the  preparation  of  archi-
tectiiral  plans  for  public  buildings,  in  which  busi-


ness he  established  himself  at  Boston,  Mass.,  in
1851.  In  the  course  of  the  next  twenty  years  more
than  3(X)  church  edifices  were  built  or  repaired
under  his  superintendence,  besides  other  public
buildings,  including  the  capitol  at  Montpelier,  Vt.
(1857),  the  Soldiers'  monument  at  Cambridge,  Mass.
(1870),  and  Buchtel  college,  Akron,  Ohio  (1872).
After  the  earthquake  in  Cnarleston,  S.  C,  in  1886,
he  was  called  to  that  city  professionally  and  re-
stored six  of  the  church  edifices  that  Tiiad  been
partially  destroyed.  In  1852  he  began  to  preach  ,
to  Universalist  congregations,  and  in  1862  he  was
ordained  a  clergyman  of  that  faith.  He  has  pub-
lished "  Theogonis.  a  Lamp  in  the  Cavern  of  Evil "
(Boston,  1856);  "  Text- Book  of  Modem  Carpen-
try" (1858);  "Warming  and  Ventilation  "  (1860);
"  Atkinson  Memorial,"  a  series  of  eighteen  dis-
courses (1861) ;  "  The  Conference  Melodist "  (1863) ;
"  Cantica  Sacra  "  (1865) ;  "  Service  of  the  Church
of  the  Redeemer,"  at  Brighton,  Mass.  (1867) ;  and,
with  Lee  L.  Powers,  "  Cathedral  Towns  of  Eng-
land, Ireland,  and  Scotland  "  (1883).  He  edited,
with  George  M.  Harding,  an  improved  edition  of
Shaw's  "  Civil  Architecture  "  (1852).

SILSBEE,  Joshua  S.,  actor,  b.  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  4  Jan.,  1815 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  22
Dec,  1855.  He  made  his  first  appearance  on  the
stage  at  Natchez.  Miss.,  in  the  winter  of  1837,  and
afterward  played  Jonathan  Ploughboy  in  "  Forest
Rose  "  at  the  Walnut  street  theatre,  Philadelphia,
in  1841.  He  appeared  as  a  star  soon  afterward  in
Boston.  Going  to  England  in  1851,  he  was  the
first  comedian  to  introduce  Yankee  characters  on
the  stage  in  that  country,  opening  at  the  Adelphi,
London,  in  his  favorite  part  of  Jonathan  Plough-
boy.  During  his  residence  in  England,  Tom  Tay-
lor, the  dramatic  author,  is  said  to  have  written
for  him  the  play  that  afterward  became  famous
as  "  The  American  Cousin,"  though  it  is  doubtful
whether  he  ever  appeared  in  it.  After  his  death
his  widow  brought  the  piece  to  the  United  States
and  sold  it  to  Laura  Keene.  Soon  afterward  John
Sleeper  Clark  brought  out  the  play  in  Philadelphia,
and  from  the  disputed  ownership  arose  a  long-
copyright  lawsuit.  Laura  Keene  suDsequently  sold,
or  gave,  her  copy  to  Edward  A.  Sothem.  The
Yankee  part  was  thus  probably  first  played  not  by
Silsbee,  but  by  Joseph  Jefferson,  under  Miss
Keene's  management.

SILSBEE,  Nathaniel,  senator,  b.  in  Essex
county,  Mass.,  in  1773;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  1  July,
1850.  His  father,  Nathaniel,  was  a  shipmaster  m
Salem.  The  son  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,
and  amassed  a  fortune.  He  served  frequently  in
each  branch  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  and
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving
from  1  Dec.,  1817,  till  3  March,  1821.  He  then
declined  a  renomination.  He  was  in  the  state  sen-
ate in  1823-6,  and  was  elected  and  re-elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  holding  the  seat  from  4  Dec,  1826,
till  3  March,  1835.  He  was  a  firm  supporter  of  the
administration  of  John  Quincy  Adams.

SILVA,  Francis  Augustus,  artist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  4  Oct.,  1835 ;  d.  there,  31  March,  1886.
He  worked  as  a  sign-painter  until  the  opening  of
the  civil  war,  when  he  entered  the  National  army.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  settled  in  New  York
and  devoted  himself  to  the  painting  of  marine
subjects.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Wat«r-
color  society  in  1872.  Among  his  works  are  "  Gray
Day  at  Cape  Ann  " ;  "  Sunrise  in  Boston  Harbor  " ;
"  New  London  Light "  ;  "  September  Dav  on  the
Coast"  (1879);  "Old  Town  by  the  Sea''  (1880);
"Old  Connecticut  Port"  (1882);  "Passing  Show-
ers" (1885);  and  "Near  Atlantic  City"  (1886).


SILVA


SIMITlfcRK


031


SILVA,  JoH#  Ijiarrnrlo,  Wm-zm-Un  noMier,
h,  ill  TiniMHi,  7  S«>|it.,  171»2;  i\.  in  Cliirgiia,  27  Ffl>..
1873.  When  the  revolmiotmrv  junt*  of  Canwa"*
was  installtHl.  19  April,  1810,  Si'lva  offerwl  his  wr-
vives  hikI  whh  apftoinUMl  !W>rp'ant  in  the  forc'i-s
«»nt  HfpiinHt  the  n»yaliHt*«  of  Coro.  Ho  served  un-
der the  orders  of  the  Martinis  de  Toro,  and  on  his
ri'tuni  wjw  proniotiHl  lieutenant,  taking;  part  in  the
oani(Hii);n  of  1811-'I2  uiulertien.  Mininda.  After
the  cApituUtion  of  the  latter.  Silva  esca[M><l  to  the

filains  of  Guarieo,  when*  he  gathen'd  a  guerilla
oroe  and  continued  to  or>|M>se  the  S|>anianls  till
he  joined  Bolivar  on  the  latter's  iiiva.sion  of
Venezuela  in  1813.  Silva  |>artici[>ated  in  the  Imt-
tlea  of  T»muanes,  Aniure,  Harhula.  an«l  Mo«iui-
tero,  and  in  the  famous  defence  of  Ija  Victoria,  13
F'eb.,  1814,  where  his  troop  of  180  men  was  re<luced
to  20.  After  his  recovery  from  his  wounds  he
WM  assigned  to  another  regiment,  with  which  he
participateil  in  the  defence  of  San  Mateo  and  the
first  liattle  of  Carabobo.  After  the  defeat  of  Ia
Puerta  and  the  capitulation  of  Valencia,  Silva  re-
tire<l  to  Guarieo.  lie  was  captured  by  the  S|)anish
under  Ijopez  Ouintana  and  condemned  to  death,
but  esca|K'd  and  joined  Ptutz  in  Apure,  under  whom
he  serve<l  till  1819.  On  Bolivar's  return  from  (V>-
lombia,  Silva  joine<l  him  and  participated  as  lieu-
tenant •  colonel  in  the  battle  of  Carabobo,  24
June,  1821.  In  1832  he  marched  with  Bolivar  to
southern  Colombia,  participated  in  the  battle  of
Bombona,  7  April,  1822,  and  went  with  the  divis-
ion that  was  sent  in  1823  to  aid  the  Peruvian
patriot*.  In  the  battle  of  Junin  he  was  at  the
iivmI  of  the  Hussars  de  Colombia,  and  was  pro-
motetl  colonel,  and  after  the  luittle  of  Ayacucho
he  was  mmle  a  brigadier  of  Peru  and  Colombia.
On  this  occasion  he  was  officially  styled  the  hero
of  Junin. He  continued  to  serve  in  Peru,  accom-

rying  Sucre  in  his  entry  into  Ija  Paz,  after  which
returned  to  Colombia,  and  in  1828  was  sent  to
quell  an  insurrection  in  Giiayana.  On  his  return
he  was  proraote«l  major-general,  and  after  the  dis-
integration of  Colombia  he  demanded  a  passport
to  Venezuela  with  the  regiments  of  grenadiers  and
hussars  of  Apure,  which  n'fuse<l  to  continue  ser-
vice in  New  Granada.  As  a  defender  of  Bolivar,
whose  niece  he  hatl  marriiHi  in  1827,  he  was  exiled
in  1831,  and  in  1835  returne<l  to  take  part  in  the
revolution  of  1835,  but  soon  submitted  to  the  gov-
ernment. In  1849  he  commande<l  the  government
troops  against  Gen.  Paez,  with  whom  he  signetl  a
convention  at  Macapo,  and,  when  the  same  was
Tiolated  by  President  Monagas,  he  rcsigne<l  and
retired  to  his  farnu  In  1855  he  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant-general by  congress,  and  was  secretary  of
war;  in  the  next  vear  he  was  appointed  to  the
government  council,  but  soon  resigned  and  retired
to  his  countrv-seat.

SILVER,  Thomas,  inventor,  b.  in  Greenwich,
Cumljerland  co.,  N.  J.,  17  June,  1813;  d.  in  New
York  city,  12  April,  1888.  His  parents  were  Qua-
kers. As  a  boy  he  displayed  unusual  mechani-
cal skill,  and  when  he  was  only  nine  years  old  his
toy  boat,  with  hidden  projH'ller-wheel  and  other
ingenious  devices,  was  the  wonder  of  the  village
in  which  he  lived.  He  was  e<lucated  in  Green-
wich and  Woodstown,  X.  J.,  and  in  Philadelphia,
and  became  a  civil  engineer,  but  continue<l  to  de-
vote much  time  to  the  perfection  of  numerous
wmtrivances  for  lightening  human  toil  and  in-
creasing the  safety  of  travellers.  Among  the  |>at-
ents,  uiiwanl  of  fl'ftv  in  number,  granted  him,  were
those  for  a  grain-<Iryer,  a  fuel-saving  heat-cham-
ber, a  gaa-consumer,  a  tension-regulator,  a  machine
for  imying  out  submarine  cables,  a  machinery-


lubricator,  a  rr)tary  a-scemling-railwav,  and  clock-
work for  me<-hanical  laimw.  Modefs  of  some  of
thes««  are  at  the  |)ateiit-omce,  Washington,  D.  C,
the  South  Kensington  museum,  liondon.  and  the
Paris  cons«'rvHtoin>  des  arts.  The  Umw  of  the  steam-
er "San  Fnincisco,"  Ixiund  to  California  with
troops  in  18.>4,  suggest«'<l  his  liost-known  invention.
That  vessel  wjls  wrecked  through  her  engines  lie-
coming  disjibled  in  a  seven*  storm,  and.  to  meet
such  emergencies,  Mr.  Silver  devjwd  his  "marine
jfovernor,"  which  wa.s  wlopte*!  by  the  Fn^nch  navy
in  1855.  It  is  also  applie<l  to  many  stationary  en-
gines, notably  to  those  in  the  press- nxuns  of  the
great  dailii>s  in  large  cities.  It  was  ailoptcd  by
the  British  lulmiralty  in  1804,  and  the  example
has  l)een  followed  by  the  navies  of  all  the  chief
powers,  except  the  United  States.  Mr.  Silver  per-
fected a  plan  of  channel  transit  for  the  carrying
of  coal  by  car  direct  from  Wales  to  France,  in
which  Napoleon  III.  was  intereste<l,  but  it  was  lost
to  that  countrv  by  the  surrender  at  Se<lan.  Mr.
Silver  was  matie  a  member  of  the  Franklin  insti-
tute of  Philadelphia  in  1855.  He  received  the
James  Watt  medal  from  the  Koyal  iM>lyte<hnic
society  of  Ixmdon,  and  one  from  Na|x)leon  III.  for
his  "regulateur  marine."  He  published  "  A  Trip
to  the  North  Pole,  or  the  The<iry  of  the  Origin  of
Icebergs"  (New  York,  1887).

SIMCOE,  John  (ilraTen,  British  soldier,  b.  near
Exeter,  England,  25  Feb..  1752;  d.  in  Torbay.  26
Oct.,  1806.  His  father,  a  captain  in  the  navy,  was
killed  at  QucIkjc  during  its  siege  by  Wolfe.  The
son  entered  the  army  as  ensign  in  1770,  and  at  the
bej^inning  of  the  American  war  purcha.s«Hl  a  cap-
taincy in  the  40th  foot,  which  regiment  he  com-
manded at  the  battle  of  Brandywine,  where  he  was
wounded,  as  also  at  Monmouth.  He  raised  a
battalion  called  the  Queen's  rangers,  which  was
drilled  and  disciplined  in  a  superior  manner  for
light  and  active  service,  and  with  which  he  did
imj)ort«nt  service  to  the  royal  cause  in  the  south.
On  23  June.  1779,  Sir  Ilenrj'  Clinton  gave  him  the
rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  In  October,  1779,  while
on  an  expedition  to  destroy  some  boats,  he  was
taken  prisoner  and  narrowly  escapee!  death.  Col.
Simcoe's  corps  was  c*onstantly  in  advance  of  the
army,  and  performed  a  series  of  skilful  and  success-
ful enterprises.  He  was  with  Comwallis  at  York-
town.and  was  included  in  the  capitulation.  After  the
war  Simcoe's  corps  was  disbanued.  and  the  officers
were  place<l  on  half-pay.  He  was  governor  of  Up-
per Canada  in  1791-'4,  and  has  been  accused  of  pro-
moting Indian  hostilities  against  the  United  States
in  the  northwestern  territories.  He  wa<«  promoted
colonel,  18  Nov.,  1790,  major-general,  3  Oct.,  1794,
lieutenant-general,  3  Oct.,  1798,  and  was  governor
and  commander-in-chief  of  Santo  Domingo  from
Deceml)er,  1796,  till  July,  1797,  exerting  himself
successfully  against  the  French,  and  to  establish
the  financial  and  other  interests  of  the  colony.  A
Ijike  of  considerable  size  in  Ontario  and  a  countv
and  town  bear  his  name.  He  wrote  and  printed
for  private  distribution  a  "Hist<>ry  of  the  Opera-
tion of  a  Partisan  Corps  called  the  Queen's  Ran-
gers" (Exeter,  1TO7:  reprintetl,  with  a  memoir  of
the  author.  New  York.  1844).

SIMITI  J:RE.  Pierre  Engine  dn,  artist,  b.  in
Geneva,  Switzerland ;  d.  in  Phila4lelphia  in  Octo-
l>er.  1784.  Ho  went  to  the  West  Indies  about
1750,  and,  after  s|>ending  nearlv  fifteen  years  there,
to  New  York,  and  in  1766  to  Philadelphia  Here
ho  became  well  known  as  a  c<illectoroi  curiosities,
and  in  1768  was  electetl  a  member  of  the  American

Khilosophical  society. His  collection  was  so  cele-
ratedthatin  1782  heo|)ened  it  to  the  public  under


632


SIMKINS


SIMMONS


tho  name  of  the  American  museum.  Re  was  an
artist  of  some  ability,  and  j)ainted  numerous  por-
traits, includine  one  of  Washington.  His  heads
of  thirteen  notables — Washington,  Haron  Steul>en,
Silas  Deane,  Joseph  Reed,  Gouverneur  Morris,  Gen.
Horatio  Gates.  John  Jay,  William  H.  Drayton,
Henry  Laurens,  Charles  Thomson,  Samuel  Hun-
tingdon, John  Dickinson,  and  Benedict  Arnold —
were  engraved  by  Benjamin  Reading  and  published
in  a  quarto  volume  (London,  1783).  He  painted
also  miniatures  in  water-color,  and  made  some  de-
signs for  publications.  Soon  after  the  Declaration
of  Independence  he  was  employed  by  a  committee
of  congress  to  furnish  designs  for  a  seal  for  the
new  republic.  Subsequently  he  suggested  another
design,  but  neither  was  accepted.  His  valuable
collection  of  manuscripts  and  broadsides,  forming
material  for  a  history  of  the  Revolution  and  com-

r)rising  several  volumes,  is  in  the  Philadelphia
ibrary.  Princeton  conferred  upon  him  in  1781
the  honorary  degree  of  M.  A.

SIMKINS,  Arthur,  legislator,  b.  on  the  eastern
shore  of  Virginia  alx)ut  1750;  d.  in  Edgefield,
S.  C,  in  1826.  He  emigrated  to  South  Carolina
early  in  life,  and  ultimately  established  himself  on
Log  creek,  in  Edgefield  district.  Having  studied
law  and  been  admitted  to  the  bar.  he  was  made
county  court  judge.  At  the  beginning  of  the
Revolutionary  war  he  took  sides  with  the  patriots,
and  his  place,  known  as  "Cedar  Fielas,"  was
burned  by  the  Tories.  After  the  war  he  was  chosen
a  member  of  the  general  assembly,  and  retained
his  seat  for  nearly  twenty  years.  He  was  also  a
delegate  to  the  convention  that  a*lopted  the  Fed-
eral constitution,  and  he  voted  agamst  it  on  the
ground  that  it  took  too  much  power  from  the  states.
— His  son.  Eld  red,  lawyer,  b.  in  Edgefield  district,
S.  C,  29  Aug.,  1779;  d.  there  in  1832,  was  well
educated  at  home,  and  subsequently  attended  the
Litchfield,  Conn.,  law-school,  where  he  remained
for  more  than  three  years.  He  then  made  himself
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  local  laws  of  South
Carolina,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  7  May,
1805,  beginning  to  practise  at  Edgefield  court-
house in  1806,  and  soon  winning  a  reputation.  In
1812  he  was  elected  lieutenant-governor,  and  five
years  later  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  congress  to
replace  John  C.  Calhoun,  who  had  accepted  a  seat
in  President  Monroe's  cabinet.  He  was  re-elected
and  served  from  8  Feb.,  1818,  till  3  March,  1821,
but  declined  a  second  re-election,  and  retired  in
favor  of  his  law-partner,  George  McDuffie.  He
was  repeatedly  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and  in
1825  prepared  an  act,  which  was  passed,  giving
jurisdiction  to  certain  courts  to  order  the  sale  or
division  of  the  real  estate  of  intestates  not  exceed-
ing $1,000  in  value.  He  was  employed  in  many
important  cases,  but  was  always  of  feeble  health,
ana  in  later  years  unable  to  confine  himself  closely
to  his  profession.

SIMMONS,  Franklin,  sculptor,  b.  in  Webster,
Me.,  11  Jan.,  1842.  His  boyhood  was  spent  in
Bath  and  Lewiston,  and  his  love  for  sculpture  was
early  developed.  Having  a  facility  for  portraiture,
he  made  his  first  attempts  in  that  line.  During
the  last  two  years  of  the  civil  war  he  was  in  Wash-
ington, where  the  members  of  the  cabinet  and
officers  of  the  army  and  navy  sat  to  him  for  life-
size  medallions.  They  were  cast  in  bronze,  and
most  of  them  were  purchased  by  the  Union  league
of  Philadelphia.  In  1868  he  went  to  Rome,  Italy,
where  he  has  since  resided.  He  visited  his  native
land  in  1888.  His  more  important  works  are
the  statues  of  Roger  Williams,  in  Washington
and Providence ; William King,  for  the state


of  Maine ;  Oliver  P.  Morton,  in  Indianapolis ;
Henry  W.  Longfellow  (1887),  in  Portland ;  "  Me-
dusa'' (1882);  "  Jochebed  with  the  Infant  Moses";
•'Grief  and  History,"  the  group  that  surmounts
the  naval  monument  at  Washington ;  "Galatea"
(1884);  "Peneloije";  "Miriam'^;  "Washington
at  Valley  Forge";  and  "  The  Seraph  Abdiel,"  from
"  Paradise  Lost  "  (1886).  Among  nis  portrait  busts
are  those  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  William  T.  Sher-
man, David  I).  Porter,  James  G.  Blaine.  Francis
Wayland,  and  Ulysses  S.  Grant  (1886).  The  hono-
rary degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Bates  college  and  also  by  Colby  university.

SIMMONS,  George  Frederick,  clergyman,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  24  March,  1814;  d.  in  t'oncord,
Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1855.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1832,  and,  after  teing  employed  as  a  private
tutor,  prepared  for  the  ministry  at  Cambridge  di-
vinity-school, where  he  completed  his  course  in
1838.  He  was  ordained  the  same  year  as  an  evan-
gelist of  the  Unitarian  denomination,  and  at  once
went  to  Mobile,  Ala.,  where  he  began  his  ministry.
Owing  to  his  decided  opposition  to  slavery,  he  re-
mained there  only  until  1840,  when  he  was  obliged
to  fly  for  his  life,  and  barely  escaped  the  fury  of  a
mob.  In  November,  1841,  he  was  ordained  pastor
of  the  Unitarian  church  at  Waltham,  Mass.  Mean-
time he  had  become  deeply  interested  in  certain
theological  questions  which  he  felt  he  could  not
solve  while  engaged  in  pastoral  work,  and  so  re-
signed in  the  spring  of  1843  and  sailed  for  Eu-
rope, where  he  remained  until  October,  1845,  spend-
ing most  of  the  time  at  the  University  of  IJerlin,
and  being  brought  much  in  contact  with  the
German  historian,  Neander.  In  February,  1848,
he  was  called  to  Springfield,  Mass.,  as  the  successor
of  Dr.  William  B.  O.  Peabody.  Here,  while  he
was  greatly  admired  by  part  of  his  congregation,
others  regarded  him  witn  less  favor,  and  in  1851
he  was  compelled  to  resign,  after  preaching  two
sermons  on  a  riotous  assault  that  had  been  made
in  the  town  on  George  Thompson,  the  English
anti-slavery  apostle.  In  January,  1854,  he  was
installed  pastor  of  a  church  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  but
in  the  summer  of  1855  he  was  attacked  by  typhus
fever,  from  the  efifects  of  which  he  never  rallied.
Mr.  Simmons  was  distinguished  by  an  acutely
philosophical  mind,  a  strong  sense  of  right,  and  a
thoughtful  and  reverent  spirit.  "  I  knew  him
well,"  said  his  classmate,  Samuel  Osgo<Kl,  "  loved
him  much,  and  respected  him  even  more."  He
was  retiring  in  his  habits,  and  his  somewhat  unso-
cial nature  was  no  doubt  an  obstacle  in  the  way  of
his  exercising  a  proper  influence  on  his  flock.  He
published  "  Who  was  Jesus  Christ  t "  a  tract  (Boss-
ton,  1839) ;  "  Two  Sermons  on  the  Kind  Treatment
and  on  the  Emancipation  of  Slaves,  preached  at
Mobile,  with  a  Prefatory  Statement  "  (1840) ;  •'  A
Letter  to  the  So-Called  'Boston  Churches ' "  (1846) ;
"  The  Trinity,"  a  lecture  (1849) ;  "  Public  Spirit
and  Mobs,"  two  sermons  delivered  at  Springneld
on  the  Sunday  after  the  Thompson  riot  (1851) ;  and
"  Faith  in  Christ  the  Condition  of  Salvation "
(1854).  Six  of  his  sermons  were  published  in  one
volume  soon  after  his  death  (Boston,  1855).

SIMMONS,  James,  law-reporter,  b.  in  Middle-
bury,  Vt.,  11  June,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at
Middlebury  college  in  1841,  removed  to  Wisconsin,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Wal-
worth county  in  1843.  Besides  filling  several
minor  offices,  he  was  clerk  of  the  county  circuit
court  from  1861  till  1871.  Mr.  Simmons  nas  pub-
lished "  Simmons's  Wisconsin  Digest "  (Albany,
1868);  "Supplements"  to  the  same  (1874-'9);
"Supplement  to  Wait's  Digest,  New York Re-


/^^^


D.  Apploton  i8t  Cq


SIMMONS


SIMMS


088


ports"  (187»-'7  and  1883);  and  "Simmons's  New
Wisconsin  Digest  "  (1886).  He  has  also  published
several  local  histories,  is  the  author  of  various  ar-
ticles in  Wait's  "  Actions  and  Defences  "  (1878-'9).
and  has  e<lited  "  Digest  of  English  Reports "  (2
vols..  Chicapi,  1878-'88).  and  "  Wisconsin  Iteports  "
(vol.  xxix.,  1S73;  vol.  Ixix.,  1888).

SIMMONS,  JameH  Fowler,  senator,  b.  in  Lit-
tle (^oinpton,  Xew{K)rt  co.,  R.  1.,  10  Sept.,  1795 ;  d.
in  Johnson.  R.  I.,  10  July.  1864.  He  received  a
good  English  e«lucation.  and  was  first  a  farmer,
and  subsequently  a  manufacturer.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  house  of  representatives  from  1828
till  1841,  when  he  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
and  served  from  31  May  of  the  latter  year  till  3
March.  1847.  Ten  years  later  he  was  again  elected
to  the  senate  as  a  Whig  for  the  full  terra  from  4
March.  1857.  but  he  resigned  in  1862.

SIMMONS,  Joseph  Edward,  banker,  b,  in
Troy.  N.  Y..  9  Sept..  1841.  He  was  graduated  at
Williams  in  1862,  studied  law.  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1863.  After  practising  in  Troy  until
the  close  of  1866,  he  abandoned  the  profession  and
removed  to  New  York  city,  where  he  has  since  en-

fftged  in  banking.  He  became  a  member  of  the
tock  exchange  in  1872,  and  was  elected  its  presi-
dent in  1884.  He  was  re-elected  in  1885,  but  de-
clined a  renomination  in  1886.  He  was  appointed
a  commissioner  of  education  in  1881,  reappointed
in  1884,  and  again  in  1887.  He  was  unanimously
elected  president  of  the  board  of  education  in  1886,
and  re-elected  in  1887-'8.  In  the  latter  year  he
was  also  made  president  of  the  Fourth  national
bank  of  New  'Vork  city.  Mr.  Simmons  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Nor-
wich. Northfield.  Vt.,  in  1885.

SIMMONS,  WUliani  Hayne,  poet,  b.  in  South
Carolina  about  1785.  He  stu<lied  medicine  in  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, where  he  was  graduated  in  1806.  He  never
practised  his  profession,  but  resided  for  some  time
in  Charleston.  S.  C.  whence  he  removed  to  East
Florida.  While  in  Charleston  he  published,  anony-
mously an  Indian  poem  entitled  "Onea."  He  is
also  the  author  of  "  A  History  of  the  Seminoles."
— His  younger  brother,  James  Wrig'ht,  poet,  b.  in
South  Carolina,  studied  for  a  time  at  Harvard,
travelled  in  Europe,  and  settled  in  one  of  the  west-
em  states.  He  published  *'  Blue  Beard,  a  Poem  "
(Philadelphia,  1821)  and  "The  Greek  Girl"  (Bos-
ton, 1852).  A  series  of  metrical  tales,  "  Wood-
Notes  from  the  West,"  remain  in  manuscrij)!.
Verses  by  both  the  brothers  may  be  found  in
Duyckinck's  "  Cycloj)aBdia  of  American  Literature."
SIMMONS,  IVilliam  Johnson,  educator,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C.  29  June.  1849.  He  is  of  African
descent.  After  studying  in  Madison  and  Roches-
ter universities,  he  was  graduated  at  Howard
university.  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1873,  taught  in
Washington  and  in  Ocala,  Fla..  and  in  1879  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Baptist  church.  In  that  year
he  was  called  to  a  church  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  and
in  1880  he  was  elected  president  of  the  State  uni-
versity. He  became  editor  of  the  "American  Bap-
tist" in  1882,  called  together  and  organized  the
American  Baptist  national  convention  in  1886,
and  was  president  of  the  colored  National  press
convention  in  the  same  year.  He  was  ap[)ointed
district  secretary  of  the  American  Baptist  home
mission  society  for  the  south  in  1887.  Willwr-
force  university  gave  him  the  degree  of  1).  1).  in
1885.  Dr.  Simmons  has  published  "  Men  of  Mark  "
(Cleveland.  Ohio,  1877),  and  a  pamphlet  on  "  In-
dustrial Education  "  (1886),  and  is  writing  a  "  His-
tory of  the  Colored  Baptists  of  Kentucky."


SIMMS,  Jeptha  Root,  author,  h.  in  Canter-
bury, Conn..  31  Dec.  1«()7:  d.  in  Fort  Plain.  N.  Y.,
31  May.  lUtiii.  His  father  was  a  hat-manufacturer.
The  son  was  educate<I  at  an  academy  in  a  neigh-
boring town.  In  1829  he  Itegan  the  n-tail  dry-
goods  business  in  New  York  city,  but,  his  health
failing  after  three  years,  he  removed  to  Schoharie
county,  N.  Y.,  and  ent«red  into  business  there  in
18312,  but  failed  in  1834.  For  a  few  years  after
1842  he  ftlle«l  the  office  of  toll-collector  for  the
New  York  and  Erie  canal  at  Fultonville,  and  for
nine  years  he  wjis  ticket-agent  for  the  New  York
Central  railway  at  Fort  Plain.  His  spare  hours
were  employed  in  writing  historical  and  other
works,  besi(les  which  he  collected  and  lalK'lle<i  a
large  assortment  of  fossils,  many  of  them  rare,  and
sold  them  for  $5,000  to  the  state  of  New  York  for
the  Geological  museum  at  Albany.  He  was  a  cor-
responding member  of  the  Oneida  historical  so-
ciety, and  rendered  it  much  aid  in  collecting  funds
for  the  erection  of  the  monument  on  the  battle-
field of  Oriskany.  He  was  a  rapid  writer  and  a
voluminous  contributor  to  the  jwpular  press
throughout  the  state.  He  published  "History  of
Schoharie  County,  N.  Y."  (Albany,  1845);  "'fhe
American  Spy,  Nathan  Hale"  (1846);  "Trappers
of  New  York  "(1850);  and  "The  Frontiersmen"
(2  vols.,  1882-'3),  He  also  composed  several  fK>ems,
Fourth-of-July  orations,  and  lectures  on  different
topics,  which  he  delivered  at  various  places  in  the
central  counties  of  New  York. — His  nephew.  Jo-
seph, physiognomist,  b.  in  Plainfleld  Centre,  Ot-
sego CO..  N.  Y.,  3  Sept..  183W.  attended  the  acad-
emy at  West  Winfield,  Herkimer  co.,  N.  Y.,  sev-
eral terms.  During  four  more  he  was  employed  in
teaching,  and  in  1854  he  began  to  lecture  on  phy-
siognomy and  physiology.  From  childhood  the
bent  of  his  minu  toward  the  study  of  character  by
external  signs  had  shown  itself  in  scanning  and
measuring  the  features  of  his  companions.  He
was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  New
York  university  in  1871.  after  devoting  himself
somewhat  to  surgery,  but  more  tomaKing  and
promulgating  new  discoveries  in  physiognomy. In

Eursuit  of  his  study  he  afterward  explored  the
f^nited  States,  Canada,  and  part  of  Alexico,  and
continued  his  observations  in  Europe,  Kgypt,  Nu-
bia, Algiers,  Morocco,  Syria.  Arabia,  and  Palestine.
He  has  lectured  with  success  in  this  country  and
abroad.  From  1881  to  1884  he  delivered  scientific
lectures  in  Melbourne,  in  Sydney,  and  in  the  Aus-
tralasian colonies.  In  1884  he  gave  up  lecturing
and  visited  Europe  again,  collecting  new  facts  and
preparing  material  for  works  on  physiognomy  and
physiology.  He  has  published  a  "  Physiognomical
Chart "  for  recording  and  reading  character  (Glas-
gow, 1873) ;  "  Nature's  Revelations  of  Character "
(London,  1874 ;  several  eds.  in  New  York) ;  a
"Book  of  Scientific  Lectures"  on  physiology  and
physiognomy  (London,  1875);  "Health  and  Char-
acter" (San  Francisco,  1879);  and  "Practical  and
Scientific  Physiognomy"  (1884).

SIMMS,  nilliam  drllmore,  author,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  17  April,  1806;  d.  there,  11  June,
1870.  He  was  a  precocious  child,  and  his  passion
for  writing,  whicn  continued  unabated  till  his
death,  manifested  itself  as  early  as  his  seventh  year.
His  whole  academic  education  was  received  in  the
school  of  his  native  city,  where  he  was  for  a  time
a  clerk  in  a  drug  and  chemical  house.  Though
his  first  aspirations  were  for  medicine,  he  studied
law  at  eighteen,  but  never  practised  to  any  extent
In  1827  ne  published  in  Charleston  a  volume  of
"  Lyrical  ana  other  Poems  " — his  first  attempt  in
literature. In  1828  he  became  editor  and  partial


634


SIMMS


SIMON


owner  of  the  "Charleston  City  Gazette,"  which
took  the  Union  side  in  politics  in  nullification
days.  In  1829  he  brought  out  another  volume  of
poems,  "  The  Vision  of  Cortes,"  and  in  1830  "  The
Tricolor."  His  pajx'r  proved  a  bad  investment,
and  through  its  failure,  in  1833,  he  was  left  in
poverty.  Thenceforth  he  determined  to  devote
niinself  to  literature,  and  he  began  that  long  series
of  volumes  which  did  not  end  till  within  three
years  of  his  death.  Accordingly,  he  published  a
poem  entitled  "  Atalantis,  a  Tale  of  the  Sea  "  (New
York,  1832),  the  best  and  longest  of  all  his  poetic
works.  But  Mr.  Simms  is  mainly  known  as  a
writer  of  fiction.  His  pen  was  never  idle.  The
scene  of  his  novels  is  almost  wholly  southern,  and
marked  invariably  with  local  color ;  many  of  them


are  historical,  but  for  the  most  part  they  aim  to
reproduce  the  various  types  of  southern  and  south-
western life.  He  spent  half  of  the  year  on  his
plantation,  "  Woodlands,"  near  Midway,  S.  C,  seen
in  the  illustration,  where  he  had  a  beautiful  home,
amid  the  live-oaks  and  the  long-leaved  pines  peculiar
to  his  native  state.  Here  he  dispensed  a  wide  hos-
pitality, and  wrote  most  of  his  works.  He  was  for
many  years  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and  in
1846  was  defeated  for  lieutenant-governor  by  only
one  vote.  Mr.  Simms  had  immense  fertility,  a
vivid  imagination,  and  a  true  realistic  handling  of
whatever  he  touched.  But  he  was  not  a  finished
scholar,  and,  although  Edgar  A.  Poe  pronounced
him  the  best  novelist  America  had  produced  aft«r
Cooper,  his  style  lacked  finished  elegance  and  accu-
racy. Yet  he  has  done  much  in  preserving  the
early  history  and  traditions  and  local  coloring  of
his  native  state.  "The  Yemassee"  is  considered
his  best  novel.  A  fine  bronze  bust  of  Simms  by
Ward  was  unveiled  at  White  Point  garden,
Charleston,  11  June,  1879,  but  he  rests  in  an  un-
marked grave  in  Magnolia  cemetery  near  the  same
city.  Besides  the  works  already  mentioned,  he
published  "Martin  Faber"  (New  York,  1833);
"  The  Book  of  My  Ladv,  a  Melange  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1833);  "Guy  Rivers"  (2  vols.,  New  York,
1834);  "The  Yemassee"  (2  vols.,  1835);  "The  Par-
tisan "  (2  vols.,  1835);  "  Mellichampe "  (2  vols.,
1836) ;  "  Richard  Hurdis  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1838) ;  "  Palayo  "  (New  York,  1838) ;  "  Carl  Wer-
ner, and  other  Tales  "  (2  vols.,  1838) ;  "  Southern
Passages  and  Pictures,"  poems  (1839);  "Border
Beagles  "  (2  vols.,  1840) ;  "  The  Kinsman  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1841 ;  republished  as  "  The  Scout,"  New
York,  1854);  "Confession,  or  the  Blind  Heart"
(2  vols.,  1842);  "Beauchampe"  (2  vols.,  1842);
"  Helen  Halsev  "  (1845) ;  "  Castle  Dismal  "  (1845) ;
"  Count  Julian"  (2  vols.,  1845) ;  "  Grouped  Thoughts
and  Scattered  Fancies,"  poems  (Richmond,  1845) ;
"The  Wigwam  and  the  Cabin,  or  Tales  of  the
South  "  (two  series,  Charleston,  1845-'6) ;  "  Areytos,
or  Songs  and  Ballads  of  the  South  "  (1846) ;  "  Lays
of  the  Palmetto"  (1848): "Katherine  Walton"


(New  York,  1851);  "The  Golden  Christmas"  (1862);
"Marie  de  Beniiere"  (1853);  "Father  Abbott,  or
the  Home  Tourist"  (1854);  "  Poems"  (2  vols.,  1854);
"  The  Forayers  "  (1855) ;  "  The  Maroon,  and  other
Tales"  (1855);  "Charlemont"  (1856);  "Utah"
(1856);  and  "The  Cassique  of  Kiawah"  (I860).
In  1867  he  edited  "War  Poetry  of  the  South."
He  wrote  a  "  History  of  South  Carolina"  (Charles-
ton, 1840) and  "South  Carolina  in  the  Revolution"
(1854),  and  lives  of  Francis  Marion  (New  York,
1844),  Capt.  John  Smith  (1846),  Chevalier  Bayard
(1848),  and  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene  (1849).  He
wrote  two  dramas,  "  Norman  Maurice  "  and  "  Mi-
chael Bonhura,  or  the  Fall  of  the  Alamo,"  which
was  acted  in  Charleston.  He  also  wrote  a  "  Geogra-
phy of  South  Carolina  "  (1843).  He  edited  "  Seven
Dramas  ascribed  to  Shakespeare,"  with  notes  and
introductions  (1848),  and  contributed  many  reviews
to  periodicals,  two  volumes  of  which  were  after-
ward collected  (New  York,  1845-'6).  A  collected
edition  of  part  of  his  works  has  been  published  (19
vols.,  New  York,  1859).  His  life  has  been  written
by  George  W.  Cable  in  the  "  American  Men  of  Let-
ters" series  (Boston,  1888).

SIMON,  £tienne,  Flemish  explorer,  b.  in  Bru-
ges in  1747;  d.  in  Geneva  in  1809.  He  followed
the  sea  for  several  years,  and  afterward  fixed  his
residence  in  Rio  Janeiro  as  a  merchant.  In  1792
he  was  granted  a  tract  of  land,  and  set  out  for  Eu-
rope in  search  of  colonists,  but  failed  in  the  scheme,
owing  to  the  war  that  then  raged  on  the  continent,
and,  returning  to  Brazil  in  1795,  began  to  traveL
After  spending  nine  years  thus  he  returned  to  Eu-
rope in  1804,  and,  settling  in  Switzerland,  devoted
the  remainder  of  his  life  to  arranging  his  notes.
His  works  include  "  Recit  d'une  ascension  au
Mont  Tapagayo  dans  I'interieur  du  Bresil "  (Gene-
va, 1805) ;  "  Voyage  k  travers  les  provinces  de  SSo
Paulo  et  d'Espiritu  Santo  "  (1805) ;  "  La  domina-
tion Portugaise  au  Bresil  "  (1806) ;  "  Belem  Para
et  Rio  de  Janeiro  "  (1807) ;  and  "  Coup  d'oeil  histo-
rique  sur  les  missions  etablies  par  les  Jesuites  dans
le  Paraguay  "  (1808).

SIMON,  Pedro  Antonio,  Flemish  historian,
b.  in  Cambrai  about  1560 ;  d.  in  Colombia,  South
America,  about  1630.  He  entered  the  Franciscan
order,  and  was  sent,  about  1590,  as  a  missionary  to
New  Granada,  where  he  resided  successively  in  Gua-
cheta,  Bogota,  Serrezuela,  Zipacoa,  and  Meuqueta,
on  Funza  river,  about  fifteen  miles  north  from  the

E resent  city  of  Bogota.  Father  Simon  became  the
istorian  of  theMuiscasorChibcha  Indians,  among
whom  he  lived  for  many  years.  His  most  interest-
ing work  contains  a  summary  history  of  all  the  tribes
that  lived  in  the  ancient  empire  of  Cundinamarca, '
and  describes  their  civilization,  their  arts,  their
monuments,  and  their  manners.  It  contains  also
an  analysis  of  the  Funza  dialect,  which  is  altogether
unknown  to-day,  and  of  which  the  only  monument
left  is  Simon's  history,  and  of  the  Bogota  or  Chibcha
dialect,  which  had  nearly  superseded  the  other  dia-
lects at  the  time  of  the  Spanish  conquest.  Simon's
work  is  the  only  one  that  gives  details  concerning
the  early  history  and  condition  of  the  tribes  living
in  Cundinamarca  before  the  conquest,  as  all  other
works  that  relate  to  that  -country  have  been  lost,
among  them  the  "  Historia  de  la  Nueva  Granada  "
by  the  missionaries  Medrano  and  Aguado,  and  the
part  of  the  "  Eloiios  de  Varones  ilustres  de  Indias  "
of  Castellanos  that  is  devoted  to  Cundinamarca.
The  only  one  left  referring  to  Cundinamarca  is  the
incomplete  relation  of  Lucas  Fernandez  de  Piedra-
hita  (q.  vX  Simon's  work  relating  to  Venezuela  was

fmblished  under  the  title  "  Noticias  historiales  de
as  Conquistas  de  Tierra  flrme"  (Madrid,  1627).


SIMOND


SIMONS


080


The  two  other  parts  reUting  to  Cundinaroarc«  are
rel  in  mniiu^HTipt,  the  eeoond  in  t\u-  library  <>f  the
Royal  hi.storieal  Hocictv,  and  the  third  in  the
National  lihrary  of  Mwlrid.  II«-nri  Teniaux-
Coinpan!i,althouf;h  hv  says  he  puruhaHed  them,  can
oohr  have  obtained  oopiutt,  which  ho  used  for  \m
"  E«ai  sur  I'ancien  C'undinanian-a  "  (PariH,  1842).

SIMOND,  Airred,  South  Amorican  botani.st,  b.
in  the  pMvince  of  Silo  I*aul«>  in  1740;  d.  in  I^oine,
Italy,  in  IHOl.  Hi:i  father,  who  wan  a  Frenchman
by  birth,  serve*!  in  the  Portujrucsc  army,  and  ob-
tained with  his  discharco  a  Innd-^nint  in  the  prov-
ince of  SAo  I'aulo;  and  his  mother  was  an  Indian.
The  son  was  destined  for  the  ehurch,  and  was  alM>ut
to  enter  the  Jesuit  onler  when  it  was  expelled  from
Brazil.  Returning  to  his  father's  farm,  he  began
there  the  study  of  agriculture  and  natural  history,
which  ho  flnisned  at  Paris  under  the  dirt><;tion  of
Buffon,  who  induceil  him  in  1776  to  acrom|>any
Baroti  Malouet  to  Ciuiuna.  Here  ho  was  employed
in  draining  marshes,  and  establishetl  a  m<Hlel  farm
for  the  improvement  of  a^jrioultural  methinls.  Af-
ter Malouet's  withdrawal  in  ITbO,  Simond  remained
in  the  colony  without  government  sup{H)rt,  and  for
several  years  tried  vainly  to  establish  a  settlement
east  of  Esscquilx)  river.  Returning  to  France  at
the  beginning  of  the  revolution,  he  was  instructed
by  the  Constituent  assembly's  committee  on  foreign
affairs  to  write  a  detailed  memoir  concerning  the
disputed  l)order-line  between  the  French  and  Por-
tuguese possessions  in  South  America,  and  in  1795
he  was  sent  to  Guiana  to  draw  a  map  of  the  basin
of  the  Orinoco  river.  Siujond's  works  include
"  Memoire  sur  les  limites  voritables  de  la  Guiane
Fran9aise  "  (Paris,  1791) ;  "  Enumeratio  plantarum
in  Guiana  crescentium"  (2  vols.,  1793) ;  "Conspec-
tus Polygarum  flone  Guiana?  meridionalis  "  (2  vols.,
R<ime,  1797) ;  and  "  Flora  Brasilia  exhibens  charac-
teres  jjenerum  et  sj^K-iorum  plantarum  in  provincia
Sancti  Pauli  crfsociitium  "  (2  vols.,  1800).

SIMONDS,  William,  author,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  30  Oct.,  1822 ;  d.  in  Winchester,  Mass.,  7  Julv,
1859.  After  attending  school  at  Salem  and  spend-
ing some  time  in  learning  the  jewelry  business  at
Lynn,  Mass.,  he  was  a{)pn»ntice<l  to  a  Boston  printer
in  1837.  While  thus  engaged  he  wrote  his  first
book,  *'  The  Pleasant  Way  "  (1841),  which  was  pub-
Iishe<l  by  the  Massachusetts  Sabbath-school  society.
This  was  followed  in  1845  by  "The  Sinner's  Friend^"
which  was  also  well  received.  In  December,  1845,
he  left  the  printing-office  where  he  had  spent  nearly
nine  years,  and  early  in  1846  began  the  publication
of  "  The  BosUin  Satunlay  Rambler,"  of  which,  after
the  first  six  months,  he  iK'cnme  the  sole  editor.  In
November,  1850,  "The  Rambler"  was  merged  in
the  "New  England  Farmer,"  of  which  Simonds  was
general  editor  until  his  death.  In  1848  he  began
the  publicationof  a  monthly  entitled  "  The  Pictorial
National  Library,"  but  was  unable  to  issue  it  longer
than  eighteen  months.  Mr.  Simonds  was  convinced
that  he  ha<l  a  mission  to  perform  in  writing  for  the
young,  and  he  employed  every  means  in  his  jK)wer
to  render  his  tales  natural  and  attractive,  and  to
make  them  accurate  reflections  of  life.  His  chief
work  is  "  The  Airawell  Stories,"  written  under  the
pen-name  of  Walter  Airawell.  These  stories  deal
chiefly  with  New  England  farm-life.  The  first,
"Clinton,"  appeared  in  1853.  He  purposed  to  ex-
tend the  senes  to  twelve  volumes,  but  lived  to
complete  only  six.  The  last  one,  "Jerry,"  was  left
unfinished,  and  to  it  is  added  a  memoir  of  the
author.  Besides  the  books  aireu<ly  mentione<l.  he
published  "Thoughts  for  the  Thoughtless"  (Bos-
ton, 1851);  "The  Boy's  Own  Guide"  (1852);  and
**  The  Boy's  Book  of  Jlorab  and  Manners  "  (1855).


81M0NIN,  Lonls  LaareBt(Be.ino-oang).  French
geologist.  I>.  in  .Marseilleti,  22  Aug.,  1880.  lie
studiMl  at  the  School  of  mincfi  at  haint  Etienne,
was  graduattnl  as  engineer  in  1852,  and  held  after-
ward various  [>ostj«  in  connection  with  mines  in
Italy  ami  France.  He  made  several  royages  to  the
United  .Slates  by  «)rder  of  the  French  government,
visited  CuIm.  the  West  Indies,  Central  America,  the
Isthmus  of  Panama,  and  Mexico,  and  travellnl  ex-
tensively through  California  ami  most  of  the  I'nited
States.  In  1867  he  was  pliu-ed  at  the  head  of  a
French  commission  charge<l  to  study  the  laying  out
of  the  Pacific  railroml  Hn<l  the  pn-liminary  surveys,
and  in  his  re|Mirt  greatly  praise<l  the  work.  In  1876
he  was  made  a  member  of  the  international  junr
for  the  Centennial  exhibition  in  Philwlelphia,  an^
before  returning  to  France  he  made  a  s(tecial  study
of  the  mines  in  Pennsylvania  and  in  the  Reading
valley.  Simonin  is  an  admirer  of  American  insti-
tutions. He  has  l)een  several  tim(*s  a  candidate  for
the  chamber  of  dei)uties,  promising  that  if  he
were  elected  he  would  sup|)ort  free  (lemocratic  in-
stitutions as  they  an-  understf)o<l  on  this  side  of  the
Atlantic,  and  be  has  been  calle<l  the  American
candidate.  Since  1860  he  has  contributed  articles  to
French  magazines  describing  his  travels  and  Ameri-
can scenery.  Since  1877  he  has  been  scientific  critic
of  "  La  France."  He  has  also  greatly  interestetl  him-
self in  the  Panama  canal,  and  his  advocacy  has  con-
tributed to  the  authorization  bv  the  government
of  a  lottery  loan  in  its  Whalf.  flis  works  include
*  Ije  grand  ouest  des  fttats-Unis"  (Paris,  1869);
"L'homme  Americain"  (1870);  "A  travers  les
Etats-Unis"  (1875);  "  Ijc  raonde  Americain,  sou-
venirs de  mes  voyages  aux  fttats-Unis"  (1876);
"  L'or  et  I'argent,"  a  study  of  gold-  and  silver-mines
in  l)oth  Americas  (1877);  and  "  Rosum6  d'une  con-
ference sur  le  ("anal  de  Panama  "  (1H84).

SIMONS,  Michael  Laird,  journalist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7  Sept.,  1843:  d.  there,  17  Nov.,
1880.  He  was  graduate<l  at  the  Central  hi^h-
school  of  his  native  city,  and  entered  journalism
when  Quite  young  in  the  employ  of  the  Philadel-
phia "Inquirer,"  suUHMjuently  engaging  with  the
"  Evening  Telegraph."  and  contributing  to  various
literary  journals.  Mr.  Simons  was  identified  with
the  establishment  of  the  Reformed  Episcopal
church,  served  as  a  delegate  to  its  councils,  and
was  secretary  of  the  syncld  of  Philadelphia  at  the
time  of  his  death.  He  edited  "  St<xlart  s  Review."
condensed  D'Aubigne's  "  History  of  the  Refor-
mation "  (1870),  published  "  Half-Hours  with  the
Best  Preachers"  (1871),  and  continued  I>uyck-
inck's  "  Cyelopa;dia  of  American  Literature,"  add-
ing al)out  one  hundred  new  names,  down  to  1878.
His  last  work,  an  extensive  "  History  of  the  World,"
is  still  unpubli.shc<l.

SIMONS,  Thomas  Tonng.  lawver,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  1  Oct..  1828  ;  <1.  there."  30  April,  1878.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1847,  and  two  years
later  began  to  practise  law  in  his  native  city.  In
1854-'60  he  was  a  ineml>er  of  the  legislature,  and
in  the  latter  year  a  presidential  elector.  He  was
also  a  member  of  the  convention  that  passed  the
onlinance  of  secession  in  I)ecemlx>r,  18<50.  and  in
the  civil  war  ho  serve<l  as  captain  of  the  27th
S4)uth  Carolina  regiment,  and  later  as  judge-a<lvo-
cate.  He  was  sent  to  the  National  Dem«x-ratic
conventions  of  1860,  1868,  and  1872,  and  was  a
memlH»r  of  the  executive  committee  of  his  party
from  the  latter  year  till  1876.  Besides  his  other
lalKirs,  he  was  etiitor  of  the  Charleston  "Courier"
in  18«W>-'7;1.  In  the  tax-payers'  conventions  of
1871  and  1874  he  was  an  active  member,  and  his
later  years  were  identified  with  the  efforts  to  pro-


636


SIMONSON


SIMPSON


cure  local  self-government  and  the  creation  of  a
Union  reform  party  in  South  Carolina.

SIMONSON,  John  Smith,  soldier,  b.  in  Union-
town,  Pa.,  2  June,  179G;  d.  in  New  Albany,  Ind.,
5  Dec,  1881.  His  father,  Adam  Smith  Simonson,
was  a  well-known  physician  of  western  Pennsyl-
vania. When  but  seventeen  years  old  he  enlisted
in  the  New  York  volunteers  and  served  as  sergeant
through  the  campaign  on  the  Niagara  frontier,  re-
ceiving an  honorable  discharge  in  November,  1814.
Three  years  later  he  settled  in  Charlestown,  Ind.
He  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1828-'30,
and  in  1841-6  of  the  lower  house,  serving  as
speaker  during  the  last  year.  In  1846  he  was  ap-
pointed captain  of  U.  S.  mounted  rifles,  and  served
through  the  Mexican  war  under  Gen.  Scott,  en-
gaging in  the  capture  of  Vera  Cruz  and  the  battles
that  followed.  He  was  brevetted  major  in  1847
for  gallant  service  at  Chapultepec,  where  he  com-
manded his  regiment  after  the  fall  of  its  colonel,
and  he  also  took  a  creditable  part  in  the  attack  on
the  Helen  gate.  The  succeeding  years  were  spent
on  duty  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico,  commanding
expeditions  against  the  Indians  and  in  making  ex-
plorations. In  May,  1861,  he  was  promoted  colonel
of  the  3d  cavalry,  and  he  was  retired  in  the  follow-
ing September.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war
he  was  made  superintendent  of  the  volunteer  re-
cruiting service  at  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  and  he  con-
tinued on  active  military  duty  till  1860.  In  1865,
on  the  recommendation  of  Gen.  Grant,  he  was
brevetted  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  long
and  faithful  service.

SIMONTON,  James  William,  journalist,  b.  in
Columbia  county,  N.  Y.,  30  Jan.,  1823  ;  d.  in  Napa,
Cal.,  2  Nov.,  1882.  He  went  as  a  lad  to  New  York
city,  and  was  educated  at  the  public  schools  there.
At  twenty  years  of  age  he  was  engaged  as  local  re-
porter on  the  "  Courier  and  Enquirer."  Within  a
year  or  two  he  was  sent,  with  Henry  J.  Raymond,
to  Washington  as  congressional  correspondent,  and
he  continued  as  such  until  1850,  winning,  by  his
ability  and  conscientiousness,  the  confidence  and
esteem  of  Daniel  Webster,  Henry  Clay,  John  C.
Calhoun,  Thomas  H.  Benton,  and  other  statesmen.
In  the  autumn  of  1851,  when  the  New  York
"  Times  "  was  founded,  he  was  one  of  the  original
proprietors  with  George  Jones,  Henry  J.  Raymond,
and  others,  and  soon  went  to  Washington  again  as  its
correspondent,  as  well  as  the  correspondent  of  New
Orleans,  San  Francisco,  and  Detroit  journals.  His
letters,  entitled  "  The  History  of  Legislation,"  were
really  a  record  of  the  times,  and  drew  wide  atten-
tion. He  became  part  owner  in  1859  of  the  "  Even-
ing Bulletin  "  in  San  Francisco,  where  he  lived  for
years,  and  subsequently  of  the  "  Morning  Call,"  of
the  same  city,  retaining  his  interest  throughout
life.  Having  returned  to  New  York,  he  was  chosen
in  1867  general  agent  of  the  associated  press  there,
and  discharged  the  duties  of  the  office  for  fourteen
years,  when  he  resigned  on  account  of  delicate
health.  He  then  retired  to  his  California  vine-
yard, and  died  there  suddenly  of  heart  disease.

SIMPSON,  Edmund,  theatre-manager,  b.  in
England  in  1784;  d.  in  New  York  city,  31  July,
18^.  He  made  his  theatrical  debut  at  the  Tow-
cester  theatre  in  England  in  May,  1806,  as  Baron
Stein  fort  in  Kotzebue's  "  Stranger."  In  this  country
Simpson  first  appeared  at  the  New  York  Park
theatre  on  22  Oct.,  1809,  as  Harry  Domton  in  "  The
Road  to  Ruin."  In  1828,  when  playing  the  part
of  Faustus  in  the  drama  of  that  name,  one  of  his
legs  was  broken  by  an  accident  to  the  stage-ma-
chinery, and  he  was  crippled  for  life.  His  last
performance  was  Dazzle  in  "  London  Assurance."


As  a  comedian,  Simfkson  was  studious  and  pains-
taking, and  in  his  delineations  intelligent  and  re-
spectable, but  there  was  ever  attached  to  his  repre-
sentations a  hardness  of  manner  that  interfered
with  his  popularity.  In  1810  he  became  stage-
manager,  and  remained  permanently  connected
with  the  one  playhouse  as  actor,  stage-manager,
and  manager  for  thirty-eight  years.  It  was  his
privilege  to  introduce  nearly  all  the  noted  British


players  of  his  day  to  American  audiences.  From
1821  until  1840  Simpson  was  working-manager  to
Stephen  Price,  the  lessee  of  the  theatre,  but  on  the
death  of  Price  he  assumed  the  sole  management.
During  his  career  he  went  through  several  trials  of
adversity,  and  finally  retired,  6  June,  1848,  under
discouragement  and  in  reduced  circumstances.
Under  Simpson's  direction  the  old  Park  theatre,  or
"  The  Theatre,"  as  the  show-bills  named  it,  was
noted  for  its  well-drilled  and  efficient  stock-com-
pany. The  scenery  of  this  noted  resort  was  made
up  of  flats  and  drops  of  the  simplest  construction,
the  properties  were  cheap,  worn,  and  few  in  num-
ber, the  costumes  flimsy  and  tinselled,  and  the
auditorium,  before  the  rising  of  the  curtain,  usu-
ally filled  with  the  stifling  leakage  of  gas.  The
boxes  were  painted  in  white  and  gold,  with  the
first  and  second  tiers  divided  into  a  series  of
screened  lock-boxes.  A  separate  stairway  led  to
the  third  tier  and  the  gallery.  This  third  tier  was
an  assembling-place  for  the  dissolute  of  both  sexes ;
one  half  the  gallery  was  patronized  by  boys,  ser-
vants, and  sailors,  and  the  remainder  was  devoted
to  the  accommodation  of  negroes.  What  is  now
known  as  the  parterre  was  called  the  pit.  It  was
fitted  with  hard  wooden  benches,  and  the  admission
to  it  was  half-price.  Here  the  bachelors,  critics,
and  wits  of  the  day  found  their  places.  Drinking-
bars,  united  with  apple-,  pie-,  and  peanut-stands,
were  connected  with  the  pit  and  the  upper  tier  of
boxes.  As  Mrs.  Trollope  has  truly  pictured,  it  was
not  an  uncommon  thing  to  see  men  rise  on  the
front  rows  of  the  dress-circle  in  their  shirt-sleeves,
and  between  the  acts  turn  their  backs  to  the  audi-
ence, while  their  better-halves  sat  munching  apples
and  peeling  oranges.  Not  seldom  the  entertain-
ments of  an  evening  comprised  a  five-act  tragedy,
a  comedy,  and  an  olio  diversion,  that  terminated  at
twelve  or  one  o'clock.  The  old  Park  theatre,  rep-
resented in  the  illustration,  was  a  wooden,  barn-
like structure,  fronting  about  eighty  feet  on  Park
row,  and  rising  to  the  height  of  sixty  or  seventy
feet,  painted  in  imitation  or  blocks  of  granite.

SIMPSON,  Edward,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New-
York  city,  3  March,  1824;  d.  in  Washington,  D.C.,
2  Dec,  1888.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipiuan,
11  Feb.,  1840,  was  in  the  first  class  at  the  naval  acad-
emy in  1845-'6,  and  was  graduated  in  the  latter
year.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  was  attached  to
the  steamer  "  Vixen,"  in  which  he  participated  in
various  engagements,  including  the  bombardment


S1MI*S0X


SIMI*SON


637


and  capture  of  Vera  C'nir.  Me  served  on  the  coast
survey.  1848-'50,  in  the  brijj  "Washington"  and
8t«an)ers  "Vixen  "and  "  liejjart'."  In  1850-'8  he
cruised  in  the  frigate  "  Congress."  on  the  Brazil
station,  an  acting  nin(<ter.  and  in  18i53-'4  he  was  at-
taohtnl  to  the  naval  »wa<l»'my  a-s  assistant  instructor
in  naval  gunnery  and  infantrj'  tactics.  lie  was
promoted  to  master,  10  .July,  IH/)4.  and  t<t  lieuten-
ant. 18  April,  18.55,  and  M'rved  in  the  shnip  "  Ports-
mouth" in  the  East  India  s«iua«lr<in,  185(1- '8,  par-
ticipating in  the  capture  of  tne  liarrier  fort«  near
Canton,  China.  He  went  to  the  naval  academy
ujHjn  his  return,  and  was  in  charge  of  the  depart-
ment of  naval  gunnery  in  18.58-'02,  and  comman-
dant of  midshipmen  in  lHt2-'3.  He  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant-commamler,  1(5  July,  1802,  and
in  the  monitor  "  Pa-ssaic,"  off  Charleston,  in  1863-'4,
participatinl  in  various  engagements.  He  was  com-
missioned commander,  3  March,  18(W,  and  8er\'ed
as  fleet-captain  of  the  consolidated  (Julf  sciuatl-
ron,  being  present  at  the  fall  of  Mobile  ana  re-
ceiving the  surrender  of  the  Conftnlerate  fleet  on
Tombigbee  river.  He  was  commissioned  captain,
16  Aug.,  1870,  and  went  <»n  a  s|)ecial  naval  nussion
to  Euro|>e  in  1870-'2.  He  was  in  charge  of  the
torpedo  station  at  Newport.  H.  I.,  in  1873-'5,  was
commandant  of  the  New  Ijondon  naval  station  in
1878-'80,  and  of  the  Philadelphia  Ijeague  islan«l
navv-yard  in  1880-'4.  He  was  pn>mote<l  to  com-
modore. 26  April,  1878,  and  to  rear-admiral.  9  F'eb.,
1884,  and  place<l  on  the  retired  list,  3  March,  188«.

Admiral  Simp-
son was  presi-
dent of  the  U.S.
naval  institute
in  188e-'8,  and
was  the  senior
member  of  the
Naval  academy
gratluates  asso-
ciation. He  had
devoted  himself
to  the  scientific
development  of
the  navy,  espe-
cially in  the  sci-
ence of  gunnery
and  torpedoes,
liesides  articles
in  magazines  on
professional  sub-
jects, he  published  "  Onlnance  and  Naval  Gun-
nery," which  was  the  text-book  at  the  naval  acad-
emy until  1888  (New  York,  1862):  "The  Naval
Mission  to  Europe"  (2  vols.,  Washington,  187:^);
and  "  Report  of  the  Gun-F'oundry  Board  "  (1885).
Several  of  his  articles  an>  republished  in  "  Modem
Ships  of  War"  (New  York.  IHS7).

SIMPSON,  Sir  tieorge,  British  traveller,  b.  in
Loch  Broom,  Ross-shins  Scotland,  in  17i>6;  d.  in
Lachine.  near  Montreal,  7  Sept.,  1860.  From  1809
till  1820  he  was  in  the  employ  of  a  Jjondon  firm
engaged  in  the  West  India  trade,  of  which  his  un-
cle was  a  memlwr.  His  energy  and  active  business
habits  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Earl  of  Sel-
kirk, then  at  the  heail  of  the  Hudson  bay  com-
pany, and  Andrew  Colville.  the  earl's  brother-in-
law,  a  large  stwk  holder,  and  in  Februarv,  1820,  he
was  selected  to  superintend  the  affairs  ut  the  com-
pany in  America.  In  May  he  left  Montreal  for  the
northwest,  and  in  1821  he  8uccee<led  in  terminat-
ing the  long  rivalrj'  that  had  existe<l  between  the
Huds<m  Iwiy  comjwny  and  the  Northwest  com-
{>any  bv  their  union.  He  was  soon  aftcrwanl  ap-
pointed governor  of  the  northern  department,  and


^<<y^^^>«t^*


^<?-3-t-^


irabsequently  became  govenior-in-chief  of  Rupert's
land,  and  g«>neral  superintendent  of  all  the  Hud-
son l>ay  comiwny's  affairs  in  North  America.  In
that  capacity  he  j>lanne<l  the  successful  ex{>edition
under  his  cousm,
Thomas  Sirii|>son
(18«(V-'9).an»lgreaU
iv  aided  other  trav-
ellers in  their  explo-
rations. In  184l-'2
he  made  the  over-
land journey  round
the  world,  going
from  Ijondon  to
Montreal,  thence  to
Vancouver  and  Sit-
ka, thenc-e  by  New
Archangel  and  the
Aleutian  islands  to
Ochotsk,across  Rus-
sian Asia  to  Mos-
cow and  St.  Peters-
burg, and  home  by
the  Baltic.  He
claimed  to  be  the
first  traveller  to  make  the  overland  journey.  For
many  years  preceding  his  death  he  resided  at  Ija-
chine,  entertained  the  Prince  of  Wales  during  his
visit  in  18(}0,  and  was  a  director  of  the  Bank  of
British  North  America  and  of  the  Bank  of  Montreal.
In  1841  he  was  knighted  for  his  services  in  connec-
tion with  the  cause  of  arctic  exnloration.  He  nub-
lishetl  "  Narrative  of  an  Overlanu  Journey  rountl  the
World  during  the  Years  184l-"2"(2  vols.,  Ix)ndon,
1847). — His  cousin,  Thoina»,  British  explorer,  b.  in
Dingwall,  Ross-shire,  Scotland,  2  July.  1808;  d.
near  Turtle  river,  British  America,  14  June,  1840,
was  graduated  in  1828  at  the  University  of  Aber-
deen, where  he  won  the  Huttonian  prize.  In  1829
he  entered  the  service  of  the  lIu(lson  Bay  com-
pany as  secretary  to  his  cousin.  Gov.  Simpson,  and
soon  afterwanl  accomjianied  the  latter  on  a  tour
through  the  southeastern  part  of  the  Hudson  bay
territory.  In  1886  an  expedition  was  arranged  by
Gov.  Sim[)son  to  connect  the  discoveries  of  Sir
John  Ross  and  Sir  George  Back,  and  it  was  placed
under  the  command  of  Thomas  Simpson.  After
passing  the  winter  at  Fort  Chif)ewyan.  on  Great
Slave  Take,  Simjtson  and  his  party  reachinl  Mac-
kenzie river  in  July,  18Ji7,  and  a  few  days  afterward
arrived  at  Foggy  Island  bay,  the  farthest  j>oint  that
had  been  attained  by  Sir  John  FrankUn.  They
then  traced  the  arctic  coast  of  North  America
from  the  mouth  of  Mackenzie  river  to  Point  Bar-
row, and  from  the  mouth  of  Coppermine  river  to
the  Gulf  of  Bothnia.  The  expedition  was  cxrcupied
in  this  service  alK)Ut  three  years,  and,  as  it  was
claimed  at  the  time,  resulted  in  solving  the  prob-
lem of  the  existence  of  a  passage  bv  water  l)etween
the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  oc«>ans.  While  returning
with  the  valuable  n'sults  of  his  discoveries,  Simp-
son was  either  killed  or  met  his  death  by  suicicie,
as  was  asserte<l  by  some  of  the  members  of  his
party.  The  weight  of  evidence  is  in  favor  of  the
former  assumption.  See  "The  Life  and  Travels
of  Thomas  Simpson,  the  Arctic  Discoverer,"  by
his  bnHher,  Alexander  Simnson  (London,  1845). —
Thomas's  brother,  Alexanaer,  author,  b.  in  Ross-
shire  in  1811.  was  educate<l  at  the  University  of
Aberdeen.  He  spent  several  years  in  the  service  of
the  Hudson  bay  com  i>any.  and  was  afterwanl  British
consul  at  the  Sandwich  islands.  He  published
"The  Sandwich  Islands"  (I^trndon,  1843):  "Life
and  Travels  of  Thomas  Sim|>son.  the  An-tic  Dis-
coverer" (1845);  and  "Oregon  Territor)*  Consid-


638


SIMPSON


SIMPSON


ered '*  (1846). — Another  brother.  .Emilins,  a  lieu-
tenant in  the  royal  navy,  who  died  in  1831  on  the
Pacific  coast  of  British  North  America,  was  also
engaged  in  the  worlc  of  exploration,  and  was  super-
intendent of  the  Hudson  hav  company's  marine
department  on  the  I*acifio  from  1826  till  1831.

SIMPSON,  George  Semmes,  pioneer,  b.  in  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  7  May,  1818;  d.  in  Trinidad.  C^ol..  4
Sept.,  1885.  He  received  a  college  education  and
studied  law,  but  on  the  completion  of  his  studies
set  out  for  the  far  west.  After  various  experiences
in  Wyoming,  Colorado,  and  New  Mexico,  he  built
the  old  fort  in  1842  where  the  city  of  Pueblo,  Col.,
now  stands.  In  November  of  that  year  he  married
a  Spanish  beauty,  Juana  Suaso,  travelling  with  her
on  norseback  through  a  wild  country  infeste<l  by
hostile  Indians  to  Taos,  N.  M.,  where  the  services
of  a  priest  were  secured.  Their  daughter.  Isabel,
now  Mrs.  Jacob  Beard,  of  Trinidad,  was  the  first
white  child  that  was  born  in  the  Rocky  mountain
region  of  Colorado.  Indians  came  in  large  num-
bers from  the  plains  and  mountains  to  see  the
white  child.  They  brought  her  presents  and  held
a  great  war-dance  in  her  honor.  Subsemiently
Mr.  Simpson  lived  in  various  parts  of  New  Mexico
until  1849,  when  he  went  to  California,  but  he  re-
turned to  Colorado  by  way  of  the  isthmus  in  1852.
In  1866  he  settled  in  Trinidad,  Col.,  and  there
spent  the  last  years  of  his  life.  He  contributed
both  prose  and  verse  to  magazines  and  journals,
and  the  first  information  that  gold  was  found  in
the  sands  of  Cherry  creek,  Col.,  was  sent  to  news-
papers in  the  east  by  him.  He  left  a  compilation
of  his  contributions,  reviewing  the  events  of  his
life,  with  the  request  that  they  be  published.  He
was  buried  in  a  tomb  cut  out  of  the  solid  rock  on
the  summit  of  a  mountain  known  as  Simpson's
Nest,  where  he  had  once  found  shelter  from  the
Indians. A  monument  marks  the  spot.

SIMPSON,  Henry,  author,  b.  in  1790;  d.  in
Philadelphia.  Pa.,  25  March,  1868.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  of  Pennsylvania,  an  ap-
praiser of  the  port  of  Philadelphia,  and  at  one  time
an  alderman  of  the  city.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Historical  society  of  Pennsylvania  and  published
"  The  Lives  of  Eminent  Philadelphians  "  (Phila-
delphia. 1859).

SIMPSON,  James  Hervey,  soldier,  b.  in  New
Jersey,  9  March,  1813;  d.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  2
March,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1832,  and  assigned  to  the  artillery.
During  the  f^lorida  war  he  was  aide  to  Gen.  Abra-
ham Eustis.  He  was  made  1st  lieutenant  in  the
corps  of  topographical  engineers  on  7  July,  1838.
engaged  in  surveying  the  northern  lakes  and  the
western  plains,  was  promoted  captain  on  3  March,
1853,  served  as  chief  topographical  engineer  with
the  array  in  Utah,  and  in  1859  explored  a  new  route
from  Salt  Lake  City  to  the  Pacific  coast,  the  reports
of  which  he  was  busy  in  preparing  till  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war.  He  served  as  chief  topo-
graphical engineer  of  the  Department  of  the  Shen-
andoah, was  promoted  major  on  6  Aug.,  1861,  was
made  colonel  of  the  4th  New  Jersey  volunteers  on
12  Aug.,  1881,  and  took  part  in  the  peninsular  cam-
paign, being  engaged  at  West  Point  and  at  Gaines's
Mills,  where  he  was  taken  prisoner.  After  his  ex-
change in  August,  1862,  he  resigned  his  volunteer
commission  in  order  to  act  as  chief  topographical
engineer,  and  afterward  as  chief  engineer  of  the
Department  of  the  Ohio,  where  he  was  employed
in  making  and  repairing  railroads  and  erecting
temporary  fortifications.  He  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  engineers  on  1  June,  1863,  had
general  charge  of  fortifications  in  Kentucky  from


that  time  till  the  close  of  the  war,  was  brevetted
colonel  and  brigadier-general  in  March,  1865,  and
was  chief  engineer  of  the  interior  department,  hav-
ing charge  of  the  inspection  of  the  Union  Pacific
railroad,  till  1867.  He  afterward  superintended
defensive  works  at  Key  West,  Mobile,  and  other
places,  surveys  of  rivers  and  harbors,  the  improve-
ment of  navigation  in  the  Mississippi  and  other
western  rivers,  and  the  construction  of  bridges  at
Little  Rock,  Ark.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  Clinton,  Iowa,
and  other  places.  Gen.  Simpson  was  the  author
of  "  Shortest  Route  to  California  across  the  Great
Basin  of  Utah  "  (Phila<lelphia,  1869),  and  "  Essay
on  Coronado's  March  in  Search  of  the  Seven  Cities
of  Cibola  "(1869).

SIMPSON,  John,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
Rothes,  Scotland,  in  May,  1812 ;  d.  in  Bowman-
ville,  Ont.,  21  March,  1885.  He  came  in  childhood
with  his  parents  to  Upper  Canada,  where  they  .set-
tled at  Perth.  He  entered  mercantile  life  in  1825
as  a  clerk  at  Darlington,  rose  to  be  his  employer's
partner,  and  was  for  many  years  engaged  m  mill-
ing and  as  a  general  merchant.  In  1848  he  opened
a  branch  of  the  Bank  of  Montreal  at  Bowmanville,
and  later  he  established  one  at  Whitby.  He  was
one  of  the  most  active  of  the  founders  of  the  On-
tario bank  in  1857,  and  was  its  president  until  a
few  years  before  his  death.  In  1856  Mr.  Simpson
was  elected  to  the  legislative  council  of  Canada  for
Queen's  division,  and  he  represented  it  in  that
body  till  1867,  when  he  became  a  member  of  the
Dominion  senate. He  was  a  Liberal  in  politics.

SIMPSON,  Josiah,  surgeon,  b.  in  New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.,  27  Feb.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  3
March.  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1833,  and  in  medicine  at  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1836.  The  following  year,  being  made
assistant  surgeon,  U.  S.  army,  he  served  through
the  Florida  war,  receiving  honorable  mention  by
Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  for  his  services  at  the  battle
of  Okeechobee.  He  was  also  commended  by  Gen.
Winfield  Scott  and  Gen.  William  J.  Worth,  under
whom  he  served  in  the  Mexican  war  at  Vera  Cruz,
Cerro  Gordo,  Churubusco,  and  Chapultepec.  In
1848-'55  he  was  attending  surgeon  with  headquar-
ters at  New  York,  acting  also  as  post-surgeon  at
Bedlow's  island.  He  was  then  promoted  surgeon
and  was  medical  director  of  the  Department  of  the
Pacific  till  1858,  of  the  middle  department  in
1862-'6,  and  of  the  Department  of  the  Tennessee
till  1867,  when  he  was  transferred  to  Baltimore.

SIMPSON,  Marcus  de  Lafayette,  soldier,  b.
in  Esperance,  Schoharie  co.,  N.  Y..  28  Aug.,  1824
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1846,  and,  serving  the  same  year  in  the  war  with
Mexico,  was  brevetted  1st  lieutenant  in  1847  for
gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  in  the  battles  of
Contreras  and  Churubusco,  and  captain  for  the
battle  of  Chapultepec.  From  1848  till  1861  he
was  quartermaster  at  various  posts,  and  assistant
in  the  office  of  the  eoraraissary-general,  acting  as
chief  commissary  of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific
in  1859-'61.  During  the  civil  war  he  served  in  the
commissary-general's  office,  and  he  was  brevetted
colonel,  brigjidier-general,  and  major-general  on  13
March,  1865.  In  1867-'73  he  was  chief  commis-
sary of  subsistence  of  the  Division  of  the  Pacific,
till  1879  of  that  of  the  Atlantic,  and  since  1879
he  has  held  the  same  office  in  the  Division  of  the
Missouri,  at  Chicago.

SIMPSON,  Matthew,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Ca-
diz, Ohio,  20  June,  1811;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
18  June,  1884.  He  received  the  best  education
that  the  town  afforded,  and  his  father  dying  when
the  boy  was  two  years  old,  he  was  instructed  and


SIMPSON


81MPS0X


080


.y^^ifi^


^yyyL^^<Urn^


eneo«imp«'«l  by  his  uncle.  Matthew  Simpson,  after
wh«iin  \w  wiia  nHUUHl.  Tlio  Uttrr  whh  h  thomugh
jjfholHr,  p'lu'rally  infomii'il,  wiw  in  the  .<«tHte  aen-
•te  ten  yearsj,  and  for  suveu  yeurs  a  ju«l)je  of  the

oountv  ciuirt.  He
waa  faniiliar  with
Greek  nn<l  llebn*w,
and  c'otifcrrcil  u|K>n
his  nephew  nmn  v  twl-
vantH|;(*8  that  boys
usually  did  not  have
at  that  earlv  day  in
the  west.  •  \\'hen  he
was  nttout  sixteen
years  of  age  Mat-
thew left  home  and
became  a  student
in  Madison  college.
Pa.,  which  has  since
been  incor|)orated
with  Allecrhanv  col-
lege at  AleaJville.
II  is  pn>gres8  was
rapid  and  he  became
a  tutor  l)efore  he  was  nineteen  years  old.  He  soon
began  the  study  of  me<licine,  and  in  181^8  entered
upon  its  practice,  but  was  drawn  to  the  ministry  and
ent^reti  the  Pittsburg  confen-nce  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church  on  trial  in  1834.  He  was  made
third  preacher  of  St.  Clairsville  circuit  in  Ohio,
Hero  his  success  was  marked,  and  the  following
year  he  was  riMnoved  to  Pittsburg.  In  IH^H  he  was
transferred  to  WilliamsjK)rt,  and  the  same  year
electetl  vice-president  and  professor  of  natural  sci-
ence in  Alleghany  college.  He  was  chosen  presi-
dent of  Indiana  Asbury  (now  De  Pauw)  university,
Greencastle,  Ind.,  in  1839.  This  jK)st  he  filled  with
great  popularity  for  nine  years.  His  elofpience
mwle  him  in  great  demand  in  the  pulpit  and  on
the  platform.  His  |>ersonal  qualities  gave  him  an
extraordinary  influence  over  students,  and  made
him  efflcient  in  raising  money  for  the  endowment
of  the  college.  In  1844  he  was  elected  to  the  gen-
eral conference,  and  in  1848  he  was  re-elected.  He
ap[)eared  in  1852  in  the  conference  as  the  leader  of
his  delegation,  and  at  this  conference  he  was  made
bishop.  In  1857  he  was  sent  abroad  as  a  delegate
to  the  English  and  Irish  conference  of  the  Wes-
leyan  connection,  and  was  also  a  delegate  to  the
World's  evangelical  alliance  which  met  in  liorlin.
His  preaching  and  atldresses  upon  this  tour  at-
tract»'d  great  attention,  particularly  his  sermon
before  the  alliance,  which  extended  bis  fame  as  a
pulpit  orator  throughout  the  world.  After  its  ad-
journment he  travelled  thrt)ugh  Turkey,  Palestine,
Ejfypt,  and  Greece.  In  1859  he  remove<I  fn>m
Pittsburg  t<i  Evanston,  111.,  and  became  nominally
president  of  Garrett  biblical  institute.  Subse-
quently ho  removed  to  Philadelphia.  His  powers
as  an  orator  were  displayed  during  the  civil  war  in
a  manner  that  commanded  the  a<lmiration  and
gratitude  of  the  people.  President  Lincoln  re-
gartl<Kl  him  as  the  greatest  orator  he  ever  heard,
and  at  his  funeral  in  Springfield  Bishop  Simpwn
officiated.  He  made  many  addresses  in  behalf  of
the  Christian  coiumission,  and  deliveriHl  a  series  of
lectures  that  hml  much  to  do  with  raising  the  spirit
of  the  people.  His  official  duties  t<M>k  him  abroad
in  1870  and  in  1875.  In  1874  he  visite<l  .Mexico.
At  the  tk-umenical  council  of  Meth(xlists  in  Ixjn-
don  he  was  selected  by  the  representatives  of  all
branches  to  deliver  the  opening  sermon.  After
the  news  of  the  death  of  President  Garfield  he  de-
livered an  atldress  at  Exeter  hall.  He  was  selected
by  the  faculty  of  Yale  to  deliver  a  series  of  atl-


dresses  before  the  students  of  the  theological  de-
tmrtment,  which  were  publishe^l  as  "  I>ectures  on
Pn*aching"  (New  York.  1879).  In  later  years  hit
appearance  was  |uitrian-hal.  His  el(H|uenoe  was
simple  and  natural,  butt  increasing  in  |M>wer  fMtn
the  Wginning  to  the  cl«»s«'.  It  was  {HH-uliar  to him-
S4>lf  and  equally  attractive  to  the  learne<l  and  the
ignorant.  When  he  was  at  hU  U-st  few  ciiuld  re-
sist his  |>athetic  apfteals.  TlM>ugh  his  cKxpiencc  is
the  principal  element  of  his  fame,  he  was  a  man  of
unusual  soundness  of  judgment,  a  |>arliamentarian
of  remarkable  accuracy  and  promptitude,  and  one
of  the  l»est  presi<ling  officers  and  safest  of  cfuinsel-
lors.  He  was  present  in  the  general  conference  in
Philadelphia  in  1884.  Though  broken  in  health
so  JUS  not  to  1)0  able  to  sit  through  the  sessions,  his
mind  was  clear  and  his  farewell  address  made  a
profound  impri'ssion.  Hishop  .Sum»s<^)n  published
"  Hundnnl  Years  of  Meth(xlisin"  (New  York.  1878),
and  "  ('yclo|)aHlia  of  Methodism"  (Philadelphia,
1878 ;  5th  ed.,  revised,  1882).  After  his  death  a  vol-
nine  of  his  "Sermons"  was  eiliteil  by  Rev.  George
R.  Oooks,  I).  I).  (1885).  A  window  in  his  memory  is
to  be  placed  by  American  a<lmirers  in  City  Road
chapel.  Ijon<lon,  where  .John  Wesley  preiuhe<l.

SIMPSON,  Michael,  soldier,  b.  in  Paxtang,
Lancaster  eo.,  Pa.,  19  May,  1740;  d.  in  York  county.
Pa.,  1  June,  1813.  He  re<*eived  a  good  e<lucation,
and  was  a  farmer.  After  the  defeat  of  Bnwldock  he
was  commissioned  an  ensign  in  the  provincial  ser-
vice, and  was  in  the  expeditions  of  Forljcs  and
Bouquet  to  the  Ohio.  At  the  l)eginning  of  the
Revolution  he  was  ap|X)inted  lieutenant  in  the  1st
Pennsylvania  l)attalion,  and  was  attache<l  to  the
Quebec  expedition  under  Arnold in  1775. He  was

Kromoted  captain,  commandeil  a  com|*any  at  the
attle  of  Ijong  Island,  and  also  participate*!  in  the
battles  of  Trenton.  Princeton,  Brandy  wine.  German-
town,  and  White  Plains.  He  was  retiretl  from  ser-
vice on  the  rearrangement  of  the  Pennsylvania  line
in  January.  1781.  After  the  war  he  retired  to  a  farm
on  Sus(iuehanna  river,  where  he  ownetl  the  fern'
on  the  \  ork  county  side  of  the  river  that  was  gen-
erally known  as  Simpson's  ferry.  He  was  appoint-
ed briga<lier-general  of  Pennsylvania  troops  under
orders  for  the  establishment  of  a  provisional  army.
He  was  a  warm  friend  of  Washington,  who  tarri«Ki
at  his  residence  over  night  while  returning  from
the  western  exjXKlition  in  1794.

SIMPSON,  Stephen,  b.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,
24  July.  1789 ;  d.  there.  17  Aug..  1854.  His  father,
George  Simpson  (1759-1822),  was  an  assistant  com-
missary-general in  the  Revolution,  one  of  the  chief
officers  of  the  Bank  of  North  America,  the  first
bank  in  the  Union,  subsofiuently  cashier  of  the
Bank  of  the  United  States  from  its  establishment
in  1791  till  its  close  in  1811,  and  then  cashier  of  the
Girard  bank.  These  various  jKJsts  he  held  during
forty  years.  Through  his  patriotism  and  close  con-
nection with  the  finances  of  the  country  he  wa^i  of
great  service  to  the  government  in  the  war  of  1812
by  obtaining  from  moneyetl  men  Kmns  to  carrv  on
the  contest  The  son  was  a  note-<'lerk  in  the  tiank
of  the  United  States,  but  resigne<l  and  soon  after-
ward attacked  the  bank,  its  |H)licy  and  transac-
tions, in  a  series  of  able  but  vindictive  articles,
signed  "  Brutus."  He  then  volunteere<l  in  the  army,
and  with  his  V>rother  George,  an  officer,  fought  at
the  liattle  of  New  Orleans  in  the  only  company  in
which  any  men  were  kille<l.  On  his  retuni  he  be-
came editor  and  pn)prietor  of  "  The  Portiwi,"  and
in  1822,  with  John  Conrad,  established  "  The  Co-
lumbian Observer."  a  Democratic  pajx'r  in  the  inter-
ests of  Andrew  Jackson,  also  resuming  the  letters
of  "  Brutus,"  whose  authorship  was  thus  acknowi-


540


SIMS


SIMS


edced.  He  contributed  to  periodicals  and  to  the
"  Philadelphia  Book,"  and  wrote  a  *'  Life  of  Stephen
Girard  "  (Philadelphia,  1H:J2).

SIMS,  Alexander  Uroiiig'oole,  congressman,
b.  in  Brunswick  county,  Va.,  11  June,  1803;  d.  in
Kingstree,  S.  C,  11  Nov.,  1848.  He  was  educated
at  the  University  of  North  Carolina,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Union  in  1833,  studied  law,  and  after  prac-
tising in  his  native  county,  removed  to  Darlington,
S.  C,  where  he  taught  for  five  years,  and  afterward
practised  his  profession  with  success.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1840- '4,  and  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  state-rights  Democrat,
serving  from  1  Dec,  1845,  till  his  death.  He  pub-
lished a  controversial  paper  on  slavery  and  a  novel
entitled  "  Bevil  Faulcon "  (1842).— "His  brother,
Edward  Droiiigoole,  educator,  b.  in  Brunswick
county,  Va.,  24  March,  1805;  d.  in  Tuscaloosa,
Ala.,  12  April,  1845,  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  N^orth  Carolina  in  1824,  became  prin-
cipal of  an  academy  at  La  Grange,  Ala.,  was
afterward  professor  of  mathematics  in  La  Grange
college,  entered  the  Tennessee  conference  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1831.  and,  after
serving  for  two  years  as  an  itinerant  preacher,
became  professor  of  ancient  languages  at  Ran-
dolph Macon  college.  He  went  to  Europe  in
1836,  studied  Latin,  Greek,  Hebrew,  Arabic  and
Syriac  for  two  years  at  the  University  of  Halle,
spent  a  year  in  travel,  and  on  his  return  to  the
United  States  assumed  the  chair  of  English  litera-
ture at  Randolph  Macon.  From  1842  till  his
death  he  taught  the  same  subject  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Alabama.  He  was  the  first  to  teach  Anglo-
Saxon  in  connection  with  English  literature  in
the  south,  and  was  preparing  grammars  of  P^nglish
and  Anglo-Saxon  at  the  time  of  his  death.

SIMS,  Charles  N.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Union  coun-
ty, Ind.,  18  May,  1835.  He  entered  the  Methodist
ministry  in  1857  and  was  graduated  at  Indiana
Asbury  (now  De  Pauw)  university  in  1859.  In
1860  he  became  president  of  Valparaiso  college,
Ind.,  and  in  1862  was  appointed  to  a  pastoral
charge  in  Richmond,  Ind. He  was  subsequently

fastor  at  Wabash,  Evansville,  and  Indianapolis,
nd.,  Baltimore,  Md.,  Newark,  N.  J.,  and  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.  Since  17  Nov.,  1880,  he  has  been  chan-
cellor of  Syracuse  university.  In  1882  and  1883  he
was  appointed  commissioner  to  the  Onondaga  In-
dian nation.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  general
conference  of  his  church  in  1884  and  1888.  The
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  De  Pauw
university  in  1870,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1882.  Dr.
Sims  has  done  much  literary  work  for  periodicals,
and  is  the  author  of  a  "  Life  of  Thomas  M.  Eddy  "
(New  York,  1879).

SIMS,  Henry  Angrnstns,  architect,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  22  Dec,  1832  ;  d.  there,  10  July,  1875.
He  was  educated  at  the  Philadelphia  high-school,
studied  civil  engineering,  and  followed  that  pro-
fession in  Canada,  Georgia,  and  Minnesota.  Sub-
sequently he  studied  architecture,  and  practised
that  art  in  Canada  from  1860  till  1866,  and  after-
ward in  Philadelphia  till  his  death.  He  was  long
the  secretary  for  foreign  correspondence  of  the
American  institute  of  architects.  He  designed
many  citv  and  country  residences  and,  among
other  public  buildings,  the  Columbia  avenue  and
2d  Presbyterian  churches  in  Philadelphia,  the
chapel  at  Mercersburg,  Pa.,  the  court-house  at
Hagerstown, Md.,  and  the  almshouse  of  Mont-

f:omery  county.  Pa. — His  brother,  Clifford  Stan-
ey,  author,  b.  in  Dauphin  county.  Pa.,  17  Feb.,
1839,  was  educated  at  tne  academy  of  the  Protest-
ant Episcopal  cbur(?h  in  Philadelphia,  studied  law,


and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1860,  but  never
practised.  He  served  as  acting  assistant  paymas-
ter in  the  U.  S.  navy  in  1863,  and  was  chosen  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  4th  Arkansas  infantry  in
1864,  but  was  taken  prisoner  before  he  could  be
nmstered  in.  He  was  judge-advocate-general  of
Arkansas  in  1864-'9,  a  delegate  to  the  Arkansas
constitutional  convention  in  1867-'8,  a  commission-
er to  digest  the  statutes  of  Arkansas  in  1868,  and  a
representative  in  the  legislature  in  1868-'9.  For
the  next  nine  years  he  was  U.  S.  consul  for  the  dis-
trict of  Prescott,  Canada.  Mr.  Sims  has  published
"The  Origin  and  Signification  of  Scottish  Sur-
names, with  a  Vocabulary  of  Christian  Names"
(Albany,  1862);  "The  Institution  of  the  Society  of
the  Cincinnati  in  the  State  of  New  Jersev  "  (1866);
and  an  edition  of  William  Noye's  "  Maxims  of  the
Laws  of  England,"  with  a  memoir  of  the  author
(1870). — Another  brother,  James  Peacock,  archi-
tect, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  15  Nov.,  1849;  d.
there,  20  May,  1882,  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  in  1868,  and  studied  architec-
ture with  his  brother  Henry.  He  designed,  be-
sides many  private  residences,  the  building  of  the
Royal  insurance  company,  Christ  church  and  Holy
Trinity  memorial  chapels,  Philadelphia,  and  Christ
church  in  Germantown.

SIMS,  James  Marion,  surgeon,  b.  in  Lancaster
county,  S.  C,  25  Jan.,  1813 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
13  Nov.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  South  Caro-
lina college  in  1832,  began  the  study  of  medicine
with  a  physician  of  his  neighborhood,  entered
Charleston  medical
school  when  it  was
opened  in  Novem-
ber, 1833,  and  com-
Jleted  his  course  at
eflferson  medical
college,  Philadel-
phia, in  1835.  He
began  practice  in
Lancaster,  where
his  parents  resid-
ed, but  became  dis-
couraged at  the
loss  01  his  first  pa-
tients, and  removed
to  Mount  Meigs.
Montgomery  co.,
Ala.,  and,  after  his
marriage  in  Decem-
ber, 1836,  to  Macon
county.  He  was  suc-
cessful there, but

severe  attacks  of  malarial  fever  impelled  him  to
change  his  residence.  Near  the  close  of  1840  he
settled  in  Montgomery,  where  in  a  short  time  he
gained  a  good  reputation  as  a  surgeon.  He  was
the  first  practitioner  in  the  south  to  operate  for
strabismus  or  to  treat  club-foot  successfully.  In
1845  he  published  a  paper  on  the  cause  and  the
proper  mode  of  treatment  of  trismus  nascentium,
in  which  he  attributed  the  disease  to  mechani-
cal pressure  on  the  base  of  the  brain,  and  affirmed
that  it  could  be  prevented  by  not  placing  new-
born infants  in  a  constrained  posture,  and  often
cured  by  simply  laying  them  on  their  side.  He
explained  his  hypothesis  in  the  "  American  Journal
of  the  Medical'  Sciences  "  in  1846  and  1848,  and
subsequently  in  an  "  Essay  on  the  Pathology  and
Treatment  of  Trismus  Nascentium,  or  Lock-jaw  of
Infants"  (Philadelphia,  1864).  His  view  was  not
generally  accepted  by  the  profession,  although  a
few  doctors  used  his  method  with  success,  and  the
doctrine  was  confirmed  more than  thirty  years


SIMS


SIMS


541


after  Ita  announcement  by  the  invpstlpration  of  a  '
long  series  of  cases  in  Wauhinifton,  1>.  C.  In  184.5  \
Dr.  Sims  conc-eivtMl  a  nieth<Hl  of  treating  vesico-  j
vaginal  fistula,  an  afftH-tion  for  which  the  physi-
cians of  various  countrii'«  hn«l  vjiinly  nought  a  cure.
He  fltt«-<l  upa  hospital  beside  his  iiousts  into  which
he  collfcteil  caws  from  the  neighlM)riiig  country,
maintaining  them  at  his  own  exjiense.  After  ex-
nerinienting  for  three  years  and  a  half,  he  finally
aeviiu>d  the  silver  suture,  which  ha.s  since  l)een  em-
ploye«l  in  many  branchcji  of  surgerv,  an<l  with
which  he  cff('cte<l  a  i»erfect  cure,  fie  invented
various  instruments  during  his  exi)erim^nt.s,  chief
of  which  was  the  duck-bill  siMHiulum,  commonly
calleil  the  Sims  s|H»oulum.  This  revealed  the  seat
of  other  serious  complaints,  and  rendered  them
amenable  to  surgical  treatment.  He  had  before
paid  no  attention  to  gj'necology,  but  the  possession
of  this  instrument,  which  has  raised  that  branch
from  the  level  of  empirical  ex|)eriment  to  that  of
certain  knowknlge,  induced  him  U>  devote  his  at-
tention henceforth  to  the  study  and  treatment  of
diseases  of  women.  Soon  after  his  first  successful
operations  on  fistula  of  the  bladiler  he  was  seized
with  chronic  diarrhoea,  and.  after  comtmting  the
disease  for  three  years  in  vain,  in  order  to  save
his  life,  he  removed  in  1853  to  New  York  city.  He
demonstrated  to  prominent  surgeons  the  siiccess  of
the  silver  suture  in  vesico-vaginal  fistula  and  lacer-
ated perinanim,  and  his  metho<ls  came  into  use
in  the  hospitals  ;  yet  their  author  met  with  a  cold
reception,  and  his  pro[)osition  to  open  a  hospital
for  the  treatment  of  women's  diseases  was  opposed
by  the  other  doctors  until  it  was  auspiciously
presente<i  before  the  public.  The  project  was  wef-
comed  by  influential  won>en,  and  in  1855  a  tem-

Krary  hospital  was  opened.  The  necessity  for  a
•ger  institution  was  soon  recognized.  In  1857
the  legislature  granted  a  charter  for  the  Woman's
hospital  of  the  state  of  New  York,  and  in  the  fol-
lowmg  year  appropriated  $50,000  for  the  purpose,
while  the  common  council  of  the  city  gave  as  a  site
the  old  Potter's  field  l)etween  Fourth  and  Lexing-
ton avenues.  In  1861  Dr.  Sims  went  to  Europe  to
study  hospital  architecture,  and,  having  convinced
himself  or  the  a<ivantages  of  the  pavilion  system,
returned  in  1862  and  persuatled  tne  governors  to
adopt  that  plan.  While  he  was  in  Europe  the
chief  gynecologists  in  London,  Paris,  Dubhn,  and
Edinburgh  invited  him  to  perform  the  operation
for  vesico-yaeinal  fistula  in  the  hospitals.  His
successes  in  Paris  led  to  his  being  invited  to  Brus-
sels to  demonstrate  the  operation  before  the  faculty.
He  took  his  family  to  Europe  in  July,  1862,  in-
tending to  return  to  New  York  to  earn  the  means
of  supporting  them  there,  but,  through  his  pro-
fessional friends  and  the  fame  of  his  operations,  ol)-
tained  a  remunerative  practice  in  Paris,  and  dt^
cided  to  remain  abroad  until  the  civil  war  came  to
an  end.  He  removed  to  London  about  1864  for
the  education  of  his  children.  His  "  Clinical  Notes
on  Uterine  Surgerv,"  which  was  published  simul-
taneously in  Englisli,  French,  and  German  (London,
Paris,  and  Berhn,  1865),  described  novel  methods
of  treatment  which  were  not  readily  adopted  by  the
profession,  but  which  in  a  few  years  revolutionized
Iheprm-tice  of  gynecology,  fn  1868  he  n^tumed
to  the  United  States  and  resumed  practice  in  New
York  city.  While  visiting  Paris  in  1870  he  organ-
ized an  Anglo-American  ambulance  coq>s,  was
made  its  surgeon-in-chief,  and  arrived  at  Sedan
imme<liatelv  l)efore  the  battle.  After  treating  1,600
French  ancf  1,000  German  soldiers  in  the  hospital
that  was  assignetl  to  the  corps,  he  resigneil  at  the
end  of  a  month. A  repoft  of  the  services  of  his


ambulance  corns  has  been  publishe«l  by  Sir  William
McCormack,  wno  succe<Hled  him  as  surgeon-in-<'hief
(I/ondon.  1H71).  The  first  |Mtvili(in  of  the  Woman's
hospital  that  he  originated  in  New  York  city  was
completwl  in  186<l,  In  .lanuary,  1872,  he  was  re-
apixiinted  a  mt-niU-r  of  the  Ixianl  of  surgefms.  His
return  incrt-aMnl  the  reputation  of  the  institution,
the  second  pavilion  of  which  was  complete<l  in
1876,  Many  surgwms  of  the  city  and  tntm  abroad
attended  to  witness  his  oj>erations.  Finally  the
board  of  governors,  out  of  a  supposed  regard  for
the  m<xlesty  of  the  patient-s,  made  a  regulation  re-
stricting tiie  numU-r  of  visitors  to  fifteen  on  any
one  occasion.  Dr.  Sims  wjis  touchetl  in  his  pn»fes-
sional  dignity  by  this  invasion  of  his  pro|)er  prov-
ince, and  on  1  I)ec.,  1874,  resigne<l  his  post.  The
American  medical  association  ele<,-ted  him  to  pre-
side over  its  meetings  at  Philadelp'vlo.  In  1881  he
served  as  president  of  the  American  gynecological
society,  A  part  of  the  last  period  of  his  life  was
spent  in  Paris,  where  his  family  «)ntinued  to  reside.
Among  his  Ix^nefactions  is  the  J.  Marion  Sims  asy-
lum for  the  jMKir  in  I^ancaster,  S,  C.  He  was  given
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  by  Jefferson  university.  Pa.,
in  1881,  was  made  a  knight  of  the  I^egion  of  honor
in  France,  a  knight  of  the  order  of  Leopold  I.,  and
a  corresponding  fellow  of  the  Royal  academy  of
medicine  in  Belgium,  and  received  the  iron  cross
of  Germany,  two  medals  from  the  Italian  govern-
ment, and  decorations  from  the  Spanish  and  Por-
tuguese governments,  Dr,  Sims  began,  but  did  not
finish,  a  work  on  accidents  of  parturition  and  an-
other on  sterility.  He  read  papers  on  these  and
many  other  subjects  before  the  medical  associa-
tions of  the  United  States  and  England,  and  de-
scribed in  medical  journals  new  operations  and  in-
struments, and  a<lvanced  theories  of  pathologjr  and
practice  that  attracted  the  universal  attention  of
medical  men.  He  published  also  a  short  treatise  on
"Ovariotomy"  (New  York,  1873).  Not  long  before
his  death  he  wrote  "  The  Story  of  My  Life  "  (New
York,  1884),  See  also  a  "  Memoir."  by  Dr.  Thomas
Addis  Emmet  (1883),— His  son,  Harrr  Marlon,
surgeon,  b,  in  Montgomery,  Ala,,  27  Feb,,  1851,  re-
ceived his  early  e<lucation  in  England,  France,  and
Germany,  was  graduated  at  Washington  and  IjCC
in  1870.  and  afterward  passed  through  the  course
of  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  New
York  city,  receiving  his  degree  in  18~1.  He  was  a
member  of  the  ambulance  corps  that  his  father  or-
ganized during  the  Franco- Prussian  war,  beine
present  at  Sedan,  Orleans,  and  other  battles,  and
rendered  active  field  service  in  Parjs  during  the
Commune.  He  established  himself  in  New  York
city,  giving  much  attention  to  gjTiecology,  on
which  subject  he  has  lecture<l  for  several  years  lie-
tore  the  New^  York  polyclinic.  Besides  publishing
paf)ers  on  subjects  connec-ted  with  his  s|KH'ialty,  he
nas  prepared  an  American  edition  of  Dr.  Grailly
Hewitt's  work  on  "  Diseases  of  Women,"  with  ad-
ditions showing  the  later  improvements  in  gyne-
cology in  this  country  (New  \ork,  1884).

SlMS,  WInfleld  Scott,  inventor,  b.  in  New
York  city,  6  Ai>ril,  1844.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Newark  hign-school  in  1861,  and  serve<l  during
the  civil  war  in  the  37th  New  Jersey  regiment.
Sul>seauently  he  turnetl  his  attenti<m  to  the  inven-
tion of  electric  apparatus,  and  devisetl  various  im-
provements in  electro-magnets.  In  1872  he  con-
structed an  electric  motor  to  be  used  for  light
work.  By  means  of  this  motor,  weighing  forty-nve
pounds  and  battery  of  twenty  half-gallon  Bunsen
cells,  he  was  able  to  projiel  an  o[>en  boat  sixteen
feet  long,  with  six  pers4»ns  on  lK>anl,  at  the  rate  of
four  miles  an  hour. Mr,  Sims  was  the  first  to  ap-


642


SIMSON


SITGREAVES


ply  electricity  for  the  propulsion  and  guidance  of
movable  torpedoes  for  harbor  and  coast  defence.
His  torpedo  is  a  submarine  l)oat.  with  a  cylindrical
hull  of  copper  and  conical  ends,  supplied  with  a
screw  propel  lor  and  rudder.  The  power  is  elec-
tricity generated  by  a  dynamo-electric  machine  on
shore  or  on  ship-board,  and  by  its  means  the  tor-
pedo is  propelled,  guided,  and  exploded.  During
1879  this  system  wius  tested  by  Gen.  Henry  L.  Ab-
bot, of  the  U.  S.  engineer  corps,  at  Willett's  point,
and  since  that  time  the  U.  S.  government  has  pur-
chased ten  of  these  boats  havmg  a  speed  of  ten  to
eleven  and  a  half  miles  an  hour.  These  boats  carry
from  400  to  450  pounds  of  dynamite.  Mr.  Sims
has  now  in  course  of  construction  a  lioat,  to  have  a
speed  of  eighteen  miles  an  hour,  which  is  to  carry  a
250-j>ound  charge  of  dynamite.

SIMSON,  Sampson,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1780;  d.  tliere,  7  Jan.,  1857.  He
studied  law  at  Columbia,  but  after  a  few  years'
practice  retired  to  his  farm  in  Yonkers,  and  de-
voted himself  to  charitable  and  benevolent  work.
He  was  founder  of  the  Mount  Sinai  hospital,  and
bequeathed  large  sums  to  Jewish  and  general  in-
stitutions, including  $50,000  that,  after  the  death
of  a  nephew,  should  be  paid  "  to  any  responsible
corporation  in  this  city  whose  permanent  fund  is
established  by  its  charter  for  the  purpose  of  ameli-
orating the  condition  of  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem,
Palestine."  By  decision  of  the  state  supreme  court
on  29  May,  1888,  this  amount,  with  thirty  years'
interest,  was  paid  to  the  North  American  relief
societv  for  indigent  Jews  in  Jerusalem.

SINCLAIR,  Carrie  Bell,  poet,  b.  in  Milledge-
ville,  Ga.,  22  May,  1839.  Her  father,  Elijah,  a  nephew
of  Robert  Pulton,  was  a  Methodist  clergyman  who
at  the  time  of  his  death  conducted  a  seminary
for  girls  at  Georgetown,  S.  C.  The  family  removed
to  Aiigusta,  Ga.,  where  she  contributed  poetry  to
the  "  Georgia  Gazette."  She  published  a  volume
of  "  Poems  "  (Augusta,  1860),  and  during  the  civil
war  wrote  lyrics  commemorating  incidents  of  the
battle-field  and  praising  the  Confederate  cause,
some  of  which  were  set  to  music,  while  devoting
herself  to  supplying  the  wants  and  alleviating  the
sufferings  of  southern  soldiers  in  Savannah.  After
the  war  she  made  Philadelphia  her  residence,  and
wrote  for  periodicals.  Her  war-songs  and  other
poetical  productions  were  collected  in  "  Heart  Whis-
pers, or  Echoes  of  Song  "  (1872).

SINCLAIR,  Peter,  Canadian  member  of  par-
liament, b.  in  Argyllshire,  Scotland,  in  1825,  He
was  educated  in  his  native  place,  emigrated  to
Prince  Edward  island,  engaged  in  farming,  and
was  elected  to  the  house  of  assembly  in  1867.  He
was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  from  1869
till  1871,  and  again  in  1872,  when  he  acted  as  gov-
ernment leader,  and  was  a  member  of  the  board  of
works.  He  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment in  September,  1873.  and  re-elected  by  accla-
mation in  1874,  but  defeated  in  1878.  He  was
chosen  to  the  legislature  of  Prince  Edward  island
in  1882,  and  again  in  1886.  He  is  a  Liberal,  and
in  favor  of  reciprocal  trade  with  the  United  States.

SINGER,  Isaac  Merritt,  inventor,  b.  in  Os-
wego, N.  Y.,  27  Oct.,  1811;  d.  in  Torquay,  Eng-
land, 23  July.  1875.  He  was  a  machinist,  and
devoted  himself  entirely  to  the  study  of  improving
sewing-machines.  After  years  of  close  application
he  succeeded  in  completing  a  single-thread,  chain-
stitch  machine,  for  which  he  received  a  patent.
In  the  early  part  of  his  career  he  was  assisted  by
Edward  ClarK,  a  wealthy  lawyer,  by  whose  aid  he
was  enabled  to  establish  a  factory  in  New  York.
The  Howe sewing-machine company  sued him


for  infringing  on  their  patents,  but  the  matter
was  finally  compromised.  Ho  then  had  some
difficulty  with  Mr.  Clark,  in  consequence  of  which,
while  each  retained  an  equal  interest  in  the  ma-
chine, its  manufacture  was  placed  in  the  hands  of
a  corapanv.  Mr.  Singer  soon  became  wealthy,  and,
leaving  this  country,  resided  for  some  time  in
Paris,  but  later  removed  to  England,  where  he
lived  in  a  curiously  constructed  house  that  he
built  in  Torquay.

SINGERLY,  William  Mlskey,  journalist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  Dec,  1832.  He  was  edu-
cated in  the  Philadelphia  high-school,  and  trained
to  mercantile  business.  From  1859  till  1881  he
was  connected  with  the  city  railways,  and  since
1877  he  has  been  the  publisher  of  the  Philatlelphia
"Record."  His  newspajjcr  has  been  the  instru-
ment for  correcting  various  abuses.  In  1884  he
effected  arrangements  by  which  the  people  of
Philadelphia  obtained  fuel  for  one  quarter  less
than  they  had  paid.  He  has  built  700  dwellings
in  a  previously  unimproved  suburb  of  Philadel-
phia. Besides  his  finely  appointed  printing-office,
he  conducts  extensive  pulp-  and  paper-mills  at
Elkton,  Md.,  and  has  devoted  much  attention  to
breeding  beef  and  dairy  cattle  and  trotting-horses
on  model  farms  in  Pennsylvania  and  Kentucky,

SINNICKSON,  Thomas,  patriot,  b.  in  Salem
county,  N.  J. ;  d.  in  Salem,  N.  J.,  15  May,  1817.
He  received  a  classical  education  and  became  s
merchant.  For  many  years  he  sat  in  the  provin-
cial council  of  New  Jersey,  and  in  1775  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  Provincial  congress.  He  was  a  cor-
respondent of  the  committee  of  safety,  and  served
as  a  captain  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  being
present  at  the  battles  of  Trenton  and  Princeton.
After  the  peace  he  was  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture, and  on  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  of
the  United  States  was  elected  to  congress,  serving
from  4  March,  1789,  till  3  March,  1791.  He  was
elected  again  in  1796,  and  served  from  15  May,
1797,  till  3  March,  1799.  He  wjis  presiding  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  for  many  years.

SISTIAGA,  Sebastian  (sis-te-ah'-gah),  Mexican
missionary,  b.  in  Teposcolula,  about  1690;  d.  in
Puebla  in  1756.  He  became  a  Jesuit  in  1704,  and,
after  finishing  his  studies,  was  assigned  in  1718  to
the  missions  of  Lower  California.  In  1721  he  re-
solved to  explore  the  northeast  coast  of  the  penin-
sula, and,  leaving  Loreto,  he  followed  the  coast  up
to  latitude  31°  N.,  discovering  three  good  ports,
with  plenty  of  spring-water  and  an  abundance  of
hard  woods,  and  also  founding  the  mission  of  San
Ignacio.  After  many  years  of  successful  mission-
ary labor  he  returned  to  Mexico,  dying  in  the
college  of  the  order  in  Puebla.  He  wrote  "  Rela-
cion  de  un  viaje  a  la  Baja  California  y  de  los
descubrimientos  hechos,  con  pianos  de  los  puertos,
remitida  al  Virey  de  Mexico  and  "  Noticia  de  la
Mision  de  San  Ignacio  con  sus  ocho  pueblos,"  the
manuscripts  of  which  were  used  by  H.  H.  Ban-
croft, the  historian  of  California.

SITGREAVES,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Berne,
N.  C,  about  1740;  d.  in  Halifax,  N.  C,  4  March,
1802.  He  studied  and  practised  law  in  New  Berne,
was  appointed  an  officer  in'Richard  Caswell's  regi-
ment of  militia  in  1776,  and  served  as  his  aide-de-
camp at  the  battle  of  Camden  in  1780.  In  1784-'5
he  represented  North  Carolina  in  the  Continental
congress,  and  in  1786-'9  he  was  a  member  of  the
North  Carolina  legislature,  leaving  that  body  on
being  appointed  United  States  district  judge  for
North  Carolina.

SIT<JREAVES,  Samuel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  16  March,  1764 ;  d.  in  Easton,  Pa.,  4  April,


SITJAR


SKENE


643


1894.  He  rpoelvwl  a  classicAl  education,  st lulled
Uw,  and  was  admittc<l  to  th«>  iMr  in  Pliilmlelphia,
8  Sept.,  1788.  In  17H6  ho  wttUnl  At  Kaston.  whore
he  ioon  gaine<l  an  extensive  practice.  He  wax
elected  a  nioml)er  of  the  .State  «'onst it iitional  con-
vention of  17H»-'1M).  and  wius  o|i'ctf<l  to  conjjresM  in
1794.  and  aptin  in  17WJ.  In  17W7  he  conductexl  the
iini>eaciiment  of  William  Blount.  He  was  one  of
the  comtnissioners  to  settle  claims  under  the  Jay
treaty.  In  1799  he  wa.s  retained  by  the  jfovernment
to  as.ii»t  in  the  trial  of  .lohn  Fries'  for  treason.  At
the  end  of  John  Adams's  administration  he  retiri'd
from  politic*,  and  resume<l  nractice. — ^.His  son,
Lorenzo,  soldier,  b,  in  Pennsylvania  about  IHU  :
d.  in  Waxhinpfon,  D.  ('..  14  May.  IHSS.  He  wa.s
gnuluated  at  the  U.  S.  militarv  jwademy  in  \Xi2.
and  wa.s  assijn>c«l  to  the  artillery.  He  resi>;ne<|
to  enjfajfo  in  civil  engineering,  but  was  n'ap|x»inte<l
in  the  army  as  3<1  lieutenant  of  topographical  engi-
neers on  18  July,  1840.  and  was  employed  in  sur-
reys of  the  Sault  Sainte  Marie.  Portsmouth  harbor,
and  the  Florida  reefs.  During  the  Mexican  war
he  took  part  in  the  march  through  Chihuahua  and
in  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista,  where  he  gained  the
brevet  of  captain  for  gallantry.  He  was  in  charge
in  1851  of  the  survey  of  Zufli'and  Colorado  rivers,
N.  M..  of  which  a  report  was  published  (Washing-
ton, 1853).  He  mu8tere<l  volunteers  at  Albany,
N.  Y.,  in  1861-2,  Ix-ing  promoted  major  on  6  Aug.,
1861.  He  reached  the  grade  of  lieutenant-colonel
of  engineers  on  22  April,  1864,  and  subsequentlv
had  charge  of  harlK)r  improvements  on  Ijake  Michi-
gan till  10  Jul  v.  1H(56,  when  he  was  rt'tiretl.

SITJAR,  fiuenaventura  (seet-har),  Spanish
missionary,  b.  in  the  island  of  Majorca,  9  Dec.,
1739 :  d.  in  San  Antonio,  Cal.,  3  Sept.,  1808.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Franciscan  order,  came  as  a
mis.<«ionary  to  America,  and  founded  in  1771  the
mission  of  San  Antonio,  and  in  1797  that  of  San
Miguel.  With  the  assistance  of  Father  Miguel
Pieras,  he  composed  a  vocabulary  of  the  Telam^  or
Sextapay  language.  This  work  forms  the  seventh
Tolurae  of  John  G.  Shea's  "  Library  of  American
Linguistics"  (New  York,  1861),  and  was  published
sejMirately  under  the  title  of  "  Vocabulary  of  the
Language  of  the  San  Antonio  Missions  "  (1863).

SITTING  BULL,  Sioux  chief,  b.  in  1837;  d.  15
Dec.,  1890.  He  was  a  chief  of  the  Dakota  Sioux,
who  were  driven  from  their  reservation  in  the
Black  Hills  bv  miners  in  1876,  and  took  up  arms
against  the  whites  and  friendly  Indians,  refusing
to  be  transported  to  the  Indian  territory.  In  June,
1876,  they  defeated  and  massacreil  Gen.  George  A.
Custer's  advance  party  of  Gen.  Alfred  II.  Terry's
column,  which  was  sent  against  them,  on  Little
Big  Horn  river,  and  were  pursued  northward  bv
Gen.  Terry.  Sitting  Hull,  with  a  part  of  his  band,
made  his  escape  into  British  territory,  and,  through
the  mediation  of  Dominion  ofllciais,  surrendentl
on  a  promise  of  pardon  in  1880.  In  1888,  in  a
conference  at  Standing  Rock,  Dak. — where  he  was
afterward  kille«l — he  influenced  his  tribe  to  refuse
to  relinquish  Indian  lands.

8KEAD,  James,  Canadian  senator,  b.  at  Calder
Hall,  Moresby,  CumlxTland.  Kngland,  31  Dec,
1817 ;  d.  in  Ottawa,  Canada,  5  July,  1884.  He  was
educated  in  his  native  town,  and,  coming  to  Can-
ada with  his  family  in  \Hii2,  settled  at  Bytown
(now  Ottawa).  Mr.  Skead  afterward  engaged  in
the  timber  trade,  and  also  in  manufactunnir.  At
the  time  of  cfmfederation  in  1867  he  was  called  to
the  senate,  b^rly  in  1881  he  resigned,  but  he  was
reappointe<l  on  24  I>ec.  of  the  same  year.  He
represente<l  Kideau  division  from  1W52  till  1867  in
the  legislative  council  of  Canada,  and  was  an  un-


miooewtful  candidate  for  Carh-ton  for  the  Ontario
awembly  in  1HII7.  He  was  |irei«ident  «if  the  Ottawa
l)oar«l  of  tra<lo.  of  the  Ottawa  Lilieral-Consenra-
tive  ass<H-tatii>n.  of  the  LilM>raI-Con!«ervative  con-
vention that  met  in  Toronto,  2ii  Sept.,  1874,  of  the
Dominion  board  of  tnwie,  and  of  the  Agricultural
and  arts  associati<m  of  Ontario,  and  was  con-
necte<l  as  president  or  dinn-tor  with  various  other
financial  or  industrial  instituticms.

HKENAMN),  Oneida  chief,  b.  in  1706;  d.  in
1816.  Ihiring  the  war  of  the  Revolution  he  hat!
command  of  2''><)  warriors  of  the  Oneida  and  Tu»-
carora  trilx*s  of  Indians,  and  rendered  im|>ortant
services  to  the  American  caus<'.  Skenando  waa
tall  and  commanding  in  person,  and  his  facw  dis-
playinl  unusual  intelligence.  He  was  an  intrepid
warrior,  and  one  of  the  noldest  and  wisest  counsel-
lors of  the  Six  Nations.  The  first  mention  of  his
name  is  bv  Rev.  Samuel  Kirkland,  who  became
acouainted  with  him  when  he  first  went  into  the
Inuian  country  in  1764.  .Skenando  formed  so
strong  an  attachment  for  .Mr.  Kirkland  that  he
expressed  a  desire  to  l)e  buried  by  the  side  of  his
friend,  which  was  done.  He  was  known  among
the  Indians  as  the  "  white  man's  friend."

SKENE,  Alexander  Johnston  ChalmerM.  phv-
sician,  b.  in  Fyvie,  Aberdeenshire,  Scotland,  17
June,  1837.  He  was  educated  chiefly  in  the  schools
of  Aberdeen,  and  studied  medicine  at  King's  col-
lege, Scotland,  at  the  University  of  Michigan,  and
at  Long  Island  college  hospital,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1863.  From  July,  1863.  till  June,
1864,  he  was  acting  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.
array.  In  1864  he  settled  in  Brooklyn,  where  he
has  since  been  engaged  in  successful  practice.  Dr.
Skene  was  adjunct  physician  in  Long  Island  col-
lege hospital  in  1864,  appointe<l  professor  of  gyne-
cology there  in  1872,  and  dean  of  the  faculty  in
1886.  He  was  professor  of  gj'necologv  in  the  Post-
graduate metlical  school  of  New  York  in  1884,
and  is  president  of  the  American  gynecological  so-
ciety. He  performed  the  first  successful  o|)eration
of  gastro-elytrotomy  that  is  recorded,  and  also  that
of  craniotomy,  using  Sims's  speculum.  He  has  in-
vented about  twelve  surgical  instniments,  has
written  numerous  articles  for  the  medical  journals,
and  published  "Uro-Cystic  and  Urethral  Diseases
in  Women  "(New  York,  1877),  and  "  Treatise  on
Diseases  of  Women,  for  the  Use  of  Students  and
Practitioners"  (1888).

SKENE.  Philip,  soldier,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, in  February,  1725;  d.  near  Stoke  Golding-
ton,  England,  10  June.  1810.  He  wyas  heir-male
(after  1742)  of  Sir  Andrew  Skene,  of  HallyanLs,
Fife,  and  entered  the  1st  royal  regiment  in  1736.
under  the  auspices  of  his  uncle.  Capt.  Andrew
Skene,  was  at  tne  taking  of  Carthagena  and  Porto
Bello,  and  at  the  battles  of  Dettingen,  Fontenoy,
and  Culloden.  He  left  the  royal  regiment  in  1750,
and  was  afterward  cajttain  in  the  27th  and  10th
foot,  and  major  of  brigade.  In  the  same  year  he
married  Katherine,  heiress  of  the  Heydens,  of  Mt.
Hevden,  County  Wicklow,  who  was  related  to  Sir
William  Johnson.  In  17.56  he  came  again  to  this
country,  and  was  engagetl  under  I^ortl  Ilowe  at
the  attack  on  Ticonm'roga,  and  afterward  under
Ijord  Amherst  at  its  capture,  with  that  of  Cri)wn
Point.  Thence  he  went  to  the  attack  on  Marti-
nique and  Havana  under  Lonl  Allx'marle,  and
was  one  of  the  first  to  enter  the  breach  at  the
storming  of  Moro  Castle.  In  1759,  by  the  desire
of  Ijord  Amherst  and  with  a  view  to  strengthen-
ing the  British  hold  on  Canada,  he  received  a  large
gntnt  of  land  on  Ijake  Clmmplain,  which  he  in-
creased by  purchases  to  the  extent  of  about  60,(XM)


644


SKENE


SKINNER


acres,  and  founded  on  Wood  creek  the  town  of
Skenesborough  (now  Whitehall,  N.  Y.).  He  was
name<l  governor  of  Crown  Point  and  Ticonderoga.
with  the  rank  of  colonel  in  the  army,  tecame  colonel
of  the  local  militia,  judge,  and  postmaster,  estab-
lished flourishing  foundries  and  saw-mills,  con-
structed and  sailed  vessels  on  the  lake,  and  opened
roads  to  Albany.  In  the  Revolution,  after  being
exchanged  »is  a  prisoner,  he  served  a  short  time
under  Sir  William  Howe  at  New  York,  and  then
volunteered  under  Gen.  Burgoyne,  during  whose
campaign  his  horse  was  twice  shot  under  him.  He
and  his  son  had  acted  as  guides  to  the  army  from
Canada  ;  the  British  troops  having  for  some  time
occupied  Skenesborough,  on  their  moving,  Gen.
Haldimand  ordered  the  whole  place  to  be  burned,
lest  it  should  become  a  danger  in  the  hands  of
their  opponents.  Col.  Skene  thus  saw  the  fruits
of  an  invested  fortune  and  many  years'  labors
perish  before  his  eyes  at  his  countrymen's  hands.
The  night  before  the  capitulation  of  Saratoga,  Col.
Skene,  as  appears  from  one  of  his  letters,  went  to
Gen.  Burgoyne  and  urged  on  him  that  there  was
no  need  for  capitulating  at  all ;  that,  on  con-
dition that  arras  and  baggage  were  abandoned,  he
would  undertake  to  guide  the  army  safe  to  Canada.
After  the  recognition  of  independence.  Col.  Skene
was  in  London,  and  intended  to  return  and  begin
again  as  an  American  citizen ;  but  the  state  of  New
York  attainted  him  and  his  son  of  high  treason,
and  confiscated  their  estates.  After  the  war  he  re-
turned to  New  York  to  recover  his  property,  but
was  unsuccessful,  and  went  back  to  England.  The
British  government  in  1785  granted  him  a  pen-
sion of  £240  per  annum  for  life,  and  a  sum  of
£20.000,  with  which  he  purchased  the  estate  of
Addersey  Lodge,  Northamptonshire.  He  has  been
sometimes  confounded  with  a  namesake,  Gen.
Philip  Skene,  colonel  of  the  69th  foot,  who  died
in  1788,  and  also  with  Lieut.  Philip  Skene,  of  the
72d  foot,  who  died  in  1774. — His  only  sou,  Andrew
Philip,  soldier,  b.  25  March,  1753 ;  d.  in  Durham,
England,  in  January,  1826,  entered  the  5th  regi-
ment of  dragoons  in  1763.  He  was  graduated  at
King's  (now  Columbia)  college.  New  York,  in  1772,
and  transferred  afterward  to  the  6th  dragoons,  and
named  major  of  brigade,  being  the  first  subaltern
that  ever  had  held  that  post.  He  lost  a  separate
estate  near  Skenesborough,  was  afterward  captain
in  the  9th  dragoons,  and  became  military  paymas-
ter at  divers  places  in  the  three  kingdoms.  The
last  twenty-two  years  of  his  life  were  passed  at
Durham.— Andrew's  eldest  son,  Philip  Orkney,
soldier,  b.  about  1790 ;  d.  in  1837,  became  a  lieu-
tenant of  engineers  in  the  British  army,  and  was
for  a  long  time  stationed  in  Canada,  where  he  de-
signed the  works  of  Quebec.  He  had  previously
been  chosen  to  attend  at  Paris  the  princes  of  Prus-
sia, afterward  King  Frederick  William  IV.,  and
the  Emperor  William.  He  wrote  many  works  and
labored  zealously  to  propagate  the  Hamiltonian
system  of  teaching  languages,  the  schemes  of  Rob-
ert Owen,  and  the  co-operative  system,  which  he
was  one  of  the  first  to  introduce  in  London. — An-
other son,  Andrew  Motz,  d,  in  Durham,  England,
10  July,  1849,  entered  the  royal  navy  in  1808,  was

f  resent  at  Flushing  and  at  actions  in  the  West
ndies,  and  was  shipmate  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon
in  the  voyage  to  St.  Helena.  He  afterward  went
with  Sir  John  Ross  on  the  arctic  expedition  of
1818,  his  name  being  given  to  the  Skene  islands
in  Baflin  bay.  Most  of  the  published  drawings  of
the  expedition  are  from  his  pencil.  He  also  ac-
companied Sir  William  E.  Parry  in  1819.  the  name
lif  slkene  bay,  the  rank  of  lieutenant,  and  a  share


of  the  reward  of  £5,000  being  the  recompense  of
that  arduous  service.  Retiring  on  half-pay,  and
presently  refusing  the  command  of  a  new  arctic
expedition,  he  devoted  most  of  his  leisure  to  divers
inventions  connected  with  his  profession,  the  most
remarkable  of  which  he  patented,  a  system  of  feath-
ering paddles,  which  was  not  then  approved,  but
after  the  expiration  of  the  patent  was  generally
adopted,  until  it  was  superseded  by  the  screw. —
His  only  son,  Andrew  Philip,  b.  6  Sept.,  1832,  suc-
ceeded to  the  Irish  and  Canadian  estates.

HKILTON,  Jalius  Angustus,  physician,  b.  in
Troy,  N.  Y.,  29  June,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  in  1849,  and  at
Albany  medical  college  in  1855,  and  began  to  prac-
tise in  Troy  in  1855.  He  was  a  member  of  the
board  of  education  in  1856,  and  city  physician  in
1857-8.  In  1861  he  was  made  assistant  surgeon
of  the  30th  New  York  regiment,  and  surgeon  of
the  87th  New  York  in  1862.  He  was  taken  prisoner
in  the  summer  of  that  year,  and  was  released  in
feeble  health,  but  recovered  sufficiently  to  become
surgeon  of  the  14th  New  York  cavalry  in  1863,
served  in  New  York  city  during  the  draft  riots,
and  was  medical  director  of  cavalry  department  of
the  southwest  in  1864-'5.  In  1869  he  was  appointed
U.  S.  consul  at  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  in  1872  he
was  promoted  to  be  consul-general,  holding  the
office  until  1878.  He  received  the  degree  of  A.  B.
from  Wesleyan  university  in  1853.  Besides  his  an-
nual reports  he  has  published  "  Mining  Districts  of
Parhuca,  Real  del  Monte,  El  Chico,  and  Star  Rosa,
State  of  Hidalgo,  Republic  of  Mexico."

SKINNER,  Charles  Rnfas,  member  of  con-
gress, b.  in  Union  Square,  Oswego  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  Aug.,
1844.  He  was  educated  at  Clinton  liberal  insti-
tute and  at  the  Mexico,  N.  Y.,  academy,  was  school
commissioner  of  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  in  1875-'84,
member  of  the  assembly  in  1877-'81,  and  a  repre-
sentative in  congress  in  1881-'5,  as  a  Republican.
In  congress  he  was  the  author  of  the  bill  providing
for  the  special  delivery  stamp,  and  he  introduced  a
bill  reducing  the  postage  on  letters  from  three  to
two  cents.  He  was  appointed  deputy  superintend-
ent of  public  instruction  of  the  state  of  New  York,
7  April,  1886,  for  the  term  that  will  expire  in  1889.

SKINNER,  Cortlandt,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Jer-
sey in  1728 :  d.  in  Bristol,  England,  in  1799.  He  re-
ceived a  good  education,  became  a  successful  lawyer,
and  was  attorney-general  of  New  Jersey  in  1775,
in  which  capacity  he  evinced  great  ability  and  in-
tegrity. At  the  opening  of  the  Revolution  he  ac-
cepted service  under  the  crown  and  was  authorized
to  raise  a  corps  of  loyalists,  of  which  he  was
allowed  to  nominate  the  officers.  Three  battalions
were  organized,  and  called  the  New  Jersey  volun-
teers. Skinner  continued  in  command  of  the
corps,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,  and  at
the  peace  went  to  England,  where  he  received  com-
pensation for  his  losses  as  a  loyalist,  and  also  the
naif-pay  of  a  brigadier-general  during  his  life.  One
of  his  daughters  married  Sir  William  Robinson,
commissary-general  in  the  British  army,  and  an-
other Sir  George  Nugent,  a  field  -  marshal. — His
son,  Philip  Kearny,  soldier,  b.  in  Amboy,  N.  J.;
d.  in  London,  9  April,  1826,  entered  the  service  as
an  ensign  in  the  New  Jersey  loyalist  volunteers,
was  made  a  prisoner  in  the  expedition  to  Ostend,
served  in  Ireland,  the  East  and  West  Indies,  and
Spain,  and  became  a  lieutenant-general  in  1825.

SKINNER.  Ezekiel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Glaston-
bury, Conn.,  27  June,  1777;  d.  in  Greenport,  L.  I.,
25  Dec,  1855.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  blacksmith,
but,  abandoning  his  trade  in  1797,  he  studied  medi-
cine, was  licensed  to  practise  in  1801,  and  settled  at


SKINNER


SKINNER


040


Granvillr,  Mass.,  as  n  phvsicinn.  ITo  wtut  •  dei.st,
but,  chHti^int;  his  views.  )u'  rt'iiKivwl  to  Ijehanon,
Conn.,  in  1«(>7.  ami  unitwl  with  the  Haptist  chim'h.
He  servisl  in  the  war  of  1812  iis  a  siirjjeon,  in  1K|1>
was  liuensi>(l  to  preach,  and  in  IH'i'i  wiis  or(iaine4l
pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Aslifonl,  Conn.  On
the  death  of  his  son,  llov.  ilenjaniin  Hush  Skinner,
a  mimionary  in  Lil>eria,  the  father  in  liHiA  went  la
replace  him,  and  spent  four  years  in  tliat  colony  iim
its  (fovenjor  and  ils  i)n'«K'her.  After  his  return  he
resume*!  his  tiastoral  duties  and  medical  practice.
He  puhlishiHi  a  series  of  essays  on  the  pr«»phecies,
in  the  '•('liristian  Svretary  "  (1842).

SKINNER.  <«eonfe  lire,  lK)tanist,  h.  In  S<-ot-
land  in  INO.*!;  d.  in  .\spinwall,  Panama,  0  Jan.,
1867.  lie  was  a  memU^r  of  the  mercantile  firm  of
Klee,  Skinner  and  Co.,  Guatemala.  He  pursued
his  n\searches  into  the  botanv  of  west<'rn  Mexicro
and  Guatemala  more  thoroujr)ily  than  any  preced-
ing; iM)tanist,  and  ^ave  attention  to  the  Orchidacee.
The  pMius  Urtiskinneria  wjus  namc<l  for  him,  and
also  th<'  Cattlcaya  Skiiuu-ri  ainon^  the  orchids.

SKINNER,  James  Atcheson,  Canadian  mem-
ber of  parliament,  b.  in  Tain.  lto.ss-shire,  Scotland,
26  Get.,  1826.  He  was  educated  in  his  native
pla(>e,  went  to  Canada  in  184:i,  and  engaj^ed  in
Business  in  Hamilton.  He  became  a  lieutenant-
colonel  of  militia  in  1866.  was  at  Ridgeway  during
the  Fenian  invasion,  and  in  1871  organized  and
comman«le<l  the  first  Canmlian  team  to  contest  at
Wimblwlon.  England,  in  the  rifle  matches.  He
served  in  the  Dominion  parliament  in  1874-'8.

SKINNER,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  New
Jersey  alx.ut  1750;  d.  in  England,  10  Oct.,  1827,
He  entered  the  service  of  the  crown  as  an  ensign
in  the  16th  regiment  of  foot,  was  in  the  actions
of  Beaufort  and  Stone  Ferry  and  at  the  sieges
*  of  Savannah  and  Charleston,  and  commanded  a
troop  in  Tarleton's  legion  in  the  battles  of  Black-
stocKs,  Cowj)ens.  and  Guilford.  In  1795  he  reduced
the  Maroons  of  Jamaica  to  submission,  and  in  1804
he  commanded  the  16th  regiment  in  the  ex[)edition
against  Surinam.  He  became  a  major-general,  was
successively  governor  of  several  of  the  West  India
islands,  anil  commanded  a  brigade  at  the  capture
of  Gumlilcupe  in  1810.

SKINNER,  John  Stnart  editor,  b.  in  Mary-
land, 22  IVb.,  1788;  d.  in  Baltimore,  21  March.
1851,  At  the  age  of  twenty-one  he  Iwgan  practice
as  a  counsel  lor  and  attorney.  In  1812  he  wasa  gov-
ernment agent  "  to  receive  and  forward  the  ocean
mails,  to  furnish  the  vessels  with  necessary  sup-
plies, and  to  see  that  nothing  transpired  prejudicial
to  the  interests  of  the  republic  or  offensive  to  ene-
mies thus  admittetl  under  the  guardianship  of  a
flag  of  truce.''  For  this  responsible  trust  Presi-
<lent  Madis<in  framed  a  special  commission  and  se-
lectetl  Mr.  Skinner  to  execute  it.  To  this  <luty  was
soon  after  adde<l  that  of  agent  for  prisoners  of
war.  In  1813  he  was  ordered  to  remove  his  offices
from  Anna|>olis  to  Baltimore,  and  a  little  later  he
accepted  a  purser's  commission  in  the  navy.  This
post  he  filled  during  the  war,  and  for  several  years
afterwanl.  When  the  British  forces  moved  toward
Washington.  Mr.  Skinner  nnle  ninety  miles  in  the
night,  and  first  announce<l  their  approach.  The
British  retaliat«Hl  by  burning  the  ouildings  on
his  St.  liconard's  creek  est^ite,  for  which  los.s  he
never  sought  rt'muneration  from  the  government.
He  was  with  Francis  S.  Key  on  the  mission  that
suggested  the  latter's  song.  "The  Star-S|>angled
BMiner."  From  1816  till  1849  he  was  iK>stnm.ster
of  Baltimore.  Having  much  practical  Kuowktlge
of  agricullur*'  and  rural  sports,  in  April.  1819,
he  estjiblished  "  The  American  Farmer. '  the  first
TOU  T. — 85


{  agricultunil  journal  in  this  country.  This  peri-
o«ii<'al  was  wannly  supiMirtJsl  by  Thomas  Jefferson,
I  Andn'w  Jai'kson.  Tiniothv  Pickerinir.  and  others
:  of  recogniziMl  altility.  When  (Jen.  Tiafayette  r»-
'  visited  the  L'nitnl  States  in  1824  he  was  the  gueiit
I  of  Mr.  Skinner  during  his  sojourn  in  Baltimore,
[  and  selecte<l  the  latter  as  agent  to  manage  the
I  20,000-acre  grant  of  land  that  had  In^en  voU-*!  him
by  congress.  In  Augtist,  1829,  Mr.  Skinner  oub-
I  lished  the  first  numU-r  of  the  "American  Turf
I  R«'gister  and  SiH)rting  Magazine."  a  monthly  peri-
fKlical.  His  devotion  to  this  work  induced  him  to
disiM)se  of  the  "  American  Farmer"  the  same  year.
i  After  conducting  the  "Turf  Register  "  .su<-cessfully
for  ten  years,  he  mU\  the  magazine,  and  in  July,
1845,  l)egan  a  new  publication,  the  "  Farmer's  Li-
brary and  Monthly  Journal  of  Agriculture,"  pub-
lishe<I  by  Greeley  and  McP^lrath.  This  was  suc-
cee<led  in  1848  by  the  "  Plough,  the  Ixnim,  and  the
Anvil,"  which  heconducte<l  until  his  death.  These
periodicals  gave  a  new  stimulus  to  agricultural
pursuits,  and  added  to  the  gcnenil  |M>pularity  of
out-door  s{)orts.  At  various  times  he  e<lite«l  for
publication  in  this  country  several  standard  foreign
works,  including  Alexander  Pctzhold's  "  Ijcctures
on  Agricultural  Chemistry,"  Henry  Stephens's
"  Book  of  the  Farm,"  and  Albrecht  t)aniel  ThSr's
"  Principles  of  Agriculture,"  in  the  "  Farmer's  Li-
brary and  Monthly  Journal  of  Agriculture"  (New
York,  1846-'8);  "  Youatt  on  the  Horse"  (1844);
"Every  Man  his  own  Cattle  D<K-tor"  (1844);  and
"Guenon  on  Milch  Cows."  with  an  introduction;
and  he  wrote  "  Christmas  Gift  to  Young  Agricultu-
rists" (Washington,  1841);  "I^etter  on  Nautical
Education  "  (1841) :  and  "The  Dog  and  Sportsman  "
(1845).— His  son,  Frederick  (lUstaTns,  b.  in  An-
napolis, Md.,  11  March,  1814,  at  the  age  of  twelve
years  was  taken  to  I^a  (irange  by  (Jen.  liafayette,
and  received  hiscarlv  education  tnere.  On  return-
ing to  this  country,  fie  entered  West  Point.  When
Gen.  Ijafayette  died,  congress  passed  compliment-
ary resolutions  upon  his  life  and  services,  and  Mr.
Skinner  was  selected  by  President  Jackson  to
convey  these  resolutions  to  Ijafayette's  family.
After  remaining  two  years  in  France,  as  working
attache  of  the  American  legation,  he  made  a  tour
of  the  continent,  and  enjove<l  the  widest  possible
range  of  field  sports.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  he  was  given  command  of  the  1st  Virginia
infantry,  and  ne  was  colonel  of  that  regiment  until
disabled  by  wounds.  After  the  war  he  went  to
Egypt,  and,  refusing  a  commission  in  the  Egyptian
army,  devoted  his  attention  to  the  field  sports  of
that  country.  Upon  returning  to  his  native  land,
he  joined  the  staff  of  the  "  Turf,  Field,  and  Farm,"
in  New  York,  and,  as  field  editor  of  that  jounial,
was  instrumental  in  bringing  about  the  first  field-
trial,  the  first  iKMich-show  of  dogs,  and  the  first
international  gun-trial  that  was  ever  held  in  the
Unite<i  States.  He  was  at  one  time  chief  of  the
agricultural  bureau  of  the  U.  S.  patentroffice.  and

fiublishinl  "Elements  of  Agricultural  Gkaaiiatry,
rom  the  French  "  (Philatlelphia,  1854V

SKINNER,  Otis  Ainsworth,  authoi;  b.  in
Koyalton.  Vt..  3  July.  1807;  d,  in  Napierville,  UL
18  Sept..  1861.  He  taught  for  some  time,  and  in
1826  became  a  Universal ist  minister.  He  was
settle^l  as  pastor  in  Baltimore  in  1831,  in  Haver-
hill in  18,36,  in  Boston  in  1837,  and  in  New  York
city  in  1846.  He  retume<l  to  his  former  charge  in
Boston  in  1849.  and  remained  till  April,  1857,
when  he  settle<l  in  Elgin,  111.  In  August  of  the
same  year  he  was  chos«»n  pn»sident  of  Lonihaid
university.  (Jalesburg,  111.,  and  in  October,  t8B6k.bii
bi>catne|uuitorat  Joliet.  111. He  editi-<l  the  ** South-


546


SKINNER


SLADE


eastern  Pioneer,"  a  religious  paner,  at  Haltimore,
the  "Gospel  Sun"  at  Havernill,  and  the  "  Uni-
versalist  Miscellany,"  a  monthly  magazine,  at  Bos-
ton (1844-'9).  He  was  an  efficient  worker  in  the
cause  of  temperance,  education,  and  other  reforms.
He  nublished  "  Universalism  Illustrated  and  De-
fended "  (Boston,  1839):  "  Miller's  Theory  Explod-
ed "  (1840) :  "  Letters  on  Revivals  "  (1842) ;" "  Prayer-
Book  for  Family  Worship"  (1848):  "Letters  on
Moral  Duties  of  Parents  (1844);  "  Lessons  from
the  Death  of  the  Young  "  (1844) ;  "  Reply  to  Hat-
field" (1847);  and  "Death  of  Daniel  Webster"
(1852).  His  life  was  written  by  Thomas  B.  Thayer
(Boston,  18G1).

SKINNER,  Richard,  jurist,  b.  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  30  Mav,  1778;  d.  in  Manchester,  Vt„  23
May,  1833.  lie  was  educated  at  Litchfield  law-
school,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1800,  and  in  that
year  removed  to  Manchester,  Vt.,  where  he  was
elected  state's  attorney  for  Bennington  county  in
1801,  and  probate  judge  in  1806.  He  was  a  mem-
lier  of  congress  in  1813-'15,  and  in  1817  became
justice  of  the  state  supreme  court,  of  which  he  had
been  an  associate  since  1816.  He  was  speaker  of
the  lower  house  of  the  legislature  in  1818,  governor
of  the  state  in  1820-'4,  and  again  chief  justice  in
1824-'9.  He  was  an  officer  of  various  local  benevo-
lent associations,  president  of  the  northeastern
branch  of  the  American  education  society,  and  a
trustee  of  Middlebury  college,  from  which  he  re-
ceivetl  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1817. — His  only  son,
Mark,  b.  in  Manchester,  Vt.,  13  Sept.,  1813 ;  d.
there,  16  Sept.,  1887,  was  graduated  at  Middlebury
in  1833,  aTid  studied  law  at  Saratoga  Springs,  Al-
bany, and  New  Haven.  He  settled  at  Chicago  in
1836,  was  elected  city  attorney  in  1839,  appointed
U.  S.  district  attorney  for  Illinois  in  1844,  and
chosen  to  the  legislature  in  1846.  He  became
judge  of  Cook  county  court  of  common  pleas  in
1851.  In  1842  he  was  made  school-inspector  for
Chicago,  and  gave  much  time  and  labor  to  the
cause  of  education.  The  city  in  1859  honored  his
services  by  naming  its  new  school-building  "  the
Skinner  school."  He  was  president  of  the  Illinois
general  hospital  of  the  lake  in  1852,  of  the  Chicago
home  for  the  friendless  in  1860,  first  president  of
the  Chicago  reform-school,  one  of  the  founders  and
patrons  of  the  Chicago  historical  society,  a  founder
of  the  New  England  society  of  Chicago,  and  de-
livered an  address  before  it  in  1848,  entitled  "  A
Vindication  of  the  Character  of  the  Pilgrim  Fa-
thers "  (1849).  He  was  an  elder  in  the  Presbyterian
church,  and  a  liberal  contributor  to  all  church
charities.  Judge  Skinner  was  chairman  of  the
meeting  in  November,  1846,  to  make  arrangements
for  the  river  and  harbor  convention  of  1847,  and
was  a  delegate  to  that  convention.  He  took  an
active  part  in  building  the  Galena  and  Chicago
railroad,  and  was  for  years  one  of  its  directors,  and
a  director  in  the  Chicago,  Burlington,  and  Quincy
railroad.  He  was  originally  a  Democrat,  one  of
the  founders  of  the  Anti-Nebraska  party  in  1854,
and  a  member  of  the  Republican  party  frofh  its
organization  in  1856.  In  October,  1861,  he  was
elected  president  of  the  Northwestern  sanitary
commission,  and  he  continued  such  until  1864.
Judge  Skinner  owned  a  large  and  valuable  library,
comprising  a  full  collection  of  books  relating  to
America.  This  was  burned  in  1871,  and  since  that
time  he  has  more  than  duplicated  his  former  col-
lections. See  a  memoir  by  E.  W.  Blatchford,  pub-
lished by  the  Chicago  historical  society  (1888).

SKISNER,  Thunias  Harvey,  author,  b.  in
Harvey's  Neck,  N.  C,  7  March,  1791 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  1  Feb.,  1871. He  was  graduated  at


Princeton  in  1809,  and  studied  law,  but,  abandon-
ing it  for  theology,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1812.
In  1813  he  l)ecame  assistant  in  a  Presluyterian
church  in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1816  he  was  settled
as  a  pastor  in  that  city.  In  1832  he  became  pro-
fessor of  sacred  rhetoric  in  Andover  theological
seminary,  and  in  1835  he  was  appointed  pastor  of
the  Mercer  street  Presbyterian  church.  New  York.
From  1848  till  his  death  he  was  professor  of  sacred
rhetoric  and  pastoral  theology  in  Union  theologi-
cal seminary.  Williams  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1826,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1855.  Dr.
Skinner  was  an  eloquent  pulpit  orator  and  an  able
teacher.  He  published  "Religion  of  the  Bible"
(New  York,  1839) ;  "  Aids  to  Preaching  and  Hear-
ing "  (Philadelphia,  1839);  "Hints  to  Christians"
(1841);  "Vinet's  Pastoral  Theology"  (1854);
"Vinet's  Homiletics"  (1854),  two  translations;
"Discussions  in  Theology"  (New  York,  1868);
"Thoughts  on  Evangelizing  the  World"  (1870);
and  occasional  sermons.  He  also  contributed  to-
the  religious  press.

SLACK,  Elijah,  educator,  b.  in  Lower  Wake-
field, Bucks  CO.,  Pa.,  24  Nov.,  1784;  d.  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  29  May,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1808,  was  principal  of  Trenton  acade-
my in  1808-'12,  and  was  licensed  by  the  New
Brunswick  presbytery  as  a  preacher  in  1811.  In
1812  he  was  elected  vice-president  and  professor  of
natural  philosophy  and  chemistry  in  Princeton.
He  continued  his  connection  with' this  institution
till  1817,  when  he  removed  to  Cincinnati.  In  that
year  he  was  elected  superintendent  of  the  Literary
and  scientific  institute  of  that  city,  and  when  Cin-
cinnati college  was  established  in  1819  he  was  ap-
Fointed  its  president,  and  so  continuetl  till  1828.
n  1837  he  established  a  high-school  at  Brownsville,
Tenn.,  which  was  successful,  and  in  1844  he  re-
turned to  Cincinnati.  He  had  received  the  degree
of  M.  D.,  and  was  at  one  time  professor  in  Ohio
medical  college.  Princeton  gave  nim  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1863. — His  cousin,  James  Richard,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Bucks  county.  Pa..  28  Sept.,  1818;  d.  in
Chicago,  111.,  28  June,  1881,  removed  with  his
father's  family  to  Indiana  in  1837,  studied  laAfr,  wa»
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  became  a  successful  law-
yer. In  September,  1861,  he  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  47th  Indiana  regiment,  and  was
ordered  with  his  command  to  Kentucky.  He  was
assigned  to  Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell's  army,  but  wa»
subsequently  transferred  to  Missouri  and  placed  •
under  Gen.  John  Pope.  With  his  command  he
participated  in  numerous  actions.  He  was  com-
missioned brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  31  Dec.,.
1864,  major-general  by  brevet,  13  March,  1865,  and
was  mustered  out  of  the  service,  15  Jan.,  1866.  After
the  war  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  and  at  the
time  of  his  death,  and  for  many  years  preceding,
was  a  judge  of  the  28th  judicial  circuit  of  Indiana.
SLADE,  Daniel  Denison.  physician,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  10  May,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1844,  and  at  the  medical  department
in  1848  with  the  appointment  of  house  surgeon  to-
the  Massachusetts  general  hospital.  In  1849  he
went  abroad  for  the  purpose  of  higher  studies,  and
on  his  return  in  1852  he  ^ttled  in  practice  in  Bos-
ton, where  he  continued  until  1863.  Dr.  Slade
then  gradually  relinquished  his  profession  for  liter-
ary and  horticultural  pursuits,  and  in  1870  was
chosen  professor  of  applied  zoology  in  Har^'ard,
which  chair  he  held  for  twelve  years.  In  1884  he
was  appointed  assistant  in  the  Museum  of  com-
parative zoology  and  lecturer  on  comparative  oste-
ology in  Harvard.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
appointed  one  of  the  inspectors  of  hospitals  under


SLADE


SLATKR


547


the  U.  S.  mnitAiy  coinmi.<wton,  nnd  for  aoido  time
he  was  house  8iir(f<»<)n  «>f  tho  Bf>ston  (li«|)i'nsiiry.
!!»•  is  n  nu>ml)or  of  tin?  Massjuhiisi-ttx  ini><lic-Hl  sm-i-
ety  «iul  of  thi>  IJoston  wn-iety  of  iiuHliojil  impntvc-
nient. Dr  SliwJe  won  thi>  Fisko  prize  by  his  essays
on  "  Diphtheria"  in  18.10  and  "  Aneurism"  in  18.'>2,  I
the  IJ4»ylst<»n  prize  by  one  on  "S|)ermut«)rrha?a"  in  I
IMT,  and  the  Ma.Hsaehusi>tLs  m«Hlicnl  prize  by  one  \
on  "  Bronchitis"  in  1859. In  addition  to  his  con-  j
tributions  to  medical,  ajfriculturai.  and  horticul-  i
tural  journals,  he  published  "Diphtheria,  its  Xa-  i
ture  and  Treatment"  (Philiuldphia,  18(J1).

SLADK.  William,  frovcrnor  of  Vermont,  b.  in
Cornwall.  Vt.,  »  May.  1780;  d.  in  Middleburv.  Vt,.
18  Jan..  18.59.  He  was  t^raduated  at  Mid<lfebury
collejfe  in  1807.  studitnl  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1810.  and  Ix'fTJin  practice  at  Middleburv.
He  was  a  presidential  elwtor  in  1812,  and  in
1814-'15  publishe«l  and  editeil  the  "Columbian
Patriot "  in  connection  with  lK>oksellinjr  and  job-
printing,  but  was  not  successful.  In  K^l.*)  he  was
elected  secretary  of  state,  which  office  he  held
eight  years,  and' in  1816-'22  he  was  judge  of  the
Addison  county  court.  lie  was  afterward  state's
attorney  for  the  same  countr.  Mr.  Slade  was  clerk
in  the  state  department  at  tV'ashington  from  182^*3
till  1829.  when  he  resume<l  the  practice  of  law  in
Middlebury.  He  was  a  member  of  congress  in
18;Jl-"4^},  in  1844  was  reporter  of  the  supreme  court
of  Vermont,  and  in  1844-'6  served  as  governor  of
that  state.  In  1840-'56  he  was  secretary  of  the
National  board  of  popular  education.  He  pub-
lished "Vermont  State  Papers"  (Middlebury,
18*3) :  "  The  Ijaws  of  Vermont  to  1824  "  (Windsor,
182.5) :  "  Reports  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Vermont,
Vol.  XV."  (Burlington,  1844);  and  j)amphlets  and
i  congressional  sj>eeches.

SLAFTER,  Edmund  Farwell,  author,  b.  in
Norwich.  Vt.,  30  May,  1810.  He  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  in  1840.  studied  at  .\ndover  theological
seminary,  and  in  1844  was  ordained  a  minister  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  The  same  year
he  became  rector  of  St.  Peter's  church,  Cambridge.
Mass.,  where  he  remained  till  the  autumn  of  1846,
when  he  was  appointed  rector  of  St.  John's  church,
Jamaica  Plain.  Here  he  continued  eight  vears,
and  then  became  assistant  rector  of  St.  Paul's
church,  Boston.  In  18.57  Mr.  Slafter  was  appointed
an  agent  of  the  American  Bible  society,  which
place  he  resigned  in  1877,  and  he  has  since  given
niit  leisure  time  to  historical  studies.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  many  learned  societies  in  America  and  Eu-
rope. He  has  published,  among  other  works,
**'rhe  Assassination  Plot  in  New  York  in  1770:  a
Letter  of  Dr.  William  Eustis.  Surgeon  in  the  Revo-
lutionary Army  and  late  (Jovenior  of  Massachu-
setts, with  Notes"  (Boston,  1808);  "Memorial  of
John  Slafter,  with  (Jenealogicai  Account  of  his
Descendants"  (1808);  "The  Charter  of  Norwich,
Venmmt,  and  Names  of  the  Original  Proprietors:
with  Brief  Historical  Notes"  (1809);  ""The  Ver-
mont C^oinage,"  Vermont  historical  society  collec-
tion (Montpelicr.  1870);  "Sir  William  Alexander
and  American  Colonization."  in  the  series  of  the
Prince  six-ietv  (Boston,  187:3);  "The  Cop|>er  Coin-
age of  the  I^Iarl  of  Stirling,  16:32"  (1874):  "Voy-
ages of  the  Northmen  to  America,"  edited,  with
an  intrrKluction  (1877);  "  V'oyages  of  Samuel  de
Champlain."  translatetl  from  the  French  by  Charles
Pomen)V  Otis,  with  historical  illustrations  and  a
memoir' (:3  vols.,  1878,  1880.  \m'2);  and  "  History
and  Causes  of  the  Incorrect  liHtitudes  as  recorder!
in  the  Journals  of  the  Early  Writers,  Navigators,
and  Explorers  relating  to  the  Atlantic  Coast  of
North  America,  1585-1740"  (1882).


^^^7^7


SLATER.  Siimiiel.  manufacturer,  b.  in  Bolper.
Derbyshire.  England,  9  June,  1708;  d.  in  Web«ter,
Maiw..  21  .\|iril.  1K.'{.5.  He  was  the  son  of  a  respect-
able ycHinum.  ri'ceivMl  a  g<KK|  e<iucation,  and  serve*!
an  apprenticeship  at  cotton-spinning  with  Jedi-
diah  Strutt,  the  |>artnerof  Kictiard  Arkwright.  He
was  a  favorite  with
Mr.  Strutt,  aided
him  in  making  im-
provements in  his
mills,  and  gained  a
thorough  nwisteryof
t  he  theory  and  |>rac-
tice  of  the  new  man-
ufacture. In  1789
congress  passed  its
first  act  for  the
encouragement  of
maiuifactur(>s,  and
the  legislature  of
Pennsylvania  of-
fered a  bounty  for
the  introduction  of
the  Arkwright  pat-
ent. Young  Slater
Ijecame  cognizant  of
these  circumstan-
ces, and  determined  to  introduce  the  invention  in
the  United  States;  but,  as  the  laws  of  England  did
not  admit  of  his  taking  drawings  or  mo<lels  with
him,  he  had  to  trust  to  his  memory  to  enable  him  to
construct  the  most  complicated  mac-hinery.  He
landed  in  New  York  in  Noveujber,  1789,  and,  hav-
ing ascertained  that  Moses  Brown  had  ma<le  some
attempts  at  cotton-spinning  in  RhfKle  Island,  wrote
to  him  and  told  him  what  he  could  do.  Mr.  Brown,
in  replying  to  him.  wrote :  "  If  thou  canst  do  this
thing,  1  invite  thee  to  come  to  Rhode  Island,  and
have  the  credit  of  introducing  cotton-manufacture
into  America."  Slater  procee*Je<l  to  Pawtucket.
R.  I.,  in  January,  1790,  and  immediately  entered
into  articles  of  agreement  with  William  Almy  and
Smith  Brown  to  construct  and  operate  the'  new
cotton-spinning  machinery.  On  21  Dec..  1790,  he
started  at  Pawtucket  three  18-inch  carding-ma-
chines,  the  necessary  dmwing-hcads  with  two  rolls
and  four  processes,  the  roving  cases  and  winders
for  the  same,  and  throstle  spinning-frames  of
seventy-two  spindles.  In  a  short  time  reels  were
made  for  putting  the  yam  into  skeins,  in  which
form  it  was  at  that  time  placed  upon  the  market.
In  doing  this  Mr.  Slater  was  compelleii  to  prepare
all  the  plans  in  the  several  departments  of  manu-
facturing, and  to  construct  with  his  own  hands
the  different  kinds  of  machinery,  or  else  tea<'h
others  how  to  do  it.  The  first  yarn  made  on  bis
machinery  was  equal  to  the  best  quality  made  in
England.  About  1800  the  second  cotton-mill  went
into  operation  in  Rhotle  Island.  In  1800  Mr.  Slater
was  joined  by  his  brother  John,  from  England,
and  soon  afterwartl  a  cotton-mill  was  erecte<l  in  a
locality  now  known  as  Slatersville,  R.  I.  In  1812
Mr.  Slater  began  the  erecti<m  of  mills  in  Oxford
(now  Webster),  Mass.,  achling  in  181.5-'10  the  manu-
facture of  W(X)llen  cloth.  He  wjis  also  interested  in
iron-manufactures,  and  acquirtnl  i^reat  wealth.  In
1796  he  established  a  Sunday-scTiool  for  the  im-
provement of  his  work-j)eople.  which  was  the  first,
or  among  the  first,  in  the  Unite«l  States.  See  a
memoir  of  him  by  George  S.  White  (Philadelphia,
18:i0). — His  nephew,  John  Fox.  ^thilanthropist.  b.
in  Slatersville,  R.  I..  4  March.  181.);  d.  in  Norwich,
Conn..  7  May.  1884.  was  the  son  of  John  Slater.
He  was  early  trainetl  for  the  manufacturing  busi-
IMM,  and  in  ISTi  became  sole  owner  of  the  mill


548


SLAUGHTER


SLEMMER


property  he  was  then  conducting.  He  made  ex-
cellent investments,  and  in  a  few  years  acquired
great  wealth.  Mr.  Slater  was  early  interested  in
the  cause  of  education,  and  gave  liberally  for  the
establishment  of  the  Norwich  free  academy  and
other  objects.  In  April,  1882,  he  placed  in  the
hands  of  trustees  $1,000,000,  the  interest  of  which
is  to  be  used  for  the  education  of  frecdmen  in  the
south. — His  son,  William  Albert,  in  November,
188(5,  transferred  to  the  Free  academy,  Norwich,  a
building  costing  $150,000,  which  he  erected  in
memory  of  his  father.

SLAlJGHTER,  Gabriel,  governor  of  Kentucky,
b.  in  Virginia  about  1767;  d.  in  Mercer  county,
Ky.,  19  Sept.,  1820.  He  emigrated  to  Kentucky  at
an  early  age,  was  a  skilful  and  successful  farmer,
and  frequently  chosen  to  the  legislature.  At  the
battle  of  New  Orleans  he  was  colonel  of  a  Kentucky
regiment,  and  he  received  the  thanks  of  the  legis-
lature for  his  gallant  services  on  that  occasion.
In  1816  he  was  elected  lieutenant-governor  of  Ken-
tucky, and  on  the  death  of  the  governor,  George
Madison,  soon  afterward,  he  served  as  acting  gov-
ernor for  the  four  years  of  Madison's  term.

SLAUGHTER,  WiUiam  Bank,  lawyer,  b.  in
Culpeper  county,  Va.,  10  April,  1798  ;  d.  in  Madi-
son, Wis.,  21  July,  1879.  He  was  educated  at
William  and  Mary,  admitted  to  the  bar,  practised
first  in  Bardstown,  Ky.,  and  then  in  Bedford,  Ind.,
and  in  1832  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of  the
latter  state.  While  in  that  body  he  introduced  a
set  of  resolutions  strongly  sustaining  President
Andrew  Jackson's  proclamation  to  the  South  Caro-
lina nulliflers.  He  was  appointed  register  of  the
land-office  at  Indianapolis  in  1833,  and  at  Green
Bay  in  1835,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  elected  a
member  of  the  legislative  council  of  Michigan,  and
introduced  a  memorial  to  congress  asking  that  the
territory  to  the  west  of  Lake  Michigan  be  organ-
ized into  a  new  territory  to  be  named  Wisconsin.
After  residing  in  Wisconsin  and  in  his  native
place,  he  returned  in  1861  to  Middleton,  Wis.,  and
in  1862  was  appointed  commissary  of  subsistence
and  quartermaster.  He  wrote  for  periodicals  and
encyclopsedias,  and  published  "  Reminiscences  of
Distinguished  Men  I  have  Met "  (Milwaukee.  1878).
— His  cousin,  PhiHp,  clergyman,  b.  in  Spring-
field, Culpeper  county,  Va.,  26  Oct.,  1808.  He  is  a
son  of  Capt.  Philip  Slaughter,  of  the  11th  conti-
nental regiment  in  the  array  of  the  Revolution.
His  education  was  obtained  partly  at  home  and
partly  in  a  classical  academy  at  Winchester,  Va.
He  entered  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1825,  and,
after  studying  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1828.  Five  years  later,  having  resolved  to  enter
the  ministry,  he  went  to  the  Episcopal  theological
seminarv,  Alexandria,  Va.  He  was  ordained  dea-
con in  I'rinity  church,  Staunton,  25  May,  1834,  by
Bishop  Meade,  and  priest  in  St.  Paul's  church,
Alexandria,  in  July,  1835,  by  Bishop  Richard  C.
Moore.  His  first  charge  was  in  Dettnigen  parish,
Va.  In  1836  he  accepted  a  call  to  Christ  church,
Georgetown,  D.  C,  in  1840  he  assumed  charge  of
Meade  and  Johns  parishes,  and  in  1843  he  be-
came rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Petersburg,  Va.
Health  failing,  he  spent  1848-'9  in  Europe.  On
returning  home  he  established  in  1850,  and  edited,
"  The  Virginia  Colonizationist "  at  Richmond,  Va.
Six  years  later  he  built  a  church  on  his  farm  in
Culpeper  county,  and  officiated  gratuitously  for
his  neighbors  and  servants  until  his  church  was
destroyed  by  the  National  army  in  1862.  He  then
edited  in  Petersburg  "  The  Army  and  Navy  Mes-
senger," a  religious  paper  for  soldiers,  and  also
preached  and  visited  in  camp  and  hospitals. When


peace  returned  in  1865  he  was  for  a  time  associ-
ate editor  of  the  "  Southern  Churchman."  Then  he
went  back  to  his  old  home,  where,  as  the  churches
were  destroyed,  he  flttetl  up  a  recess-chancel  in
his  own  house  for  church  services.  Emmanuel
church  in  Slaughter  parish  having  been  rebuilt,  he
accepted  charge  of  it,  and  served  tnere  while  health
and  strength  sufficed.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  William  and  Mary  in  1874.  Of  late
years  he  has  held  the  office  of  historiographer  of
the  diocese  of  Virginia,  which  was  tendered  to  him
by  the  convention.  Ur.  Slaughter  has  made  large
contributions  to  religious  and  general  literature,
not  only  in  publishing  special  sermons,  orations,
addresses,  tractates,  and  magazine  articles,  but  also
in  bringing  out  various  volumes  from  his  pen  dur-
ing the  last  forty  years.  Among  these  are  "  St.
George's  Parish  llistory  "  (Richmond,  1847) ;  "  Man
and  Woman  "  (1860) ;  "  Life  of  Randolph  Fairfax"
(1862) ;  "  Life  of  Colonel  Joshua  Fry,  Sometime  Pro-
fessor in  William  and  Mary  College,  Va.,  and  Wash-
ington's Senior  in  Command  of  Virginia  Forces,  in
1754"  (New  York,  1880);  "Historic  Churches  of
Virginia,"  in  Bishop  Perry's  "Centennial  History"
(1882) ;  "  Life  of  Hon.  William  Green,  Jurist  and
Scholar "  (Richmond,  1883) ;  "  Views  from  Cedar
Mountains,  in  Fiftieth  Year  of  Ministry  and  Mar-
riage "  (New  York,  1884) ;  "  The  Colonial  Church
of  Virginia  "  (1885) ;  "  Christianity  the  Key  to  the
Character  and  Career  of  Washington,"  a  discourse
before  the  ladies  of  Mount  Vernon  association,  in
Pohick  church  (1886) ;  and  "  Address  to  the  Min-
ute-Men of  Culpeper"  (1887),

SLEEPER,  John  Sherbnrne,  author,  b,  in
Tyngsboro,  Mass.,  21  Sept.,  1794;  d.  in  Boston
Highlands,  Mass.,  14  Nov.,  1878.  He  was  during
twenty-two  years  a  sailor  and  a  shipmaster  in  the
merchant  service  from  Boston.  He  afterward  en-
gaged in  journalism,  was  connected  with  the  New
Hampshire  "News  Letter"  at  Exeter  in  1831-'2,
and  the  Lowell  "  Daily  Journal "  in  1833,  and  was
editor  of  the  Boston  "  Journal "  in  1834-'54,  He
was  mayor  of  Roxburv,  Mass.,  in  1856- '8,  and  pub-
lished "'Tales  of  the  Ocean  "  (Boston,  1842) ;  "  Salt-
Water  Bubbles"  (1854);  "Jack  in  the  Forecastle"
(1860) ;  "  Mark  Rowland,  a  Tale  of  the  Sea,  by
Hawser  Martingale  '*  (1867) ;  and  various  addresses.

SLEMMER,  Adam  J.,  soldier,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery county.  Pa.,  in  1828 ;  d,  in  Fort  Lara-
mie, Kan.,  7  Oct..  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  the
United  States  military  academy  in  July,  1850,  and
assigned  to  the  1st  artillery.  After  a  short  cam-
paign against  the  Seminole  Indians  in  Florida,  in
which  he  took  a  creditable  part,  he  was  for  four
years  on  frontier  service  in  California,  and  in
1855-'9  was  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  at
the  U.  S,  military  academy.  He  afterward  re-
turned to  garrison  duty  at  Fort  Moultrie,  S,  C,
and  in  1860  was  transferred  to  Florida,  where  in
1861  he  commanded  a  small  body  of  U.S.  soldiers
in  Pensacola  harbor,  occupying  with  them  Fort
Barrancas ;  but  when  intelligence  of  the  surrender
of  Pensacola  navy-yard  reached  him,  he  trans-
ferred his  troops  on  10  Jan.  to  Fort  Pickens,  oppo-
site, which  he  successfully  held  until  he  was  re-
lieved by  Col,  Harvey  Brown,  thus  preserving  the
key  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  He  was  promoted
major  of  the  16th  infantry  in  May,  1861,  was  for
a  short  time  inspector-general  of  the  Department
of  the  Ohio,  returned  to  active  duty  in  ^Iay,  1862,
and  participated  in  the  siege  of  Corinth  and  the
subsenuent  movement  to  Louisville,  Ky,,  and  to
the  relief  of  Nashville.  Tenn,  He  was  made  brig-
adier-general of  volunteers,  29  Nov,,  1862,  and
took  part  in  the  battle  of  Stone  River,  31  Dec.,


SLENKER


SLIDBLL


549


rhcrp  he  wan  »•»  sevortsly  wounded  as  to  be
inespacitAt<>d  for  further  active  MTvice  in  the
flehl.  On  8  Feb.,  IWM.  ho  wjis  pniinote*!  lieuten-
ant-cdlonol  of  the  4th  infjintrv,  and  in  Man-h,
IHtm,  he  was  brevetted  colonel  and  bripwlier-
sencral,  U.  S.  army,  for  his  ineritoriou:*  services.
He  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service  in
Auffust,  1H((5,  and  vran  afterward  M*nt  to  command
Fi>rt  liaramic,  where  he  died  of  heart  diseiis**.

SLKNKKR,  Klniina  Drako,  author,  b.  in  Ija
Gmnjre,  N.  Y..  'i'i  Dec,  1H27.  She  is  a  daughter  of
Thomas  Dnike,  wjus  e«lucate«l  at  district  sch»K)ls,
and  then  alternated  Iwtween  teachinc  ay«l  study-
ing at  higher  s<!hool8.  She  married  Iswic  Slenker
in  IH/iJI,  and  has  long  resided  in  Snowville,  Va.
Mrs.  Slenker  has  w>ntrihute«l  to  various  journals,
and  wa.s  in  1880-*1  assistant  inlitor  of  the  New
York  "  Physiologist  and  Family  Physician."  The
"Children's  Comer"  in  the  "  Boston  Investigator,"
and  "  Klmina  Column  "  in  "  The  Sf)uth  Land,"  have
been  under  her  charge  for  s<'veral  vears.  and  she  has
published  "Studying  the  Hible''  (lioston,  1870);
"John's  NVav"  (>Jew  York,  1878);  "The  Darwins"
(1879);  and  '"  Mary  Jones"  (Nashville.  188r)).

SLICEK,  Henrj,  clergyman,  b.  in  Annapolis,
Md.,  in  1801 :  d.  in  Baltimore,  23  April,  1874.  He
receivetl  n  gocnl  education,  worked  for  a  time  as
a  furniture- painter,  studying  theology  at  the  same
time,  and  in  1821  was  licensed  as  a  preacher  of
the  Methmlist  Epis<'opal  church.  After  serving
on  the  nartft>rd  and  Redstone  circuits,  he  was
transferrtnl  in  1824  to  the  navy-yanl  at  Washing-
ton. In  1832  he  was  appointed  presi<ling  elder  of
the  Potomac  district,  and  in  18^37  he  was  electe<l
chaplain  of  the  U.  S.  senate,  being  twice  re-elected.
In  1846  he  was  stationed  at  Carlisle,  Pa.,  was  again
elected  chaplain  of  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  held  the
ofRce  till  1850.  In  the  following  nineteen  years
he  was  stationed  at  Baltimore  and  Frederick  city,
was  again  chaplain  of  the  siMiatc,  and  a  presiding
elder  for  eight  years.  From  18G2  till  1870  he  was
chaplain  of  the  Seaman's  chapel  at  Baltimore,  and
in  1870  he  was  again  presiding  elder  of  the  Balti-
more district.  He  had  Iteen  a  member  of  seven
auadrennial  general  conferences.  He  received  the
egree  of  D.  D.  from  Dickinson  college,  Carlisle,
Pa.,  in  1860.  While  chaplain  of  the  senate  he  de-
livereil  a  sermon  against  duelling,  which  power-
fully aide<l  the  passage  of  the  act  making  duels
illegal  (New  York,  18JJ8).  His  other  works  are
"Appeid  on  Christian  Baptism"  (New  York,  1835).
and  "  A  Further  Appeal  '^  (18:30).

SLIDELL,  John,  statesman,  b.  in  New  York
city  about  1793;  d.  in  Ijondon.  England.  29  July.
1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1810.  and
engaged  unsuccessfully  in  commerce.  He  then
studied  law.  and  in  1819  removed  to  New  Orleans,
where,  making  a  specialty  of  commercial  law,  he
soon  ac«juire<l  a  large  practice.  In  1828  he  was  a
defeated  Democratic  candidate  for  congress,  and
actively  canvasseil  the  state  for  Andrew  Jackson,
who  apfKjinted  him  U.  S.  district  attorney  for
Ijouisiana,  but  after  a  year  in  office  he  resigned.
Mr.  Slidell  was  a  candidate  for  the  U.  S.  senate  in
18:J4,  but  Charles  Gayarre  was  chosen.  He  dis-
posed of  his  practice  in  1835  and  continued  as  a
leader  in  Louisiana  {jolitics  until  1842,  when  he
was  electetl  to  congn*ss  »is  a  state-rights  DemtK-rat.
and  served  from  4  Dec.  1843,  till  10  Nov.,  1845.  In
November,  1845,  he  was  sent  as  minister  to  Slexico
by  President  Polk,  to  mljust  the  difficulty  caused
by  the  annexation  of  Texas  to  the  Unitetll  States:
but  that  government  refused  to  receive  him,  an«l
he  returnwl  in  January,  1847,  when  he  resigne*!.
He  was  again  a  candidate  for  the  U.  S.  senate  in


T'-


cyy^J^i/Ul


1849;  but  his  [mrty  were  In  the  minoritr.  and  in
the  canvass  of  IK.'iS  he  waM  active  in  nehalf  of
Franklin  Pierce.  On  the  inauguration  of  the  lat-
ter he  refused  a  diplomatic  apiM>intment  to  Central
America,  but.  on  the  acceptance  by  Pierre  Souj^  of
the  French  mission,  he  was  sent  to  the  U.  8.  sen-
ate and  serve<l,
with  re-election,
from  5  Dec,  1858,
to  4  Feb.,  1861.
He  rarely  8{)oke,
but  was  a  memlwr
f)f  im|K»rtant  com-
mittees, and  ex-
ert etl  great  influ-
ence. Preferring
to  remain  in  the
senate,  he  declined
a  cabinet  appoint-
ment from  Presi-
dent Buchanan,
but  continue<l  a
confidential  friend
of  the  latter
throughout  his  ad-
ministration. Mr.
Slidell  was  a  stren-
uous supporter  of

the  doctrines  of  state- rights,  and,  when  Ix)ui8iana
passed  the  ordinance  of  secession,  he  withdi-ew  from
the  senate  with  his  colleague,  after  making  a  defi-
ant spetH-h.  In  S«'pteml)er,  1861,  he  wits  ai)pointed
Confe<lerate  commissioner  to  France,  an(i  set  out
with  James  M.  Mason  for  Southampton  from  Ha-
vana in  NovemVjer.  He  was  seized  on  the  high-seas
by  Capt.  Charles  Wilkes,  and  brought  tothe  L'nited
States.  After  imprisonment  in  Fort  Warren  he
was  released  and  sailed  for  England  on  1  Jan.,  1862.
From  England  he  went  at  once  to  Paris,  where,  in
February,  1862.  he  paid  his  first  visit  to  the  French
minister  of  foreign  affairs.  His  mission,  which  had
for  its  object  the  recognition  of  the  Conftnlerate
states  by  the  French  government,  was  a  failure,
but  the  well-known  sympathy  of  Napoleon  III.,
who  at  that  time  was  deeply interested  in  the

Sroject  of  a  Mexican  empire  under  Maximilian,
id  much  to  favor  the  Confederate  cause.  In  or-
der to  secure  F'rench  aid,  he  proposed  a  commer-
cial convention,  by  which  France  should  enjoy
valuable  export  and  imjKirt  privileges  for  a  long
fK'riod,  and  which,  if  carried  into  effect  speedily,
on  the  basis  of  breaking  the  blockade,  because  of
its  legal  inefficiency,  would  give  France  control  of
southern  cotton,  and  in  return  furnish  the  Con-
federacy with  ample  supplies,  including  arms  and
munitions  of  war.  This  was  not  accepted,  on  ac-
count of  the  emjieror's  refusal  to  recognize  the
Confederate  states  unless  the  British  authorities
should  co-operate.  But  the  sympathy  of  Najxdeon
III.  proved  of  great  value,  for  by  his  secret  influ-
ence Mr.  Slidell  was  able  to  l)egin  the  negotiation
of  the  |15.000.0(X)  Confederate  Kmn.  Early  in  186:i
the  emperor  permitte<l  him  to  make  proposals  for
the  construction  of  four  steam  corvettes  and  two
iron-clad  rams  at  private  shijvyards  in  Bonleaux
and  Nantes;  Imt  later  in  the  year,  information  of
this  fjict  cominc:  to  the  knowledge  of  the  U.S.  rep-
resentative in  Paris,  imperial  orders  were  issued
that  the  vessels  should  l)e  sold  to  foreign  powers.
One  of  them  was  transferre<l  to  the  Confederate
navy  in  Jatniarv,  1865,  after  l)eing  purchase<l  bv
Denmark,  as  is  claimed  by  the  Confederates,  though
it  is  assert e<l  on  the  other  side  that  the  purchase
was  fictitious.  This  vessel,  the  "Stonewall,"  set
out  for  the  Unitetl  States,  but  did  not  reach  Ha-


650


SLOAN


SLOANB


vana  till  May.  after  the  surrender  of  the  Confed-
erate armies.  Mr.  Slidell  settled  in  England  at
the  close  of  the  war,  and  continued  there  till  his
death.  A  full  account  of  the  relations  of  Mr.
Slidell  with  the  French  government  in  regard  to
the  building  of  the  vessels  mentioned  above  is  con-
tained in  "France  and  the  Confederate  Xavy,"  by
John  Bigelow  (New  York,  1888).— His  brother,
Thomas  (1810-'G0),  was  a  judge  of  the  Louisiana
supreme  court  in  1845-'52,  and  then  chief  justice
till  1855,  when  he  was  assaulted  by  a  ruflian  and
received  injuries  from  which  he  never  recovered.
With  Judun  P.  Benjamin,  he  prepared  a  "  Digest
of  Supreme  Court  Decisions."

SLOAN,  Hamiiel,  architect,  b.  in  Chester  county,
Pa.,  7  March,  1815 ;  d.  in  Raleigh.  N.  C,  19  July,
1884.  He  established  himself  in  Philadelphia,  and
designed  many  important  buildings,  among  them
the  Bloekley  hospital  for  the  insane  in  that  city,
and  the  state  insane  hospital  at  Montgomery,  Ala.
He  conducted  the  "  Architectural  Review,"  begin-
ning in  1868,  and  published  "  City  and  Suburban
Architecture"  (Philadelphia,  1859):  "Constructive
Architecture  "  (1859);  "Model  Architect "  (1860) ;
and  "Designs  for  Rural  Buildings"  (1861).

SLOAN,  Samuel,  railroad  president,  b.  in  Lis-
burn,  near  Belfast,  Ireland,  25  Dec,  1817.  He
came  to  this  country  in  infancy,  was  graduated  at
Columbia  college  gi-ammar-school  in  1830,  was
engaged  as  a  clerk,  and  afterward  became  a  mer-
chant. He  was  supervisor  of  Kings  county  in
1850-'l,  and  state  senator  in  1858-'9,  and  was
elected  president  of  the  Hudson  River  railroad,  13
Feb.,  1855,  which  office  he  retained  till  1862.  Sub-
sequentlv  for  two  years  he  was  commissioner  of
the  trunk  lines  of  railroad  to  the  west,  as  general
arbitrator  of  railroad  disputes.  Mr.  Sloan  was
elected  president  of  the  Delaware,  Lackawanna,
and  Western  railroad  company  in  1867,  which  post
he  now  (1888)  holds.  He  is  also  president  of  the
OswcTO  and  Syracuse ;  Syracuse,  Binghamton,  and
New  York ;  Utica,  Chenango,  and  Susquehanna
Valley ;  Fort  Wayne  and  Jackson ;  Green  Bay,  Wi-
nona, and  St.  Paul ;  and  other  roads.

SLOANE,  Sir  Hans,  bart.,  British  naturalist,
b.  in  Killyleagh,  County  Down,  Ireland,  16  April,
1660;  d.  in  London,  11  Jan.,  1753.  He  studied
medicine  vi  London,  in  1685  was  elected  a  fellow
of  the  Royal  society,  and  afterward  spent  some
time  in  Jamaica  and  other  West  India  islands,
where  he  collected  a  great  number  of  plants.  He
became  physician-general  to  the  army  in  1716,
president  of  the  College  of  physicians  in  1719,  and
physician  to  the  king  in  1727,  and  about  the  same
time  succeeded  Sir  Isaac  Newton  as  president  of
the  Royal  society.  His  library  and  natural  history
collection  were  purchased  by  the  British  govern-
ment after  his  death,  and  formed  the  beginning  of
the  British  museum.  Besides  numerous  contribu-
tions to  the  "  Philosophical  Transactions,"  he  pub-
lished the  "  Natural  History  of  Jamaica  "  (2  vols.,
London.  1725).

SLOANE,  James  Renwick  Wilson,  educator,
b.  in  Tonsham,  Orange  co.,  Vt.,  29  May,  1823 ;  d.
in  Alleghany  City,  Pa.,  6  March,  1886.  He  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  college,  Canonsburg,  Pa.,
in  1847,  and  studied  theology  at  the  Reformed
Presbyterian  seminary  in  northwestern  Ohio,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1853.  In  1854  he  became  pastor
at  Rushsylvania.  Ohio,  and  in  1856-'68  he  neld  a
charge  in  New  York  city.  He  was  president  of
Richmond  college,  Ohio,  in  184S-'50,  of  Geneva
college,  in  the  same  state,  in  1851-'6,  and  professor
of  systematic  theology  and  homiletics  in  Alleghany
theological  seminary  from  1868  till  his  death. He


was  also  pastor  of  the  1st  Reformed  Presbyterian
church  in  Alleghany.  He  published  numerous
sermons  and  literary  addresses.  See  his  "  Life  and
Work,"  edited  bv  his  son.  William  (New  York,  1888).
—His  son,  William  Milli|an,  educator,  b.  in
Richmond,  Ohio,  12  Nov.,  18o0,  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1868.  He  was  instructor  in  classics
in  Newell  institute,  Pittsburg,  in  1868-'72,  studied
in  Berlin  and  Leipsic  in  1872-'6,  and  in  1873-'5,
in  addition,  was  also  privat*  secretary  of  George
Bancroft,  then  minister  at  Berlin,  and  worked
under  his  direction  on  the  tenth  volume  of  the
"History  of  the  United  States."  From  1877  till
1883  he  was  assistant  and  professor  of  Latin  in
Princeton,  and  he  has  since  been  professor  of  his-
tory in  that  institution.  In  June,  1888,  he  declined
the  professorship  of  Latin  to  which  he  was  invited
by  Columbia  college.  He  has  Ijeen  since  1885  edi-
tor of  the  "  New  Princeton  Review."  He  edited  his
father's  "  Life  and  Work  "  (New  York,  1888).

SLOANE,  Jolin,  statesman,  b.  in  York,  Pa.,  in
1779;  d.  in  Wooster,  Ohio,  15  May,  1856.  He  re-
moved to  Ohio  at  an  early  age,  was  a  member  of
the  state  assembly  in  1804-'6,  and  served  the  last
two  years  as  speaker.  He  was  U.  S.  receiver  of
public  mpneys  at  Canton  in  1808-'16,  and  at  Woos-
ter in  1816-'19,  was  elected  to  congress  from  Ohio,
and  served  by  successive  elections  from  6  Dec,
1819,  till  3  March,  1829.  He  was  clerk  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  for  seven  years,  secretary  of
state  of  Ohio  three  years,  and  was  appointed  treas-
urer of  the  United  States,  serving  from  27  Nov.,
1850,  till  1  April,  1853.  During  the  war  of  1812
he  was  a  colonel  of  militia.

SLOANE,  Rnsli  Richard,  lawver,  b.  in  San-
dusky, Erie  CO.,  Ohio.,  18  Sept.,  1828.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Wesleyan  academy,  Norwalk,  Ohio,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  city
clerk  of  Sandusky,  Ohio,  in  ]855-'7,  was  elected
judge  of  the  probate  court  for  Erie  countv  in  1857.
and  re-elected  in  1860,  was  appointed  by  President
Lincoln  to  the  general  agency  of  the  post-olfice
department,  serving  from  1861  till  1866,  and  was
mayor  of  Sandusky  in  1870, 1880,  and  1881.  Mr.
Sloane  was  an  ardent  anti-slavery  man,  and  was
instrumental  in  the  escape  of  seven  slaves  in  San-
dusky, on  20  Oct.,  1850,  where  they  had  been  ar-
rested by  their  masters.  He  was  prosecuted,  and
paid  over  $4,000  damages  and  costs,  being  the  first
victim  of  the  fugitive-slave  law  of  1850.

SLOANE,  Tliomas  O'Conor,  chemist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  24  Nov.,  1851.  He  is  a  nephew  of
Charles  O'Conor.  After  graduation  at  St.  Fran-
cis Xavier's  college  in  1870,  and  at  the  School  of
mines  of  Columbia  in  1872,  with  the  degree  of
E.  M.,  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  1876  from
the  latter  institution.  His  scientific  work  has  in-
cluded a  method  for  the  determination  of  sulphur
in  illuminating  gas,  and  various  other  improved
processes  for  the  estimation  of  constituents  in  gas
analysis.  Dr.  Sloane  has  invented  the  thermo-
phote,  which  is  the  only  apparatus  ever  devised  for
registering  autoraaticAlly  and  mechanically  the
illuminating  power  of  gas.  He  has  lectured  exten-
sively in  schools  and  before  public  audiences,  and
since  1883  has  been  lecturer  in  chemistry  and
physics  at  Seton  Hall  college.  His  services  have
been  freauently  called  for  as  an  expert  in  patent
suits,  ana  he  is  regularly  retained  by  law  firms  in
New  York  city.  In  1878-'80  he  was  one  of  the  de-
partment editors  of  the  "Sanitary  Engineer,"  and
since  1886  has  been  one  of  the  staff  of  the  "  Scien-
tific American."  He  has  contributed  largely  to
technical  journals  in  this  country  and  abroad,
and  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies. From  1882


SLOAT


8I/X>'UM


651


till  IWfl  he  was  troMurer  of  tlie  Ainoriciin  chemi-
cal mx-ioly.  I)r.  Slnanc  in  the  tmiiHlntor  of  Alglave
and  Ii<mlupil'.H  "  Kloetrir  Light "  (Now  York,  1888),
and  iH  lh(>  author  of  "  Homo  Kx|M*rimi>nt«  in  Sci-
enco"(IMiiliMl.l|>hia.  1888).

SLOAT,  John  Drake,  naval  ofTlccr.  h.  in  Now
York  c'itv  in  1T8<);  il.  in  New  Hrighton.  Staton
island.  N.' Y..  28  Nov..  1807.  llo  ontorwl  the  navy
as  niidshinman,  12  Feb..  18(M),  and  wa.><  honoraltly
dis<>har>r«Hi  by  the  pem-o-establishment  art,  21  May,
1801.  IIo  re-ontfn«<l  the  navy  as  a  sailinK*miu<ter,
10  Jan..  1812.  and  »erve<l  in  the  frijfate  "  I'nitwl
States  "  in  1812-*15.  In  this  ship,  on  2.*)  Oct..  1812.
he  imrticinatiMl  in  the  capture  of  the  British  frii^ate
"  Macedonian,"  and  was  sid>seouently  bl<>ckade<l
In  Thames  rivt-r,  Conn.,  by  the  British  fleet  until
the  end  of  the  war.  He  rt>coive<l  a  vote  of  thanks
and  silver  miMlal  for  the  victory  over  the  "  Mace-
donian," and  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,  24  Julv.
1813.  After  the  war  he  was  on  leave  until  1S17.  fn
1823-'.')  he  cniis<>d  in  the  sch«x>ner  "  Grampus,"  sup-
pressing pirm-y  in  the  West  Indies,  and  particinatetl
m  the  capture  of  the  ))irate  brig  "  Palmyra'  near
Camiwacliy.  He  succeeded  to  the  command  of
the  "(frampus"  in  1824,  and  assisted  at  the  cap-
ture and  destruction  of  the  town  of  Foxhanlo,  the
headquarters  of  the  pirates  on  Porto  Rico.  In  the
spring  of  1825  he  captured  a  piratical  brig  near
St.  Thomas.  W.  I.,  witli  the  pirate  chief  ("olfrecinas,
who  was  subswjuently  executed  by  the  .Spaniards.
He  was  promotiil  to  master-commandant.  21  March,
1820.  and  to  captain,  9  Feb..  1837.  and  was  com-
mandant of  the  navy-vard  at  Portsniouth,  N.  II.,
in  184(>-*4.  In  1844-'6  he  had  comnuind  of  the
Pacific  squa<lron,  (Hiring  which  he  occupied  Mon-
terey in  antici|>ation  of  a  similar  attempt  by  the
Knglish  admiral,  and  when  the  Mexican  warlx^gan
he  secured  possession  of  San  Francisco  and  other

B)ints  in  California  until  he  was  relieved  by  Com.
olx-rt  F.  Sttx'kton.  when  he  returned  to  Norfolk,
27  A|)rii.  1847.  He  had  command  of  the  Norfolk
navv-yard  in  1847-'51,  after  which  he  was  superin-
tendent of  the  construction  of  the  Stevens  Iwttery
until  185").  He  was  placed  on  the  reserved  list,  27
Sept..  1855,  and  retired.  21  Dec.,  1801,  but  was  pro-
moted to  commodon>,  10  July,  1802,  and  to  rear-
admiral,  25  July,  1800.

SLOCl'M,  Frances,  captive  among  the  Indians,
b.  in  Wyoming  valley,  Pa.,  in  1773; d.  near  Lo-

Knsport.  Ind.,  in  1851.  She  was  taken  captive  by
ilaware  Indians  on  2  Nov.,  1778,  and  no  intelli-
gence was  received  regarding  her  till  the  summer
of  18i{7,  when  the  surviving  members  of  her  familv
heard  that  she  was  residing  near  Logansport,  Ind.
Her  brother,  Joseph  Slocum,  and  her  sister  piT>-
ceeded  thither,  and,  obtaining  an  interview  with
their  long-lost  sister,  had  no  dlfliculty  in  esUiblish-
ing  her  identity.  She  had  entirely  forgotten  her
native  language  and  all  knowletlge  of  Christianity,
and  was  an  Indian  in  everything  but  the  fairness
of  her  skin  and  the  color  of  her  hair.  She  hml  a
distinct  recollection  of  her  cai)ture  by  the  savages,
who,  after  taking  her  to  a  rocky  cave  in  the  moun-
tains, denarted  for  the  Indian  country.  She  was
treated  Kindly  and  adopted  by  an  Indian  family,
who  brought  her  up  as  their  daughter.  For  years
she  led  a  roving  life,  and  l)ecame  an  expert  in  all
the  employments  of  savage  existence,  and  when
grown  to  womanhotMl  married  a  young  chief  of  the
nation,  and  removed  with  him  to  Ohio.  She  was
so  happy  in  her  domestic  relations  that  she  dreaded
being  discoveretl  and  compelled  to  reside  among
the  whites.  After  the  death  of  her  first  huslianu
she  marricil  one  of  the  Miami  tril)e,  and  at  the
time  of her discovery  had been many  years  a


widow,  and  ha<I  children  and  grandchildren  around
her.  .She  was  known  among  the  Indians  as  Ma-
conaqua  (young  liear),  was  regarded  by  them  as  a
qu(H?n,  and  was  happy  and  in  comfortable  circum-
stanws.  When  the  Miamis  were  n-move*!  from
Indiana.  John  (^uincy  Adams  pleadiMl  the  cauw  of
Maconaqua  mi  eliHjuently  in  c«>ngre)>s  that  she  and
her  Indian  ndativcs  were  exempted.  CongresM
jrave  her  a  tra<'t  of  land  a  mile  s«|uare,  to  Jjo  held
ui  iM'riM'tuitv  by  her  dcMTndants.

Mi<K'r>I,  Henrr  Warner,  soldier,  b.  in  Del-
phi. Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Sept.,  1827.  Ho  was
graduateil  at  the  U.  .S.  military  aca^lemy  in  1852,
aptK»inted  2d  lieutenant  in  the  Ist  artillery,  and
orderwl  to  Florida
the  same  year.  He
was  promoted  1st
lieutenant  in  18,55.
but  resigned  in  Oc-
tolier,  1850.  and.
returning  to  New
York,  engage<l  in
the  practice  of  law
at  Syrm-use,  and
was  a  member  of
the  legislature  in
1859.  At  the  o|>-
ening  of  the  civil
war  he  tendered
his  sen'ices,  and
on  21  May.  1801,
was  appointed  col-
onel of  the  27th
New  York  volun-
teers. He  commande<l  this  regiment  at  the  bat-
tle of  Bull  Uun  on  21  July,  where  he  was  severe-
ly wounded,  on  9  Aug.  was  commissioned  briga-
ilier-general  of  volunti'ers.  and  wa.s  assigned  to
the  command  of  a  brigade  in  Gen.  William  B.
F'ranklin's  division  of  tlie  Army  of  the  Potomac.
In  the  Virginia  peninsula  camjwign  of  1802  he
was  engaged  in  the  sic^e.  of  \  orktown  and  the
action  at  West  Point,  \  a.,  and  succeechnl  to  the
command  of  the  division  on  15  May,  on  Franklin's
assignment  to  the  0th  corps.  At  the  battle  of
Gaines's  Mills,  27  June,  he  was  sent  with  his  di-
vision to  re-enforce  Gen.  Fitz-John  Porter,  who
was  then  severely  presse<l  by  the  enemy,  and  ren-
deretl  imi)ortant  s<>rvice,  as  he  did  also  at  the  Imt-
tles  of  Glendale  and  Malvern  Hill,  his  division  oc-
cupying the  right  of  the  main  line  at  both  engage-
ments. He  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  major-
general  of  volunteers.  4  July.  1802.  engaged  in  the
second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  at  South  Mountain,  and
at  Antietam,  and  in  October  was  as.signe<l  to  the
command  of  the  12th  army  cor|>s.  In  the  battles
of  Fredericksburg,  Chancellorsville,  and  Gettys-
burg he  took  an  active  part.  At  Gettysburg  he
commanded  the  right  wing  of  the  army,  and  ctm-
tributed  largely  to  the  National  victory.  Having
t)een  transferred  with  his  corps  to  the  west,  he
served  in  the  Department  of  the  Cumberland  till
April,  1804,  when,  his  corps  U'lng  consolidated
with  the  11th,  he  was  assigned  to  a  division  and
the  command  of  the  district  of  Vicksburg.  In  Au-
gust, 1804,  he  succeeded  Gen.  Joseph  Hooker  in  the
command  of  the  20th  corps,  which  was  the  first
Ixxly  of  tnxips  to  occupy  Atlanta,  Ga.,  on  2  Sept.
In  Sherman's  march  to  the  sea  and  invasion  of  the
Canilinas.  he  held  command  of  the  left  wing  of
the  army,  and  |»artici|>ated  in  all  its  engagements
from  the  departure  from  Atlanta  till  the  surrender
of  Gen.  Joseph  K.  Johnston  at  Durham  station,
N.  C.  In  September,  1805,  Gen.  SliKum  resigned
from  the  army  and  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in


652


SLOCUMB


SMALL


Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  In  1866  he  declined  the  appoint-
ment of  colonel  of  infantry  in  the  regular  army.
In  1865  he  was  the  unsuccessful  candidate  of  the
Democrats  for  secretary  of  state  of  New  York,  in
1868  he  was  chosen  a  presidential  elector,  and  he
was  elected  to  congress  the  same  year,  and  re-
elected in  1870.  In  1876  he  was  elected  president
of  the  board  of  city  works,  Brooklyn,  which  post
he  afterward  resigned,  and  in  1884  he  was  again
elected  to  congress.  He  was  one  of  the  commis-
sioners of  the  Brooklyn  bridge,  and  was  in  favor
of  making  it  free  to  the  public.

SLOCUMB,  Ezekiel,  soldier,  b.  in  Craven
county,  X.  C,  about  1750 :  d.  near  Dudley,  N.  C,
4  July,  1840.  Ilis  father,  Joseph,  was  at  one  time
a  merchant  in  Atlanta,  Ga.  The  son  entered  the
Revolutionary  army  at  an  early  date,  and  served
through  the  war.  As  a  lieutenant  he  fought  at
the  battle  of  Moore's  Creek,  N.  C,  27  Feb.,  1776,
and  he  attained  the  rank  of  colonel  before  the
close  of  the  war.  After  the  battle  of  Guilford,  in
1781,  his  farm  was  ravaged  bv  the  British  troops
while  on  their  march  from  Wilmington  to  Vir-
ginia, and,  aided  by  Maj.  Williams,  he  raised  a
troop  of.  about  200  men,  and,  following  the  royal
army,  succeeded  in  cutting  off  their  foraging  par-
ties and  harassed  them  greatly  until  thev  crossed
Roanoke  river,  when  he  joined  Gen.  Lafayette
with  his  troop,  and  was  at  Yorktown  on  19  Oct.,
1781.  After  the  war  he  returned  to  his  home
on  a  plantation  near  Dudley,  N.  C,  held  many
offices  of  honor  and  trust,  and  was  a  member  of
the  North  Carolina  house  of  commons  from  1812
till  1818.— His  wife,  Mary  Hooks,  at  the  battle  of
Moore's  Creek,  fearing  for  her  husband's  sjifety,
visited  the  scene  of  the  battle  alone,  and,  having
been  assured  that  he  was  unharmed,  dressed  the
wounds  of  the  injured  and  returned  to  her  home
forty  hours  after  she  had  left  it,  having  ridden  125
miles  on  horseback. — Their  son  Jesse,  b.  in  Dud-
ley, N.  C,  20  Aug.,  1780;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
20  Dec,  1820,  was  -elected  to  congress  from  North
Carolina  for  two  successive  terms,  serving  from  1
Dec,  1817,  till  his  death.

SLOUGH,  John  P.  (slo),  soldier,  b.  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  in  1829;  d.  in  Santa  Pe,  N.  M.,  16  Dec,
1867.  He  l)ecame  a  lawyer  in  his  native  city,  and
in  1850  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of  Ohio,  from
which  he  was  expelled  for  striking  a  member.  In
1852  he  became  a  secretary  of  the  central  Demo-
cratic committee  of  Ohio,  and  soon  afterward  he
T#ent  to  Kansas,  and  in  1860  to  Denver  city.  Col.  At
the  opening  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  a  company
of  volunteers,  assumed  command  of  Fort  Garland,
and  afterward  became  colonel  of  the  1st  Colorado
regiment,  forming  part  of  Gen.  Edward  R.  S.  Can-
by  s  expedition  to  New  Mexico.  He  fought  there,
in  opposition  to  orders,  the  battle  of  Pigeon's
Ranche,  gaining  a  victory  over  Gen.  Henry  H.
Sibley,  who  was  forced  to  retire  into  Texas.  Im-
mediately after  this  he  gave  up  his  commission  as
colonel  and  proceeded  to  Washington,  where  he
was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  and
military  governor  of  Alexandria.  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of  New
Mexico  by  President  Johnson  ;  but  his  manner  and
irritable  temper  rendered  him  unpopular.  A  series
of  resolutions  were  passed  in  the  legislature  ad-
vocating his  removal  from  the  chief  justiceship,
which  sf)  incensed  him  against  William  D.  Ryner-
son,  the  member  who  had  introduced  them,  that
a  personal  encounter  took  place  between  the  two
men,  resulting  in  Gen.  Slough's  death.

SLUTER,  Geoi^e  Liidewi^,  clergyman,  b.  in
Rodcnberg,  Hesse-Cassel,  Germany,  5  May,  1837.


In  1847  he  settled  with  his  parents  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.  Ho  was  graduated  at  Westminster  college.
Pulton,  iMo.,  in  1860,  in  1863  at  Princeton  theo-
logical seminary,  and  he  was  licensed  as  a  preacher
by  the  presbytery  of  New  Brunswick  the  same
year.  He  has  been  settled  as  pastor  in  Rens-
selaer, and  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  Duluth,  Minn.,  and
Shelbyville,  Ind..  and  since  1881  at  Arlington,
N.  J.  Prom  1866  till  1870  he  was  secretary  of
home  missions  of  the  synotl  of  Missouri.  He  was
assistant  editor  of  the  "  Missouri  Presbyterian  "  in
1866-'70,  and  since  1881  has  been  the  New  York
correspondent  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Herald  and  Pres-
byter. '  He  has  published  "  Life  and  Character  of
Joseph  Hamilton"  (Shelbyville,  Ind.,  1872);  "Me-
morial of  Mrs.  Jane  Major  (1874) ;  "  History  of  our
Beloved  Church  "  (1876) ;  "  Historical  and  Critical
Investigations  of  the  Acta  Pilati"  (Indianapolis,
1879);  "Illustrated  Historical  Atlas  of  Shelby
County,  Indiana"  (Chicago,  1880);  "The  Religion
of  Politics"  (Shelbyville,  1880) ;  "Life  of  the  Em-
peror Tiberius  "  (New  York,  1881);  and  minor  works.

SMALL,  Alvin  Edmond,  physician,  b.  in  Maine,
4  March,  1811 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  29  Dec,  1866.  He
began  the  study  of  medicine  at  Bath  in  1831, and  sub-
sequently continued  it  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania. He  settled  in  Delaware  county.  Pa.,  but  in
1845  returned  to  Philadelphia  and  took  high  rank
in  his  profession.  While  here  he  became  converted
to  the  homoeopathic  school  of  medicine.  In  1849
Dr.  Small  was  appointed  professor  of  physiology
and  pathology  in  the  Homoeopathic  medical  college
of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  remained  for  seven  years,
during  which  time  he  wrote  several  medical  works
and  was  editor  of  the  "  Philadelphia  Journal."  In
1856  he  removed  to  Chicago  and  entered  at  once
into  an  extensive  practice,  which  he  continued  till
his  death.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in  that  city  he
was  called  to  the  chair  of  theory  and  practice  in
Hahnemann  college,  which  he  held  for  life.

SMALL,  Henry  Beanmont,  Canadian  natural-
rist,  b.  in  Market  Bosworth,  Leicestershire.  Eng-
land, 31  Oct.,  1831.  He  was  educated  at  King's
college,  London,  and  Lincoln  college,  Oxford,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1853,  afterward  emigrated  to
Canada,  and  in  1858  removed  to  the  state  of  New
York,  where  he  was  a  teacher  of  classics  in  a  mili-
tary school  at  Sing  Sing  in  1860-'2.  He  afterward
taught  for  a  time  in  New  York  city,  served  in  the
U.  S.  sanitary  commission  in  Virginia  during  part
of  the  civil  war,  and  in  1865  returned  to  Canada.
He-entered  the  civil  service  of  Canada  in  1868,  and
became  chief  clerk  of  emigration  and  quarantine
in  1885.  Mr.  Small  has  contributed  extensively  to,
the  British,  American,  and  Canadian  press  and  to
magazines,  and  among  other  works  has  published
"Animals  of  North  America,  Mammals"  (Mon-
treal, 1865);  "  Fresh- Water  Fish  "  (1866) ;  "  Chroni-
cles of  Canada"  (1868) ;  "  Resources  of  the  Ottawa
Valley "  (Ottawa,  1872) ;  "  Mineral  Resources  of
Canada"  (1880);  and  "Canadian  Forests "  (Mon-
treal. 1885).

SMALL,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Strathardle,
Athole,  Scotland,  in  1726;  d.  in  the  island  of
Guernsey,  17  March,  1796.  After  serving  in  the
Scotch  brigade  in  the  Dutch  service,  he  was  com-
missioned an  ensign  in  the  42d  Highlanders,  29
Aug.,  1747,  and  was  appointed  a  lieutenant  on  the
eve  of  the  departure  of  that  regiment  for  this
country,  to  join  the  force  under  Loudon.  He
served  under  Abercrombie  in  the  attack  on  Ticon-
deroga  in  1758,  accompanied  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst
the  following  year  in  his  expedition,  went  to  Mon-
treal in  1760,  was  on  service  in  the  West  Indies  in
1762,  and  the  same  year  was  made  captain. On  14


SMALL


SMALI^


563


.liinff,  1775.  ho  iwoivwl  a  (ximmiMion  na  major  to
raim)  a  f><ir|M  of  ili|;hlaiuli>rH  in  Nova  Sc*otin  in  aicl
of  the  rniwii.  lie  wat  in  tho  Itattlo  of  Hunker  Hill,
«n«l  i«  a  proininent  fljfure  in  Col.  TruinlKilI'M  pic-
turf.  Up  wiu«  aii[Miinti>4l  major  commamlin);  tho
2ti  Uittnlion  of  tho  HIth  royal  onffintMjrs.  with  pari
of  which  ho  ioinod  tho  army  un«lor  Sir  llonry  (  lin-
ton  at  Now  York  in  177U,  and  in  17>«)  ho  UM-amc
lioutcnant-<'olonol.  Ho  was  ap|>oiiito4l  colonol,  18
Nov.,  17JHI,  b«H-anio  lioutonant-pivcrnor  of  (hiern-
90V  in  17t>:{.  an<l  major-p-noral,  <i  Oct.,  171M.

SMALU  Michael  l»cter,  «oiaior.  h.  in  Harrin-
burc.  I'a.,  U  Au)f.,  1H;{1.  Ho  wa-s  gnuluati.tl  at  tho
U.  S.  military  acailomy  in  185.'},  a.<.sijfno(l  to  tho
•rtillery,  sorvo<l  a^inst  the  Sominolo  Indians  and
on  frontier  and  other  iluty,  and  wjls  promotwl  1st
lieutonant.  27  April,  1H«11. '  Ho  starved  as  chief  com-
missary and  (luartormastcr  at  Kolla,  .Mo.,  from  4
.Sept.,  iww.  till  81  Jan.,  1K<W;  as  chief  commissary
of  tho  null  army  cor|)s,  and  of  the  army  during
the  flehl.  in  the'Tet^he  cam|)aign  in  tho  Depart-
ment of  the  Ciulf  from  15  Sept.  till  9  Nov.,  ISWJ;
and  was  supervising  comnussary  of  the  stat«s  of
Illinois  and  Indiana  from  I>eceml)er,  186;J,  till  Feb-
ruarv,  1804.  He  wjis  nppointe<l  lieutenant-colonel
on  tfio  st«(T,  15  Se|»t.,  18(W.  U'Wime  chief  commis-
sary of  tho  I)o|»artment  of  Virginia  and  North
Carolina  at  Fortn'ss  Monroe,  supplied  the  armies
operating  against  Richmond,  aim  acted  in  a  simi-
lar capacity  for  other  armies  and  other  military
departments  till  the  close  of  the  war.  He  lM»came
brevet  colonel  of  U.  S.  volunteers,  1  Jan.,  1805.  and
brevet  brigadier-general,  9  April,  1805,  for  merito-
rious services  in  the  subsistence  department  dur-
ing the  war.  .Since  31  Oct.,  1884,  he  has  been  nur-
chasing  and  depot  commissary  at  Baltimore,  Md.

SXALLEY,  Eugene  Virgil,  journalist,  b.  in
Randolph.  Portage  co..  Ohio,  18  July,  1841.  He
was  educated  in  the  public  schix)lsof  Ohio  and  New
York,  and  pa.ssed  one  year  in  New  York  central  col-
lege at  McGrawville.  He  enlisted  at  tho  beginning
of  the  civil  war  in  the  7th  Ohio  infantry,  and  fre-
quently sent  letters  ai)out  dififerent  engagements  to
the  newspapers,  for  which  descriptions  he  had
shown  a  predilection  l)efore  entering  tlie  field.  He
8erve<l  until  nearly  the  cK^se  of  the  struggle,  when
he  was  discharge<l  on  account  of  wounds,  and  as
soon  as  he  was  able  went  to  Washington,  I).  C,
where,  in  1805,  he  was  appointed  clerk  of  the  mili-
tary committee  of  the  house  of  representatives.
He  retainetl  the  post  until  1873,  at  the  same
time  corresnonding  at  intervals  for  diflforent  jour-
nals. He  then  formed  a  connection  with  a  New
York  journal,  continuing  to  lie  its  correspond-
ent ana  editorial  writer  for  nine  years.  During  his
rosidence  in  Washington  he  had  formed  an  intimate
acquaintance  with  public  men  and  measures,  which
aided  him  greatly  as  a  journalist.  In  1882  he  en-
tered the  employment  of  the  Northern  Pacific  rail-
roail.  and  in  18M4  establishe<l  tho  "  Northwest,"
an  illustratetl  magazine,  in  St.  Paul.  Minn.,  of
which  he  is  still  (1888)  the  e<litor  and  publisher.
Ho  is  a  frequent  contributor  to  periodicals,  mainly
on  subjects  relating  to  tho  resources  and  devolo[>-
raent  of  the  region  in  which  he  has  ma«le  his  home.
He  has  nublishi»d  "  History  of  the  Northern  Pacific
Itailroiui  "  (New  York.  1883),  and  *'  History  of  the
Renublican  Party  "  (1885).

S.M.\LLKY.  (jeorfe  naslibiirn,  jounuilist,  b.
In  Fninkliii,  .Suffolk  co.,  Mass.,  2  Juno,  18*i.  He
was  gmduatoil  at  Yale  in  18553,  rea<l  law  with
George  F.  Hoar  at  Worcester  in  1853-'4,  and  in
Harvanl  law-school  in  18,">4-'5,  and  in  1850  was
admitt«Hl  to  the  Iktston  bar.  Ho  practised  law  in
Boston  until  the  opening  of  the  civil  war,  when,  in


tho  w^rvico  of  tho  Now  York  "  Tribune,"  ho  acconi'
|)anio<l  the  National  trtntiM  to  Port  Royal,  after-
ward going  with  (ion.  John  ('.  Fn*mont  into  Vir>
ginia.  Remaining  with  tho  Army  of  tho  Potomac,
no  witnosMMl  tho  bnttio  of  Antiotam.  Immediately
U[K)n  its  clos«>,  Smalloy  rrMlo  thirtv  miles,  found  a
train,  and.  going  dirn-t  to  Now  V'ork,  wrote  his
narnitive  or  tho  engagement  on  the  «'ars.  This
vivid  d(>scription.  with  tho  energy  that  had  lx<en
shown  in  its  transmission  and  publication,  gave  him
rank  among  tho  U'st-known  war  corrosjxjnuent-H.  In
IHtiii  ho  was  a  memlN>r  of  the  e4litorial  staff  of  the
"Tribune."  At  the  sudden  Itoginnitig  of  the  war
between  Prussia  and  Austria  in  18(MJ  .Mr.  Smalley
was  sent  on  a  day's  notice  to  Euro|M>.  At  the  cIos«j
of  the  war  he  returned  for  a  few  months  to  New
York,  but  was  sent  U>  Kngland  in  .May.  18<{7.  by  the
'•  Tribune."  with  instructions  to  organize  a  Ix)ndon
burt^au  for  that  journal.  This  he  did,  and  the  suc-
cess that  has  attende<l  the  P!uro[K«an  doitartment
of  the  *'  Tribune  "  is  largely  due  to  his  eflort-s.  In
1870,  at  the  oi)ening  of  the  Franco-CJerman  war,
the  "  Tribune  devised  a  new  system  of  news-gath-
ering. Mr.  Smalley.  as  the  agent  of  this  |H»licy.
showed  an  energy  and  foresight  which  gave  him  an
eminent  rank  in  journalism.  The  Knglish  writer
I  Kinglake.  in  his  •'  History  of  the  Crimean  War,"
!  says:  "  The  success  of  that  partnership  for  the  pur-
I  (K>se  of  war  news  which  hiul  been  formed  Ijetween
one  <)f  our  London  newsi>a|)ers  and  the  New  York
I  '  Tribune.'  was  an  em  in  tlie  journalism  of  Europe."
Mr.  Smalley's  letters  from  lierlin.  in  April,  1888,
descriptive  of  the  Em|>eror  William's  (loath  and
burial,  were  among  the  most  brilliant  that  ap-
peared on  that  occasion.

SMALLEY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lelmnon
(now  Columbia),  Conn.,  4  June,  1734;  d.  in  New
Britain,  Conn..  I  Juno.  1820.  After  his  graduation
at  Yale  in  1750  he  studieti  theology  under  Rev.
Joseph  Bellamy,  and  on  19  April,  1758,  was  or-
dained and  installe<l  pastor  over  a  newly  organized
chuix'h  at  New  Britain,  Conn.,  sustaining  the  rela-
tion, with  slight  interruption,  a  little  more  than
fifty  years.  In  1800  he  received  the  degree  of  I).  D.
from  Princeton,  and  in  1810,  Iwing  infirm,  he  was
given  a  colleague,  preaching  afterward  (x-casionally
and  devoting  himself  to  the  preparation  of  a  sec-
ond volume  of  discourses  for  publication.  Dr.
Smalley's  sermons,  which  he  always  read  in  the
pulpit,  have  seldom  been  sur(>asse<l  in  logical  ac-
curacy, clearness,  and  strength.  The  Rev.  Royal
Ilobbins  says  in  1850:  "  Dr.  Smalley,  in  referri'ng
to  his  treatise  on  'Natural  and  Moral  Inability/
seemeti  to  think  that  no  one  previously  had  drawn
the  proi)er  distinctions  on  this  subject — not  even
Edwards  ha<l  mmle  the  matter  clear.  Admitting
the  correctness  of  this  opinion,  he  is  to  l)e  ri'gardea
as  the  father  of  New  England  theology  in  that
branch  of  it."  He  publisheil  two  sermons  on  "  Nat-
ural and  Moral  Inability"  (1709:  republished  in
London) ;  two  on  "  Universal  Salvation"  (178.")-'6);
one  on  "The  Perfection  of  Divine  Iiaw"(1787);
and  an  "Election  Sermon"  (1800).  Two  volumes
of  his  sermons  were  issued  in  1803-'14.

SMALLS,  Robert,  member  of  congress,  b.  in
Beauf<»rt,  S.  C..  5  April.  18:^9.  lieing  a  slave,  he
was  delMirrod  fn)m  attending  school,  and  was  alto-
gether solf-iHlucated.  Ho  n-inovwl  to  Charleston
in  1851.  work«><l  at  the  rigger's  trade,  aftorwartl  le<l
a  si'afaring  life,  and  in  1801  was  emplov«l  as  a
pilot  on  "The  I'lanter,"  a  steamer  that  plieii  in
Charleston  harlntr  as  a  transport.  In  May.  1862,
he  t«K>k  this  vessel  over  Charleston  bar,  and  de-
livered her  to  the  commander  of  the  U.  S.  blockad-
ing squadron. After  serving  for  acme  time  as  pilot


664


SMALLWOOD


SMILIK


in  the  U.  S.  navy,  he  was  promoted  captain  for
gallant  and  meritorious  conauct,  1  Dec,  ISGJi,  and
placed  in  command  of  "  The  Planter,"  servine  until
she  was  put  out  of  commission  in  1866.  He  re-
turned to  Beaufort  after  the  war,  was  a  raemlwr  of
the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1868.  was
elected  a  member  of  the  state  house  of  representa-
tives the  same  year,  and  of  the  state  senate  in  1870,
and  was  re-elected  in  1872.  He  was  elected  to  the
44th  congress  from  South  Carolina,  has  been  re-
elected to  every  succeeding  congress  except  the
46th.  for  which  he  was  defeated,  and  served,  with
this  exception,  from  6  Dec.,  1875,  till  1888.  He
has  been  major-general  of  state  troops.

SMALLWOOD,  Charles,  Canadian  meteorolo-
gist, b.  in  Hirmingham,  England,  in  1812 ;  d.  in
Montreal.  22  Dec,  1873.  He  l)ecame  a  physician,
and,  emigrating  to  Canada  in  1853,  settled  at  St.
Martin's,  Isle  Jesus.  Canada  East,  and  acquired  a
large  practice.  He  soon  afterward  established  his
meteorological  and  electrical  observatory,  a  descrip-
tion of  which  was  given  in  the  "  Smithsonian  Re-
ports." He  discovered  the  effects  of  atmospheric
electricity  on  the  formation  of  snow  crystals,  and
investigated  the  action  of  ozone  in  connection  with
light,  and  that  of  electricity  in  the  germination  of
seeds.  In  1858  Dr.  Smallwood  received  the  honor-
ary degree  of  LL.  D.  from  McGill  college,  and  was
appointed  professor  of  meteorology  in  that  institu-
tion, to  which  was  subsequently  added  the  chair  of
astronomy.  In  1860  the  Canadian  government
made  hini  a  grant  for  the  purchase  of  magnetic
instruments,  and  in  August,  1861,  he  began  mak-
ing observations.  When  the  U.  S.  signal-service
system  was  established.  Dr.  Smallwood  arranged
for  stations  in  connection  with  it  in  Montreal  and
other  Canadian  cities.  He  was  one  of  the  govern-
ors of  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  of
Lower  Canada,  and  was  a  member  of  many  scien-
tific and  literary  societies  in  America  and  Europe.
He  was  the  author  of  numerous  articles  in  scientific
periodicals  and  the  "  Smithsonian  Reports,"  and  of
contributions  to  Canadian  meteorology  furnished
to  various  magazines  for  more  than  twenty  years.

SMALLWOOD,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Kent
countv,  Md.,  in  1732;  d.  in  Prince  George  county,
Md.,  14  Pel)..  1792.  On  2  Jan.,  1776,  he  was  elected
colonel  of  the  Maryland  battalion,  and  on  10  July,

with  nine  com-
panies, he  joined
Washington  in
New  York.  On  20
Aug.  his  troops
took  an  active  part
in  the  battle  of
Brooklyn  Heights,
being  hotly  en-
gaged from  sun-
rise until  the  last
gun  was  fired,  and
losing  nearly  half
their  number.  At
White  Plains,  on
18  Oct.,  the  Mary-
land line  again
bore  the  brunt  of
the  fight,  and
Smallwood  was
wounded.  For  his
gallantry  on  this  occasion  congress  appointed  him
a  brigadier-general,  23  Oct.,  1776.  In  the  battle  of
Port  Washington,  16  Nov^  1776,  his  command  again
suffered  severely,  and  at  German  town,  4  Oct.,  1777,
the  Maryland  line  retrieved  the  day  and  captured
part  of  the  enemy's  camp. In  the  winter  of  1777-'8


/^/^ia/<!2/y'avx)


he  was  stationed  at  Wilmington,  and  captured  a
British  brig  in  the  Delaware  laden  with  stores  and
provisions.  He  won  new  laurels  in  the  battle  of
Camden,  and  received  the  thanks  of  congress  for
his  gallant  conduct.  In  September,  1780,  he  was
ap[)ointed  major-general,  but  after  the  removal  of
Gates  he  refused  to  serve  under  Baron  Steulien,
who  was  his  senior  officer,  declaring  his  intention
to  leave  the  army  unless  congress  should  antedate
his  commission  two  years.  This  claim  was  not  al-
lowed, being  regarded  as  absurd,  but  Gen.  Small-
wood  remained  m  the  army  until  15  Nov.,  1783.  In
1785  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  in  the  same
year  he  was  chosen  governor  of  Maryland,  which
was  the  last  public  post  that  he  held.

SMARIUS,  Cornelius  Francis,  clergyman,  b.
in  Telburg,  North  Brabant,  Holland,  3  March,
1823 ;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  2  March,  1870.  After
completing  his  studies  at  the  University  of  North
Brabant,  he  came  to  the  United  States  and  joined
the  Society  of  Jesus  at  Florissant,  Mo.,  13  Nov.,
1841.  In  1843  he  went  to  Cincinnati,  where  he
pursued  theological  studies,  and  was  assistant  pro-
fessor of  poetry  and  rhetoric  in  a  school  there  un-
til 1848.  During  this  period  he  published  anony-
mously many  poems  of  much  beauty.  He  was
ordained  priest  ni  1849,  afterward  studied  in  Ford-
ham,  N.  Y.,  and  was  pastor  of  the  church  of  St.
Francis  Xavier  in  St.  Louis  in  ■1859-'60.  Here  he
displayed  such  powers  as  a  pulpit  orator  that  he
became  very  popular.  In  1861  he  was  detailed  for
missionary  work,  with  a  large  field  of  operations,
and  in  1865  he  visited  Europe  for  his  health.  He
was  vice-president  of  the  Lniversityof  St.  Louis
in  1850-2,  and  again  in  1857-8.  "He  published
"  Points  of  Controversy  "  (New  York,  1865).

SMEAD,  Wesley,  philanthropist,  b.  in  West-
chester county,  N.  Y.,  23  Dec,  1800 ;  d.  in  Pough-
keepsie,  N.  Y.,  6  Jan.,  1871.  He  first  was  a  news-
boy, then  became  a  printer,  afterward  studied
medicine,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Ohio  medical
college,  Cincinnati.  He  practised  in  that  city,  and
was  president  of  the  Citizens'  bank  there  from
1843  till  1857.  He  became  possessed  of  great
wealth,  founded  in  1850  the  Widows'  home  in
Cincinnati,  to  which  he  gave  $37,000,  and  gave
liberally  to  every  public  charity  that  came  to  his
notice.  Besides  essays  on  banking,  he  published
"Guide  to  Wealth,  or  Pathway  to  Health,  Peace,
and  Competence"  (Cincinnati,  1856).

SMEDES,  Susan  Dabney,  author,  b.  in  Ray-
mond, Miss.,  10  Aug.,  1840.  She  is  the  daughter
of  Thomas  S.  Dabney,  a  rich  planter,  and  was  edu-
cated at  home,  at  I^ew  Orleans,  and  at  Jackson, .
Miss.  When  twenty  years  of  age  she  married
Lyell  Smedes,  but  was  left  a  widow  about  three
months  afterward.  With  her  sisters  she  originated
and  supported  the  Bishop  Green  training-school  at
Dry  Grove,  Miss.  In  1887  she  was  appointed  a
teacher  in  the  Government  Indian  school  in  Rose-
bud agency,  Dakota  territory.  She  has  published
"  Memorials  of  a  Southern  Planter,"  whicn  conveys
a  graphic  picture  of  southern  plantation  life  at  its
best,  and  of  slavery  in  its  least  repulsive  aspect
(Baltimore,  1887).

SMILIE,  John,  member  of  congress,  b.  in  Ire-
land in  1741 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  30  Dec,
1812.  He  came  to  Pennsylvania  in  1760,  settled  in
Lancaster  county,  and  served  during  the  war  of
the  Revolution  in  both  military  and  civil  capaci-
ties. He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  of  Penn-
sylvania, served  in  congress,  as  a  Democrat,  in
1793-5  and  in  1799-1813,  and  was  chairman  of
the  committee  on  foreign  relations.  He  was  a
presidential  elector  in  1796.


SMILLIB


SMITH


BBS


S M I  lilJ  K,  JaniPH  (smi-Iy),  cnj^ravor.  b.  in  K«lin-
hurKli.  S<(itlHiul,2.'{ Nov.,  1H<)7  :  d.  in  I'oujjhkiM'iwU',
N.  v..  4  1  >«•(•..  1H85.  He  wa-s  at  first  Hppreiitiecil  to
Jaineti  Johnston,  a  »ilv«»r-«'njfrftvcr,  after  wlio!«f
fieath.  ten  months  lat«>r,  he  worko<l  for  a  time  with
an  enjrmver  of  pictures,  hlilwanl  Miteliel.  In  1821
he  eame  with  nis  family  to  Cnnada,  settling  in
UueUv.  wlu'ri'  his  father  and  eldest  brother  estab-
lished thenjsiMves  as  jewelers.  Yoiui);  Smillie
worked  with  them  for  some  time  as  a  general  en-
graver, until  Ix)nl  I>alhousie,  struck  with  his  evi-
dent talent,  ^ve  him  free  iMistiaKe  to  Ijondon  and
letters  of  intHxluction  in  1p27.  This  did  not  prove
of  much  assistance  to  the  young  artist,  as  the  Lon-
don engravers.  n>ganling  him  as  the  governor's
protege,  asked  niost  exorbitant  premiunis.  Smillie
thereujxin  went  to  Kdinburgh.  where  he  worked
for  alwiut  five  months,  after  which  he  retiirne<l  to
Quebec.  He  went  in  1H21>  to  New  York,  where  he
si*ttle<l  jH-rmanently  in  the  following  year.  His
engraving  after  KolK?rt  W.  Weir's  "Convent  fJate"
first  brought  him  into  notice,  and  <luring  l!*}2-'6
he  engravetl  a  series  of  nlates.  mostly  after  uaint-
ings  by  Weir,  for  the  New  York  "Mirror.'  In
1832  he  was  elected  an  a>«ociate  of  the  National
academy,  and  he  IxM-anu-  un  acwlemician  in  1K51.
From  the  first  his  name  became  connecti-d  with
the  art  of  Iwuk-note  engraving,  and  he  has  l)een
calle<l  the  pioneer  in  this  line.  From  1801  till  his
death  his  time  was  devoted  to  that  branch  of  en-
graving. He  is  best  known,  however,  as  a  land-
scaiKvengniver,  in  which  branch  of  art  he  probably
haa  no  equal  in  this  country.  Among  his  more
important  plates,  all  executed  in  the  line  manner,
are  "  r)rcam  of  Arcudia."  after  Cole,  and  "  Dover
Plains."  after  Asher  B.  Durand  (1850),  and  "  Mount
^Washington."  after  John  V.  Kensett,  and  "Ameri-
can Harvesting,"  after  Jasper  F'.  Cropsey  (1851) — all
engrave<l  for  the  American  art  union:  the  series
"  The  Voyage  of  Life,"  after  Thomas  Colo  (185»-'4),
and  "The  Rocky  Mountains,"  after  Albert  Bier-
stadt  (18(»-'G).— His  brother,  William  Cuiuiuin^,
engraver,  b.  in  Edinburgh.  2^}  Sept..  1H1;{,  oun-
grated  with  his  itarents  to  Canada  in  1821.  He
first  workefl  at  sitver-engraving,  but.  after  coming
to  New  York  in  18:{().  soon  turned  his  attention  to
bank-note  engraving.  He  was  connected  as  partner
with  several  firms,  the  last  of  which,  Edmonds,
Jones  an«l  .Smillie,  was  eventuallv  absorlKvl  by  the
American  bank-note  company.  In  180(5  he  estal>-
lishe<l  a  bank-note  engraving  company  at  Ottawa,


from  1873  till  1878.  Among  his  water-colors  are
"The  Tnwk  of  the  Torrent,  Adinmdacks"  (1809):
"  A  .Scrub  Uace,  Califoniia"  (1870):  "Old  Cedarn,
Coast  of  Maine  "  (18H0):  "Stray  lianibs.  near  Mont-
row.  I'a."  (1884):  "Etn'tal."  Coast  of  France"
(1887):  and  "The  Passing  Herd"  (1888).  Mr.
Smillie  is  also  well  known  as  an  etcher,  and  waa
one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  York  etching  club.
His  |)encil  has  Ikh'U  frecjuentlv  employed  in  Ixjok
illustration,  and  he  is  the  author  as  well  a<i  illus-
trator of  the  "  Yosemitc"  article  in  "  Pictur««s<|ue
America."— Another  son,  Willlaiii  Main,  b.  in
New  York,  23  Nov.,  IKW;  d.  there.  21  Jan..  1888,
was  known  as  an  exjK?rt  letter  engraver.  He  waa
in  the  employ  of  a  firm  until  merged,  with  seven
other  companies,  into  the  «>ld  American  l>ank-note
company  in  1S.')7.  He  remaine<l  with  the  company
until  it  was  combined  with  two  others  to  form  the
present  company,  after  which  he  was  general  mana-
ger until  his  «Ieath. — Another  son,  Cjeor^e  Henry,
artist,  b.  in  New  York.  2J)  I>f«c..  1840.  studie<l  under
his  father  and  James  M.  Hart  in  lWJl-'3.  In  1871
he  visited  the  Yosemite  valley,  and  in  1884  he  went
abroad.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  Na-
tional academy  in  1804,  and  an  academician  in
1882,  and  is  also  a  meml)er  of  the  Water-color  so-
ciety. Among  his  works  in  oil  are  "A  I^ake  in  the
Woods  "  (1872) :  "  A  Florida  I^agoon  "  (1875) :  "  A
Goat  Pasture  "(1879):  "  Merrimack  River"  (1882);
"On  the  Massachusetts  Coast "  (188:i):  ".Summer
Morning  on  Long  Island  "  (1884) ;  and  "  Light  and
Shadow  along  Shore,"  which  is  owned  by  the  L'nion
league  club,  Philadelphia  His  water-colors  in-
clude "  Under  the  Pines  of  the  Yosemite"  (1872):
"  Near  Portland,  Maine  "  (1881) :  "Swamp  Willows
at  Newburyjxjrt  "  (18M:i);  and  ".September  on  the
New  England  Coast"  (1885),  which  gained  a  prize
at  the  American  art  association's  water-color  exhi-
bition in  1885. — George  Henry's  wife,  Nellie  Shel-
don Jacobii,  artist,  b.  in  New'  York,  14  Sept.,  1854,
studied  under  Joseph  O.  Eaton  and  James  I).
.Smillie.  Her  works  include  "Gran<lmother's  Old
Love  Letters"  (1881),  and  "When  the  Dew  is  on
the  Grass"  (1884),  in  oil;  and  "Priscilla"  (1880);
"Forgotten  Strain"  (1881);  and  "Family  Choir"
(1882),  in  water-color.  She  is  a  member  of  the
Water-color  society.

SMITH,  Sir  Albert  James,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Westmoreland  county.  New  Bninswick,
in 1824. He  was  educated  in  his  native  county,
studie<l  law,  was  called  to  the  bar  of  New  Bruns-
Cana<la,  having  secured  a  contract  to  furnish  the  I  wick  in  1847,  and  was  afterward  appointed  queen's


Canadian  government  with  nil  its  paper  currency,
bonds,  etc.  In  1874  he  retired  from  this  business,
but  eight  years  later  he  again  esuiblished  a  com-
pany in  Canada.  In  this  business  he  is  still  (1888)
engaged. — James's  son.  James  David,  artist,  b.
in  New  York  city,  10  Jan..  1833,  was  educated  by
his  father  as  an  engraver  on  steel.  He  pro<luced
some  excellent  work,  notably  the  illustrations  for
CfMjper's  novels  after  Felix  0.  C.  Darley's  designs,
but  his  principal  work  was  on  bank-note  vignettes.
In  1804.  after  his  first  visit  to  Europe,  he  turned


counst'l.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New-Brunswick
lepslature  from  1852  till  the  union  of  the  province
with  Canada  in  1807,  when  he  was  elected  to  the
Dominion  parliament.  He  was  re-ele<jte<l  by  ac-
clamation in  1872,  on  his  appointment  to  office,  and
again  at  the  general  election  in  1878.  He  was  a
mend)er  of  the  executive  council  of  New  Bnms-
wick  from  1850  till  180:^  and  for  a  short  {»eritxl  in
1800,  attoniey-general  from  1802  till  18(J3,  when  he
retired  from  the  government  and  held  the  same
office  in  his  own  administration  in  1805. He  was


his  attention  to  painting,  studying  without  a  mas-  a  delegate  to  London  in  1858  on  the  subject  of  the
ter.  The  same  year  he  first  exhibited  at  the  Acad-  |  Intercolonial  railway,  and  on  public  business  in
emy  of  design.  New  York,  and  was  elected  an  [  1805,  and  to  Washington  with  Mr.  Gait  (now  Sir
a8s<»ciat«  of  the  aca<lemy  in  18(J5,  and  an  acatlemi-  Alexander  T.  Gait)  and  others  on  the  subject  of  re-
cian  in  1870.  His  work  in  oil  includes  "The  Lift-  |  ciprocal  trade,  in  January.  18r>0.  He  decline*!  the
ing  of  the  Clouds,  White  Mountains"  (1808);  |  chief  justiceship  of  New  Brunswick  in  1800.  the
"  Dark  against  Day's  Golden  Death.  Catskills "  lieutenant-governorship  of  the  same  i>rovince  in
(1870);  "  Evening  among  the  Sierras  "(1870);  "The  |  1873,  and  the  \wst  of  minister  of  justice  in  June.
Adirondacks"and  "  Upthe  Hiir(187»);  and"The  1874.  He  became  a  memljer  of  the  privy  council,
CliflTs  of  Normandy"  (1885|.  He  was  one  of  the  and  was  appointed  minister  of  marine  and  fisheries,
original  members  of  the  W  ater-color  societwawii^  Nov.,  1873.  He  represented  the  I>ominion  gov-
waa  its  treasurer  from  1800  till  1873,  and>f$iiMn\^ /^ment  before  the  fisheries  commission  at  HaUCax


666


SMITH


SMITH


in  1877,  and  was  created  a  knight  commander  of
the  order  of  St,  Michael  and  St.  George  in  1878.

SMITH,  Alfred  Uukcr,  soldier,  b.  in  Masscna.
St.  Lawrence  co.,  N. Y.,  17  Nov.,  1825. He  wa.s

f graduated  at  Union  college  in  1851,  taught,  studied
aw,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1855,  and  practised
in  Poughkeensie,  N.  Y.  He  entered  the  IVational
army  in  Octooer,  1862,  as  major  of  the  150th  New
York  volunteers,  and  was  with  his  regiment  in
every  march  and  action  from  Gettysburg  till  the
close  of  the  war,  succeeding  to  the  command  as
senior  officer  at  Atlanta.  He  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant-colonel and  colonel,  and  was  made  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  by  brevet  for  meritori-
ous services  in  the  campaign  of  Georgia  and  the
Carolinas.  He  has  long  been  a  member  of  the
Poughkcepsie  board  of  education,  of  which  he  was
president  for  several  years,  and  in  1867-'75  was
postmaster  of  that  city.

SMITH,  Andrew  Jackson,  soldier,  b.  in  Bucks
county.  Pa.,  28  April,  1815,  He  was  graduated  at
the  C.  S.  military  academy  in  1838,  became  1st
lieutenant  in  1845  and  captain  in  1847,  and  was
engaged  on  the  frontier  in  operations  against  hos-
tile Indians.  Hel)e-
— ~.  came  major  in  Mav,

/ ^».  1861,  colonel  of  the

J  ^  2d  California  caval-

"Wf  "«^.  yfff9  year,  from  11  Feb.

kv^^ JT  ->)  to  11  March,  1862,

««&.  »  »-  was  chief  of  cavalry

of  the  Departnjent
of  the  Missouri,  and
in  March  and  July
of  the  Department
of  the  Mississippi.
He  became  briga-
dier-general of  vol-
unteers in  March.
^ //^^ '  ,*y  1862. engaged in

OC.  JKih^l-Uty^>^^^  the advance upon

"  Corinth  and siege

of  that  place,  was
transferred  to  the  Department  of  the  Ohio,  and
subsequently  to  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  which
he  accompanied  on  the  Yazoo  river  expedition,  and
participated  in  the  assaults  of  Chickasaw  Bluffs,
27-29  Oct.,  1862,  and  of  Arkansas  Post.  11  Jan.,
1863.  During  the  Vicksburg  campaign  he  led  a
division  in  the  13th  army  corps.  He  was  then  as-
signed to  the  command  of  a  division  of  the  16th
army  corps,  which  captured  Fort  De  Russy,  en-
gaged in  the  battle  of  Pleasant  Hill,  and  in  almost
constant  skirmishing  during  the  Red  River  cam-
paign, in  April,  1864,  receiving  the  brevet  of  colo-
nel, U.  S.  army,  for  "gallant  and  meritorious  ser-
vice at  Pleasant  Hill."  He  became  lieutenant-colo-
nel, U.  S.  army,  in  May,  1864,  and  major-general
of  volunteers  on  the  12th  of  that  month,  was  or-
dered to  Missouri,  aided  in  driving  Gen,  Sterling
Price  from  the  state,  and  was  then  called  to  re-
enforce  Gen,  George  H,  Thomas  at  Nashville,  and
to  aid  in  pursuit  of  Gen.  John  B.  Hood's  army,  be-
ing engaged  at  Nashville.  He  received  the  brevets
of  brigadier-general  and  major-general,  U.  S.  army,
on  13  March,  1865,  for  gallant  service  at  the  bat-
tles of  Tupelo,  Miss.,  and  Nashville,  Tenn.  PVom
February  till  June  of  that  year  he  commanded  the
16th  array  corps  in  the  reduction  and  capture  of
Mobile,  lie  was  mustered  out  of  volunteer  service
in  January,  1866,  and  on  28  July  became  colonel  of
the  7th  IJ.  S.  cavalry.  He  then  commanded  the
Department  of  the  Missouri  from  14  Sept.,  1867,  to
2  March,  1868,  and  was  on  leave  of  absence  till  6


May,  1869,  when  he  resignetl.  On  3  April  of  that
year  he  became  postmaster  of  St.  LouLs,

SMITH,  Arcnibald  t'ary,  naval  architect,  b,  in
New  York  city,  4  Sept.,  1837.  He  was  educated  at
the  University  grammar-school.  New  York  city,
learned  the  trade  of  lx)at-building.  and  in  1800
built  the  "Comet,"  a  sail-boat  that  defeated  all
rivals  for  several  years.  He  studied  painting  un-
der Maurice  F.  H.  de  Haas  in  1863,  and  subse-
quently painted  pictures  of  many  noted  yachts.
He  designed  for  liobert  Centre,  of  New  York  city,
in  1871,  the  cutter  "  Vindex,"  which  was  the  first
iron  yacht  that  was  built  in  Chester,  Pa,,  and  at-
tracted much  attention  as  a  departure  from  the
usual  type.  His  success  in  this  business  induced
him  to  abandon  painting,  and  he  has  since  de-
voted himself  to  designing  and  altering  yachts  of
all  kinds,  among  which  are  the  schooners  "  In-
trepid," "  Fortuna,"  "  Norma,"  '•  Harbinger,"  "  Car-
lotta,"  "  IroQuois,"  "Oriole,"  "Dream.  "Whim,"
the  sloops  "  Mischief,"  "  Rover,"  "  Kestrel,"  "  Pris-
cilla,"  "  Cinderella,"  "  Banshee,"  "  Katrina,"  and
"  Meteor."  The  "  Mischief  "  defended  the  "  Ameri-
ca's "  cup  in  the  race  in  1887  with  the  Canadian
sloop  "  Atalanta."  He  delivered  a  course  of  lec-
tures on  naval  architecture  before  the  Seawanbaka
yacht  club.  New  York  city,  in  1878,  and  for  many
years  was  measurer  of  the  New  York  yacht  club.

SMITH,  Asa  Dodge,  clergyman,  b.  in  Amherst,
N.  H.,  21  Sent.,  1804;  d.  in 'Hanover,  N.  H.,  16
Aug.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1830,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminar)'  in
1834,  serving  in  1830-'l  as  principal  of  Limerick
academy,  Me.  He  was  pastor  of  the  14th  street
Presbyterian  church  in  New  York  city  from  1834
till  1863.  lectured  on  pastoral  theology  in  Union
theological  seminary  in  1843-'4,  and  president  of
Dartmouth  fiom  1863  until  his  death.  Williams
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1849,  and  the  Uni-
versity of  New  York  city  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1864.
He  published  a  large  number  of  addresses  and  ser-
mons, and  "  Letters  to  a  Young  Student "  (Boston,
1832) ;  "  Memoir  of  Mrs.  Louisa  Adams  Leavitt "
(New  York,  1843) ;  "  Discourse  on  the  Life  and
Character  of  Rev.  Charles  Hall"  (1854);  "The
Puritan  Character,"  an  address  (1857) ;  "  Home
Missions  and  Slavery,"  a  pamnhlet  (1857) ;  "Chris-
tian Stewardship"  (1863);  ana  "Inauguration  Ad-
dress" (Hanover,  N.  H.,  1863).

SMITH,  Ashbel,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  13  Aug..  1805 ;  d.  in  Harris  county,  Tex.,
21  Jan.,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1824,
and  at  the  medical  department  in  1828.  after  study-
ing law  in  the  interval.  He  also  attended  the  Paris
hospitals  in  1831-'2,  and  practised  in  North  Caro-
lina till  1836,  when  he  removed  to  Texa.s,  and  was
appointed  in  the  same  year  surgeon-general  of  the
new  republic.  He  was  joint  commissioner  in  mak-
ing the  first  treaty  with  the  Comanches  in  1837,
Texan  minister  to  the  United  States,  Great  Brit-
ain, France,  and  Spain,  during  the  administration
of  President  Samuel  Houston  and  President  An-
son Jones,  was  recalled  in  1844,  and  became  sec-
retary of  state  under  the  latter,  which  office  he
held  until  the  annexation  of  Texas  to  the  United
States  in  1845.  He  was'  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture from  Harris  county  for  several  years,  and
served  throughout  the  Afexican  war.  In  the  earlv
part  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  the  2d  Texas  vol-
unteers for  the  Confederate  service,  leading  that
regiment  in  several  campaigns  east  of  Missouri
river.  He  retired  to  his  plantation  on  Galveston
bay  in  1865.  and  while  taning  an  active  part  in
state  politics  as  a  Democrat  was  also  occupied  in
the  preparation  of  papers  on  scientific  and  agri-


SMITH


SMITH


007


cultunil  topic-s.  In  IiIh  profewion  hU  Bonrloeawere
n-ndoml  cmluitoiisly,  and  in  evcrv  vellow-fever
cpitlt'mic  \u'  w««nt  to  Ilonston  or  rtftlvoston  and
devoltsl  himwlf  to  the  sufTer««rs.  Up  wiw  inxtru-
luontnl  in  tl»c««>«t»bli!«lim<'nt  of  the  state  university,
ami  pn-siiicnt  of  its  iKwird  of  n'jr««nts.  II is  puldi-
cHtions  include  "  Aecounl  of  the  V'ellow  Kevt-r  in
Oalvi'ston.  in  1«:M»"  ((Jalveston,  1H4());  "  Aroount
of  the  (i<'<i>;niphy  of  Texjts"  (1M51):  an«l  "  Per-
mamnt  Iilontity  <If  tiie  Munian  Itat-e  "  (IWJO).

SMITH.  Au}rii'«tiis  William,  e<lucHtor,  b.  in
New|M>rt.  Herkimer  to..  N.  Y.,  Vi  May.  1H02:  d.  in
Anna|M)lis,  Md..  26  Mnrth.  1WM5.  ife  was  jjnwlu-
ate<l  at  llninilton  collep'  in  \Xi'>,  iM-caine  a  teacher
in  Oneida  conference  S4'minary,  ('a/,cn<»via.  N.  Y..
wa«  professor  of  mathematics  and  astronomy  in
Weslevan  in  ISJH-'Sl.  and  at  the  latter  date  lie-
camo  Its  president.  Fnnu  1H55)  until  his  death  he
was  professor  of  natural  philosophy  in  the  U.  S.
naval  academy.  Hamilton  i^ve  nim  the  degree  of
LL.  I>.  in  18.50.  In  1H(K)  he  wa.s  one  of  the  cor[)s
of  astronomers  that  were  sent  by  the  U.  S.  jrovem-
raent  to  Ijabnwlor  to  oltserve  the  annular  eclipse  of
the  sun.  He  was  an  excellent  mathematician,  ami
the  author  of  s«>veral  text-lK)oks,  including  an  "  Kle-
mcnlary  Treatise  on  Mechanics  "(New  York.  184(5).
SMITH.  Azariali,  missionary,  b.  in  Manlius.
N.  Y.,  16  Feb.,  1817:  d.  in  Aintiib.  Asia  Minor.  3
Juno,  1851.  He  was  gratluatwl  at  Yale  in  1837.
studied  metlicine  and  theology,  and  in  1842  em-
Iwrkcd  for  western  Asia  as  a  missionary.  He  ar-
rive«l  in  Smyrna  in  January,  184^5,  made  numerous
journeys  into  the  interior,  and  was  the  travelling
companion  of  Sir  Austin  Henry  Layanl.  Subse-
quently, when  Asiatic  cholera  raged  there,  he  suc-
cessfully practise<I  among  the  sufferers.  He  settled
^  at  Aintab  in  1848,  and  taught  and  preached  therti
'  until  his  death.  He  wrote  several  valuable  papers
on  niettH)ro|ogy  and  Syrian  antiquities  for  the
"  American  Journal  of  hicience."

SMITH.  Benjamin,  governor  of  North  Caro-
lina, b.  in  Hrunswick  county,  X.  C,  in  17.50;  d.  in
Smithville,  X.  C,  10  Feb.,  1829.  He  Ix-came  aide-
de-camp  to  Gen.  Washington  in  1770,  was  with
him  in  the  retreat  from  Ix>ng  Island,  participated
in  the  defence  of  Fort  Moultrie,  ami  served  during
the  British  invasion  of  South  Canilina.  In  1781)
he  gave  20,000  acres  of  land  to  the  University  of
North  Carolina,  whose  trustees  named  a  hall  in
that  institution  in  his  honor.  He  was  fifteen  times
a  member  of  the  state  senate  from  Brunswick
county,  served  as  major-general  of  militia  in
1794-1810.  and,  when  war  with  France  was  threat-
ened in  1790,  raised  a  regiment  of  North  Carolina
volunteers  in  his  county.  He  was  governor  of  the
state  in  1810-'12.  A  town  and  an  island  of  North
Can>lina  are  named  in  his  honor.

SMITH.  Benjamin  Boswortii.  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Bristol,  It.  1.,  13  June.  1794;  d.  in  New  York
city,  31  May,  1884.  He  entered  Brown  university.
Providence,  R.  I.,  and  was  graduated  in  1816.  Al-
though of  Congregational  pareimige,  he  studied
for  the  ministry  in  the  F]|)iscopal  church,  was  or-
dained deacon  in  St.  Michael's  church,  Bristol,  23
April,  1817,  by  Bishop  (iriswold,  and  priest  in  St.
Michael's  church,  Marblehead,  Mass.,  24  June,
1818,  l»y  the  saune  bishop.  His  earliest  work  in  the
ministry  was  in  Marblehejul  for  two  years,  after
which  he  lxK*ame  rector  of  St.  George's  churt^h,  Ac-
comack county,  Va,,  and  two  years  later  rector  of
Zion  chuH'h,  Charlcslown,  with  charge  of  the  church
in  Sheplienlstown.  In  182J1  he  n>inove<l  to  Ver-
mont and  iKH-ame  nvtor  of  .St.  Stephen's  church,
Middlebury.  in  1828  he  assumeil  charge  of  (Jrace
church  mision,  Phila<lelphia,  and  in  1830  he  ac-


^fit^e^o^rvt^rr  ^  ^H^^x*/^


ceptwl  the  roct^)rship  of  Chrixt  church.  Ijexington,
Ky.  This  last  post  he  held  until  182)7.  While  In
Vermont  he  wa«  editor  of  "  The  KiiiM-»ifMil  I{t>gi»-
ter,"  and  sulMpqiiently  in  Philadel{>hia  he  conduct*
«h1  "  The  Kpis-
copal  Recorder."
He  receivcil  the
degn*  of  .S.  T.  I>.
fn)mGeneva(now
Ilolwrt)  college
in  18.'i2.  and  that
of  LL.  I),  from
Orlswold  college,
Iowa,  in*l  870,  and
from  Brown  uni-
versity in  1872.
He  was  elected
first  bishop  of
Kentucky.  and
was  consecrated
in  St.  Paul's  chap-
el. New  York
city,  31  Oct..  1832.
On  the  death  of
Bishop  Hopkins  in  1868  he  became  the  presiding
bishop.  From  1872  onwarfl,  owing  to  ailvanced  age
and  accompanying  infirmities,  he  was  allowed  to
reside  out  of  the  limits  of  his  diocese,  and  he  was
furnished  with  an  assistant  in  January.  1875.  In  ad-
dition to  his  cimtributions  as  e<litor  to  church  jour-
nalism, Bishop  .Smith  publish<»d  "  P'ive  Charges  to
the  Clergy  "  of  his  diocese ;  "  Satunlay  Evening,  or
Thoughts  on  the  Progress  of  the  Plan  of  Salva-
tion" (New  York,  1870);  and  "Ajx>stolic  Succes-
sion, Facts  which  prove  that  a  Ministry  appointed
by  Christ  Himself  mvolves  this  Position''  (1877).

SMITH,  Benjamin  Mosbj,  clergyman,  b.  in
Powhatan  county,  Va,,  30  June,  1811.  He  was
graduated  at  Hampden  .Sidney  in  1829,  and  at  the
Virginia  union  theological  seminary  in  18ii2.  He
was  tutor  in  Hebrew  and  intr«>ductory  studies  from
that  date  till  1836,  and  was  successively  pastor  of
Presbyterian  churches  in  Danville  and  Augusta
county,  Va.,  from  1840  till  his  ap|X)intment  in
1854  to  the  chair  of  Oriental  and  biblical  litera-
ture in  Union  seminary,  which  office  he  still  (1888)
holds.  In  1858-'74  he  was  pastor  of  Hampden
.Sidney  college  church,  and  he  was  moderator  of
the  general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church
in  1870.  Ham{HU'n  Sidney  gave  him  the  degree  of
I).  I),  in  184.5.  Dr.  .Smith  exercises  much  influence
in  the  affairs  of  his  church  in  Virginia.  He  has
published  numerous  sermons  and  addiesses,  "  A
Commentary  on  the  Psalms  and  Proverbs"  (Glas-
gow, 1859;  Knoxville.  Tenn..  1883),  and  "Ques-
tions on  the  Gospels  "  (Richmond,  Va.,  1868).

SMITH.  Buckingham,  antiquarian,  b.  on
Cumijcrland  island,  (ia..  31  Oct.,  1810;  d.  in  New
York  city,  5  Jan.,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  law-school  in  1836,  and  practise<l  his  pro-
fession in  Maine,  but  soon  returnetl  to  his  family
estate  in  F'lorida,  where  he  was  a  member  of  the
territorial  legislature.  He  was  U.  S.  secretary  of
legation  in  3lexico  in  18.50-'2,  acting  as  charge
d'affaires  in  1851.  During  his  residence  there  he
made  a  thorough  study  of  Mexican  historj-  and
antiquities  and  Indian  philology,  and  collected
many  l)ooks  ami  manuM-ripts.  He  was  secretary
of  legation  at  Madrid  in  185.5-'8,  matle  im|M)rtant
researches  in  the  .Spanish  libraries  and  archives
res{)ecting  the  colonial  history  of  Florida  and
liouisiana,  and  iviiden-d  valuable  services  to  George
Bancroft,  Jared  Sjmrks,  and  Francis  Parkman.  He
s«-ttle<l  in  Florida  in  1859,  Itei-ame  a  jutlge,  and
served  several  terms  in  the  state  senate. A  {>art  of


658


SMITn


SMITH


his  library  wjis  bought  by  the  New  York  historical
society  after  his  death.  He  edited  translations  of
the  "  Narrative  of  Alvar  Nufiez  Cabeza  de  Vaca"
(Washington,  D.  C,  1851  ;  improved  ed.,  New  York,
1873);  "The  Letter  of  Hernando  de  Soto"  and
*'  Memoir  of  Hernando  de  Escalante  Fontaneda,"
of  each  of  which  100  copies  were  printed  (Wash-
ington, 1854;  collected  and  published  in  Spanish
under  the  title  of  "  Coleccion  de  Varios  Documen-
tos  para  la  Historia  de  la  Florida  y  Zierras  Adya-
centes,"  Madrid,  1857) ;  "  A  Grammatical  Sketch  of
the  Heve  Language  "  (New  York,  1861) ;  a  "  Gram-
mar of  the  Pima  or  Nevome :  a  Ijanguage  of  Sonora,
from  a  Manuscript  of  the  17th  Century  "^St.  Au-
gustine, 1862) ;  "  Doetrina  Christiana  e  Confesiona-
rio  en  Lengua  Nevome,  6  sea  la  Nevome  "  (1863) ;
"  Rudo  Ensayo,  tentative  de  una  Prevencional  De-
scripcion  Geographica  de  la  Provincia  de  Sonora  "
(1863) ;  "  An  Inquiry  into  the  Authenticity  of  Docu-
ments concerning  a  Discovery  of  North  America
claimed  to  have  been  made  by  Verrazzano"(1864);
and  a  volume  of  translations  of  "  Narratives  of  the
Career  of  Hernando  de  Soto  in  the  Conquest  of
Florida"  (1866).  He  also  wrote  for  the  magazines
concerning  the  early  history  and  writers  of  Florida.

SMITH,  Caleb  Blood,  secretary  of  the  interior,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  16  April,  1808 ;  d.  in  Indian-
apolis, Ind.,  7  Jan.,  1864.  He  emigrated  with  his
parents  to  Ohio  in  1814,  was  educated  at  Cincin-
nati and  Miami  colleges,  studied  law  in  Cincinnati
and  in  Connersville,  Ind.,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1838.  He  began  practice  at  the  latter  place,
established  and  edited  the  "Sentinel"  in  1833,served
several  terms  in  the  Indiana  legislature,  and  was
in  congress  in  1843-'9,  having  been  elected  as  a
Whig.  During  his  congressional  career  he  was
one  of  the  Mexican  claims  commissioners.  He  re-
turned to  the  practice  of  law  in  1850,  residing  in
Cincinnati  and  subsequently  in  Indianapolis.  He
was  influential  in  securing  the  nomination  of  Abra-
ham Lincoln  for  the  presidency  at  the  Chicago  Re-
Eublican  convention  in  1860,  and  was  appointed
y  him  secretary  of  the  interior  in  1861,  which  post
he  resigned  in  December,  1862,  to  become  17.  S.
circuit  judge  for  Indiana.

SMITH,  Charles,  bookseller,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1768 ;  d.  there  in  1808.  He  was  a  book-
seller in  New  York  city,  translated  plays  for  the
stage  from  the  German  of  Kotzebue  and  Schiller,
and  edited  the  "  Monthly  Military  Repository  "  in
1796-'7.  the  Revolutionary  descriptions  in  which
were  said  to  have  been  supplied  by  Baron  Steuben
and  Gen.  Horatio  Gates.  He  also  published  a  "Po-
litical Pocket  Almanac  "  (New  York,  1797).

SMITH,  Charles  Adam,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
York  city,  25  June,  1809 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
15  Feb.,  1879.  His  parents  were  German.  Charles
was  educated  at  Hartwick  seminary,  ordained  to
the  ministry  of  the  Lutheran  church  in  1830,  and
was  pastor  successively  in  Palatine,  N.  Y.,  and  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  where  he  was  also  an  editor  of  the
"  Lutheran  Observer."  He  was  called  to  the  Wiir-
temberg  church  in  Rhinebeck,  N.  Y.,  in  1843,  and
remained  there  till  1853,  when  he  became  pastor
in  Easton,  Pa.  He  afterward  had  charge  of  a
Presbyterian  church  in  Philadelphia,  and  then  of
a  parish  in  East  Orange,  N.  J.,  after  which  he  de-
voted himself  to  literary  pursuits.  He  originated
and  published  in  1850  a  monthly  home  journal  en-
titlea  "  The  Evangelical  Magazine,"  which,  after
adopting  several  names,  is  now  published  as  the
"  Lutheran  and  Missionary."  He  translated  many
works  from  the  German,  including  "  Krummacher's
Parables"  (New  York,  1833);  and  is  the  author  of
"  The  Catechumen's  Guide  "(Albany,  1837) ; "  Popu-


lar Exposition  of  the  Gospels,"  with  Rev.  John  G.
Morris  (Baltimore,  1840) ;  "  Illustrations  of  Faith  "
(Albany,  1850);  "  Men  of  the  Olden  Time  "  (Philar
delphia,  1858);  "Before  the  Flood  and  After"
(1868);  "Among  the  Lilies "  (1872) ;  "Inlets  and
Outlets  "  (1873) ;  and  "  Stoneridge,"  a  series  of  pas-
toral sketches  (1877).

SMITH,  Charles  Emory,  ioumalist,b.  in  Mans-
field, Conn.,  18  FeVj.,  1843.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  college  in  1861,  became  editor  of  the  Albany
"Express"  in  1865,  and  of  the  "Albany  Journal
in  1870,  and  since  1880  has  conducted  the  Phila-
delphia "  Press."  He  was  president  of  the  New
York  state  press  association  in  1874,  and  delivered
the  annual  address  at  its  meeting.  He  was  a  re-
gent of  the  University  of  the  state  of  New  York  in
1879-'80,  a  delegate  to  the  National  Republican
conventions  in  1876  and  in  1888,  has  repeatedly
served  in  state  conventions,  and  was  temporary
and  permanent  chairman  of  that  body  in  1879.

SMITH,  Charles  Henry,  humorist,  b.  in  Law-
renceville,  Ga.,  15  June.  1836.  He  was  graduated
at  Franklin  college.  Athens,  Ga.,  and  in  1848  be-
came a  lawyer  in  Rome,  Ga.  He  served  in  the
Confederate  army,  and  after  the  war  settled  as  a
planter  near  Cartersville,  Ga.,  was  state  senator  in
1866,  and  mayor  of  Rome,  Ga.,  in  1868-'9.  He
began  his  literary  career  in  1861  in  a  series  of  news-
paper letters  under  the  signature  of  "  Bill  Arp."
They  enjoyed  a  wide  popularity,  and  are  remark-
able for  homely  humor  and  shrewd  philosophy.
A  southern  writer  says  of  his  widely  read  and
quoted  letter  to  Artemus  Ward  in  July,  1865,  that
"  it  was  the  first  chirp  of  any  bird  after  the  sur-
render, and  gave  relief  and  hope  to  thousands  of
drooping  hearts."  He  is  also  a  successful  lecturer.
His  publications  include  "  Bill  Arp's  Letters  "  (New
York,  1868);  "Bill  Arp's  Scrap-Book"  (Atlanta,
1886) ;  and  many  humorous  and  philosophical
sketches  that  he  has  contributed  to  the  press.

SMITH,  Charles  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Hollis,
York  CO.,  Me.,  1  Nov.,  1837.  He  was  graduated  at
Colby  university  in  1856,  entered  the  National
army  in  1861  as  captain  in  the  1st  Maine  cavalry,
was  attached  with  his  regiment  to  the  Army  of
the  Potomac,  and  served  throughout  its  opera-
tions, participating  in  numerous  battles.  He  became
major  of  volunteers  in  1863,  lieutenant-colonel  in
March,  1863,  and  colonel  of  the  1st  Maine  cavalry,
commanding  that  regiment  at  Upperville,  Gettys-
burg, Shepardstown,  and  through  the  movements
southwara  to  the  Rapidan.  In  the  Mine  run  cam-
paign, in  November,  he  conducted  the  rear-guard
of  the  left  column  of  the  army  from  Mine  run  to
and  across  the  Rapidan.  During  Gen.  Philip  H.
Sheridan's  cavalry  campaign  in  May  and  June,
1864,  he  fought  at  Todd's  Tavern  and  South
Anna,  at  Trevillian  Station,  and  on  1  Aug.,  1864,
was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  for
gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  at  St.  Mary's
church,  where  two  horses  were  killed  under  him,
and  he  was  shot  through  the  thigh.  He  command-
ed a  cjwalry  brigade  and  was  wounded  at  Reams's
Station,  and  the  3d  brigade  of  Gen.  David  M.
Gregg's  division  from  October,  1864,  till  the  opera-
tions that  ended  in  the  surrender  of  Lee's  armv.
During  the  Appomattox  campaign  he  was  wound-
ed, and  a  horse  wjis  killed  under  him  at  Dinwiddle
Court-House,  and  he  participated  in  the  battles  of
Sailor's  Creek,  Brier  Creek,  and  Farmville.  In
May  and  July,  1865,  he  was  in  command  of  a  sub-
district  of  the  Appomattox,  comprising  five  coun-
ties. He  was  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers,
13  March.  1865,  for  gallant  and  meritorious  service
during  the  civil  war,  and  in  March,  186f,  brig^ier-


SMITH


SMITH


009


genoml,  U.  S.  army,  for  Sailor's  ('reek,  and  major-

fericral  for  pilUn't  scrvit-o  durin;;  the  civil  war.
le  ))ecanie  culoiu'l  of  thu  28th  infuritry  on  the  ro-
orgHuizution  of  thn  U.  S.  nrtnv  in  IK6(>,  waM  trans-
ferreil  in  1H09  to  the  lOtlj  infantry,  and  now  (IHHH)
holds  thnt  commanil.

SMITH,  Charles  I'orrin,  Kpnt'alojfist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  I'a..  5  Jan.,  1»19:  d.  in  Trenton,
N.  J.,  27  Jan.,  1883.  On  att«inine  his  inaiority  he
became  i)roprietor  and  etlitor  of  •*  The  National
Standaru"in  Salem,  N.  J.,  and  conducted  it  for
eleven  years.  He  serve<l  in  the  le^j^i.slaturo.of  1852,
and  was  clerk  of  the  supreme  court  of  New  Jersey
in  1857-'72.  He  was  early  identified  with  the  old
Whijr  party,  and  during  the  Harrison  campaign
travelhnl  extensively  through  the  west  and  north-
west, publishing  a  graphic  account  of  his  journey
in  a  series  of  letters.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
a  secret  agent  of  the  state  of  New  Jersey.  Mr.
Smith  was  a  corresponding  meralwr  of  the  Phila-
delphia numismatic  and  antiquarian  society.  He
was  the  author  of  "  Lineage  of  the  Lloyd  and  Car-
penter Families"  (printed  privately,  Camden,  N.  J..
1870)  and  *'  Memoranda  of  a  Visit  to  the  Site  of
Mathraval  Castle,  with  a  Genealogical  Chart  of
the  Descent  of  Thomas  Lloyd"  (1875).  See  a
memoir  of  him  by  Charles  Hart  in  the  "  Necrology
of  the  Philwlelphia  Numismatic  and  Antiquarian
Society  for  1883."

SMITH,  Charles  Shaler,  engineer,  b.  in  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  16  Jan.,  1836 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  19
■  Dec.,  1886.  He  attended  a  private  school  in  Pitts-
burg, but  at  the  age  of  sixteen  entered  on  the
study  of  his  profession  by  securing  an  appointment
as  rodman  on  the  Mine  Hill  and  Schuylkill  Haven
railroad.  After  various  services  he  became  in
*1856  engineer  in  charge  of  the  Tennessee  division
of  the  Louisville  and  Nashville  railroad.  Subse-
quently he  became  chief  engineer  of  bridges  and
buildings  of  the  Wilmington,  Charlotte,  and  Ru-
therford railroad  in  North  Carolina,  where  he  re-
mained until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He
then  enteretl  the  Confederate  army  as  captain  of
engineers,  and  continued  so  until  1865,  during
which  time,  as  chief  engineer  of  government  works
in  the  Augusta  district,  he  constructed  the  Con-
federate states  powder- works,  with  a  daily  capacity
of  17,000  pounds  of  powder,  and  one  of  the  largest
that  had  then  been  built.  Mr.  Smith  continued
in  the  south  as  engineer  of  bridges,  and  con-
structed the  Catawba  and  Congaree  bridges  on
the  Charlotte  and  South  Carolina  railroad.  In
1866,  with  Ikmjamin  H.  Latrolw,  he  organized  the
engineering  firm  of  Smith,  Latrobe  and  Co.,  which
in  1869  became  the  Baltimore  bridge  company,  with
Mr.  Smith  as  president  and  chief  engineer.  This
company  continued  in  business  until  1877.  and  did
a  largo  amount  of  work.  He  removed  to  St,
Charles,  Mo.,  in  1868.  to  take  charge  of  the  rail-
road bridge  then  just  Ijegun  across  Missouri
river,  and  m  1871  he  went  to  .St.  Ijouis,  where  he
remained  until  the  end  of  his  life,  mainly  occupied
as  a  consulting  engineer.  His  name  will  ever  be
connected  with  the  great  bridges  that  were  built
under  his  sujK'rvision.  They  an>  hundre<ls  in  num-
ber an«l  include  four  over  the  Mississippi,  one  over
the  Missouri,  and  one  over  the  St.  Lawrence.  His
most  imiK)rtant  work  was  the  practical  demonstra-
tion of  the  uses  and  value  of  the  cantilever,  Imj-
ginning  in  1H(J9  with  the  300- foot  dniw-s|>an  over
Salt  river  on  the  line  of  the  Elizalx>th  and  Paducah
railroa4l,  and  including  the  Kentucky  river  bridge
on  the  Cincinnati  Southern  railnmd.  that  over  the
Mississippi  near  .St.  Paul,  and  fkially  his  last  gre«t
bridge  across  the  St.  I^awrence  river  a  short  dis-


tance above  the  Ijachine  n^ids.  Mr.  Smith  waa
electwl  a  menilier  of  the  American  society  of  civil
engineers  in  1873,  and  was  a  director  of  that
organization  in  1877-*8.  His  publications  are  ccm-
flnwl  t^>  a  few  professional  papers,  notably  "  A
ComjMirative  Analysis  of  the  rink.  Murphv,  Boll-
man,  and  Triangular  Trusses"  (18<15) ;  "  ProjKjr-
tions  of  Eyebars,  Heads,  and  Pins  as  determmed
by  Kxpcrinient "  (1877) ;  and  "  Wind-Pressure  upon
Britlgej<"(1880).

SMITH,  Cotton  Mather,  clergj'man,  b.  in  Suf-
fleld,  Conn.,  26  Oct.,  1731 ;  d.  in  Sharon.  Conn.,  27
Nov..  1H(H1.  He  was  deseende<l  from  Kev.  Henry
Smith,  who  came  to  this  country  in  KW6.  and  was
first  pastor  at  Wethersfield,  (.'onn.  His  mother
was  the  granddaughter  of  Increase  Mather.  Cotton
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1751,  taught  the  Stock-
bridge  Indians  while  studying  theology,  and  in
1753  was  licensed  to  preach.  From  1755  until  his
death  he  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  Sharon.  During  the  Revolution  he  served  as
chaplain  under  Gen.  Philip  Schuyler  in  1775-'6.
During  his  ministry  he  delivered  more  than  4,(XK)
public  discourses.  He  published  thrt^  sermons
(Hartford,  1770,  1771,  1793).  He  was  distinguished
for  force  of  character,  tact,  tenderness  of  heart,  fine
scholarship,  and  grace  of  manner.  His  views  were
of  advanced  liberality,  and  he  was  an  effective  and
persuasive  preacher,  whose  influence  long  survived.
— His  son,  John  Cotton,  statesman,  b.  in  Sharon,
Conn.,  12  Feb.,  17(55;  d.  there,  7  Dec.,  1845,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1783.  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1786,  and  served  several  terms  in  the  legislature,
of  which  he  was
clerk  in  1799  and
speaker  in  1800.
He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Fed-
eralist in  the  lat-
ter year,  served  till
1800,  was  chair-
man of  the  com-
mittee on  claims
in  1802-'6,  and  in
the  once  celebrat-
ed discussion  on
the  judiciary  in
1801  presided  over
the  committee  of
the  whole.  He  re-
sumed an  exten-
sive legal  practice
when  he  returned
from  his  congressional  career,  was  again  in  the
legislature  in  1808-'9,  and  was  chosen  a  judge  of
the  Connecticut  supreme  court  the  next  year.  He
was  lieutenant-governor  in  1810  and  governor  in
1813-'18.  after  which  he  retired  and  did  not  again
accept  office,  devoting  himself  to  literary  |)ursuits
and  the  care  of  a  large  estate.  He  was  president
of  the  Litchfield  county  foreign  missiouary  society,
ancl  of  the  County  tempi^rance  s<x'iety,  first  presi-
dent of  the  Connecticut  Bible  society,  of  the  Ameri-
can Bible  society  in  18:Jl-'45,  and  of  the  American
boanl  of  fortMgn  missions  in  1826-'41.  Yale  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1814.  He  was  a  mem-
Iwr  of  the  Northern  s«x'iety  of  antiquaries  in  Copen-
hagen, Denmark,  and  of  the  Connecticut  historical
society,  and  an  m-casional  contributor  to  scientific
reviews.  He  combine<l  strength  of  character  with
true  amiability  in  a  ri'markable  degree.  His  fine
pt>rsonal  apj)earance  and  graceful,  commanding
manners  auaed  a  charm  to  the  eloquence  for  which
his  sp«^eches  were  noted.  True  to  his  wmvictions
and his  friends,  enduring  no thought of  coro-


C?^k^9zS^>ffir^zJU^.^u^C^


560


SMITH


SMITH


promise  on  any  moral  question,  he  was  yet  a  man
of  broad  views  and  enlightened  statesmanship.
Though  belonging  to  a  defeated  party,  he  was  ever
held  in  high  respect  by  his  opponents  as  an  able,
unflinching,  and  generous  foe.  See  his  "  Corre-
spondence and  Miscellanies,"  edited  with  a  eulogy
by  Rev.  William  W.  Andrews  (New  York,  1847). —
John  Cotton's  grandson,  John  Cotton,  diploma-
tist, b.  in  Tivoli,  N,  Y.,  in  1810;  d.  in  Sharon,
Conn.,  21  Nov.,  1879,  was  gra<luated  at  Yale  in
1830,  elected  to  the  legislature  at  twenty-one  yeans
of  age,  and  served  for  many  terms.  He  was  an
active  member  of  the  Democratic  party,  and  in
1856-'60  was  U.  S.  minister  to  Bolivia.  He  was
an  eloquent  speaker  and  possessed  of  wide  infor-
mation and  many  attractions. — Cotton  Mather's
grandson,  Thomas  Mather,  clergyman,  b.  in
Stamford,  Conn.,  7  March,  1797;  d.  "in  Portland,
Me.,  6  Sept.,  1864,  was  the  son  of  Cotton  Mather's
daughter,  who  married  Rev.  Daniel  Smith,  pastor
of  the  church  at  Stamford  from  1793  until  his
death  in  1841.  Thomas  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1816,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1820.  He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the
Congregational  church  in  1822,  was  successively
pastor  in  Portland,  Me.,  Fall  River,  Catskill,  N.  Y.,
and  New  Bedford,  Mass..  in  1826-'42,  and  in  1844,
having  changed  his  theological  views,  was  or-
dained in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  He
was  professor  of  theology  in  the  Gambier  (Ohio)
seminary  in  1845-'63,  and  president  of  Kenyon  in
1850-'4.  Bowdoin  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1850. — Thomas  Mather's  son,  John  Cotton,  clergjr-
man,  b.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  4  Aug.,  1826;  d.  m
New  York  city,  10  Jan.,  1882,  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1847,  studied  theology  at  the  Gambier
(Ohio)  seminary,  was  ordained  deacon  in  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church  in  1849,  and  priest  in
1850.  He  was  successively  rector  of  St,  John's
church,  Bangor,  Me.,  assistant  on  the  Green  foun-
dation at  Trinity  church,  Boston,  and  from  1860
until  his  death  was  rector  of  the  Church  of  the
Ascension,  New  York  city.  During  his  pastorate
there  he  was  active  in  mission  work,  the  church
contributing  under  him  $1,000,000  to  charity.  He
organized  the  first  successful  attempt  to  establish
improved  tenement-houses,  and  was  instrumental
in  erecting  two  blocks  of  such  homes  that  are
under  the  care  of  an  association  in  Ascension
church.  He  built  the  Mission  chapel  on  the
corner  of  Jane  and  Greenwich  streets,  and
that  on  West  43d  street,  which  number  3,000
pupils,  and  was  also  active  in  foreign  mission
work.  He  was  a  member  of  the  American  Bible
society,  and  one  of  a  committee  of  three  to  revise
the  received  Greek  text.  Columbia  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1862.  Dr.  Smith  was  a  strong
and  effective  preacher,  a  profound  scholar,  and
of  wide  and  Catholic  views.  For  several  years  he
edited  the  "  Church  and  State,"  a  paper  established
as  the  representative  of  the  liberal  branch  of  the
church.  He  discussed  scientific,  literary,  and
social  subjects  in  it  and  in  his  pulpit,  and  aided
largely  in  the  gathering  of  the  church  congress  in
New  York  in  1874.  Dr.  Smith  published  an  "  Ar-
tillery Election  Sermon  "  (Boston,  1858),  and  nu-
merous other  occasional  sermons  and  tractates ;
"  Limits  of  Legislation  as  to  Doctrine  and  Ritual "
(New  York,  1874);  "'Miscellanies  Old  and  New"
(1876) ;  "  Briar  Hill  Lectures :  Certain  Aspects
of  the  Church  "  (1880) ;  '•  The  Church's  Mission  of
Reconciliation"  (1881);  and  "The  Liturgy  as  a
Basis  of  Union  "  (1881).

SMITH,  Daniel,  senator,  b.  in  Fauquier  coun-
ty, Va.,  about  1740 ;  d.  in  Sumner  county,  Tenn.,


16  June,  1818.  He  emigrated  to  Tennessee  at  an
early  age,  l>eing  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  that
state,  and  filled  manv  public  offices.  He  was  a
major-general  of  militia,  was  appointed  by  Gen.
Washington  secretary  of  the  territory  south  of
Ohio  river  in  1790,  sat  in  the  convention  that
formed  the  constitution  of  Tennessee,  and  was  U.  S.
senator  from  that  state  in  1798-'9,  in  place  of  An-
drew Jackson,  who  had  resigned,  and  again  from
1805  till  his  own  resignation  in  1809.  He  pub-
lished the  fii-st  map  of  Tennessee  and  a  geography
of  the  state  (Philadelphia,  1799).

SMITH,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Salisbury,
Conn.,  16  Sept.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Kinpton,  N.  Y.,  23  June,
1852.  He  was  educated  at  Wilbraham  academy
under  Rev.  Wilbur  Fisk,  ordained  to  the  ministry
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  18iJl,  and
was  a  pastor  in  Connecticut  and  New  York  for  the
subsequent  twenty-one  years.  He  was  active  in  Sun-
day-scnool  and  temperance  work.lectured extensive-
ly in  the  latter  cause,  and  wrote  more  than  fifty  re-
ligious books  for  the  young.  Throughout  his  min-
istry he  gave  all  his  salary  to  benevolent  objects.
His  publications  include  *'  Anecdotes  for  the
Young  "  (New  York,  1840) ;  "  Teacher's  Assistant "
(1847)  "  Lady's  Book  of  Anecdotes  "  (la'il) ;  "  Prov-
erbs "  (1851) ;  and  "  Lectures  to  Young  Men  "  (1852).

SMITH,  Daniel  B.,  educator,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  14  July,  1792 ;  d.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,
29  March,  1883.  He  was  educated  under  John
Griscom,  from  whom  he  acquired  a  fondness  for
scientific  studies. On  leaving  school,  he  was  ap-

Erenticed  to  the  drug  business,  and  on  completing
is  term  was  admitt^  to  partnership.  In  1819  he
opened  a  drug-store,  and  continued  thereafter  in
active  mercantile  pursuits  until  within  a  few  years
of  his  death.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Apprentices'  library  in  1820,  and  was  active  in  the
movement  that  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  Col-
lege of  pharmacy  in  1822.  In  1821  he  became  sec-
retary of  the  preliminary  organization,  which  office
he  then  held  until  his  election  as  vice-president  in
1828,  and  from  1829  till  1854  he  was  its  president,
also  serving  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  publi-
cation that  in  1826  issued  the  first  number  of  the
"  American  Journal  of  Pharmacy."  Meanwhile,  in
1834,  he  became  professor  of  moral  philosophy,
English  literature,  and  chemistry  in  Haverfora
school  (now  college),  and  continued  in  that  place
until  1846.  He  was  infiuential  in  organizing  the
House  of  refuge  in  1828,  and  the  American  phar-
maceutical association  in  1852,  and  presided  over
its  first  meeting  in  Philadelphia.  Prof.  Smith  was
a  member  of  the  Franklin  institute  from  its  inceps
tion  in  1824,  of  the  Historical  society  from  its  or-
ganization in  1825,  and  was  its  first  corresponding
secretary.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society  and  of  the  Philadelphia  acad-
emy of  natural  sciences.  He  published  "  The  Prin-
ciples of  Chemistry  "  (Philadelphia,  1842).

SMITH,  David  M.,  inventor,  b.  in  Hartland,
Vt.,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  Springfield,  Vt.,  10  Nov.,  1881.
He  began  to  learn  the  carpenter's  trade  in  Gilsum,
N.  H.,  when  he  was  twelve  years  old.  and  seven
years  later  taught  in  a  school.  Subsequently  he
began  the  manufacture  6f  "  awls  on  the  haft, '  for
which  he  obtained  a  patent  in  1832.  The  awl-haft
as  manufactured  by  him  was  similar  if  not  identi-
cal with  the  one  now  known  as  the  Aiken  awl.
In  1840-'l  he  represented  the  town  of  Gilsum  in
the  New  Hampshire  legislature,  after  which  he
removed  to  Springfield,  Vt.  He  patented  a  combi-
nation-lock in  1849,  of  which  an  English  expert
named  Hobbs,  who  had  opened  all  the  locks  that
were  brought  to  him  in  London,  said  :  "  It  cannot


SMITH


SMITH


661


be  nickoil."  This  l<H'k  hi>  hIbji  pHt«>nt(yI  in  Enjr-
Una.  and  aliout  ihU  time  he  invcDtu<l  an  iniprovi*-
ment  on  tli»  flrst  iron  lathe  dog  that  in  now  in
common  uso.  Ho  also  dcviaod  •  pefc-spliltinf;  ma-
chine, and  two  sowin^^-machineH,  aft^^r  which  he
pnxluci'41  a  {wtent  clothe!(-|Mn.  In  1H(M)  ho  befpin
tho  inanufiu*turo  of  a  spring  hrMik  and  «>yp,  for
which  ho  also  dovisod  tho  mwhintTy.  Mr.  Smith
showed  gtvHt  injronuity  in  inventing  the  machinery'
by  which  his  original  articles  were  ina^le.  In  addi-
tion to  i)erfe<'tin>f  the  ideas  of  other  jteople  that
secured  patent.s,  he  took  out  for  himwif  nearly  six-
ty, amonK  which  was  that  for  tho  machinery  that
is  now  uwmI  in  foldinc  newsptt|K>rs.

SMITH,  Sir  David  William,  Iwrt.,  Canadian
statesman,  h.  in  Kn^land,  4  S>pt..  17G4;  d.  in  Aln-
wick, Northumljerluiid.  Knghmd,  9  May,  1M37.  His
father,  who  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  5th  foot,
died  while  commandant  of  P^)rt  Niagara,  C'ana<la
West,  in  1795. At  an  early  age  the  son  was  ap-

Eoint^d  an  ensign  in  his  father's  regiment,  in  which
e  subsouuentlv  attained  tho  rank  of  captain.  He
afterward  stu(fie<l  law  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Up|)er  C'ana<la,  was  appointed  survevor-gen-
eral  of  lands,  one  of  the  trustees  for  the  Six  Nations,
a  member  of  the  executive  council,  and  of  the  com-
mittee for  administi>ring  the  government  during
the  governor's  absence.  He  was  a  memlxT  of  the
thre«  first  Canadian  parliaments,  and  a  sr)eaker  of
the  house  of  assembly  in  two  of  them.  He  resided
in  England  for  many  vears  preceding  his  death,
and  aoministered  the  aftairs  of  the  Duke  of  North-
umberland. For  his  public  services  he  was  created
a  baronet  bv  patent.  30  Aug.,  1821.

SMITH.  Delazon,  senator,  b.  in  Berlin.  N.  Y.,
in  1816;  d.  in  Portland,  Oregon,  18  Nov.,  1860.
He  was  gra<luate<l  at  Ol)erlin  collegiate  institute  in
1837,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
but  adopted  journalism  as  his  profession,  and  be-
came editor  of  the  "  True  Jefifersonian  "  in  Roches-
ter. N.  Y..  and  subsequently  of  the  "  Western  Em-
Sire  "  at  Dayton.  Ohio.  He  was  appointed  by  Presi-
ent  Tyler  special  commissioner  to  Quito,  Ecua-
dor, in  1842,  removed  to  Iowa  in  1846.  and  was
licensed  to  preach  in  tho  Methodist  Episcopal
church.  He  settled  in  Oregon  in  1852.  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  territorial  legislature  in  1854-'6.  a  dele-
gate to  the  convention  that  framed  the  state  consti-
tution in  1857,  and  served  in  the  U.  S.  senate  from
4  Feb..  1859,  to  3  March  of  the  same  year,  having
been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  From  1859  until  his
death  he  edited  the  "  Oregon  Democrat."

SMITH,  Sir  Donala  Alexander,  Canadian
legislator,  b.  in  Morayshire.  Scotland,  in  1821.
Alter  completing  his  course  of  education  he  came
to  Canada,  and  early  in  life  entered  the  service  of
the  Hudson  bay  company,  of  which  he  became  a
director,  and  later  resident  governor  and  chief  com-
missioner. He  was  appointed  in  1870  a  memlier  of
the  executive  council  of  the  Northwest  territories,
and  in  Decemlwr,  1869.  was  a  s|)ccial  commissioner
to  inquire  into  the  causes,  nature,  and  extent  of  the
obstructions  that  were  offered  in  the  Northwest
territories  to  the  peaceful  entrance  of  the  lieutenant-
governor,  William  McDougall.  during  the  Kiel  in-
surrection. For  the  important  services  that  he
rendered  on  this  occasion  he  received  the  thanks
of  the  governor-general  in  council.  He  represented
Winnipeg  and  St.  .John  in  the  Manitolw  assembly
from  1871  till  January.  1874,  when  he  resigned,
and  was  elected  to  the  Dominion  parliament  for
Selkirk.  Manitoba,  in  1871.  being  re-elected  in
1872,  1874,  and  1878.  but  upon  (letition  the  last
election  was  declared  void.  He  was  an  unsuccess-
ful candidate  in  1880.  but  was  elected  for  Montreal,
TOt.  T. — 36


went,  in  February.  1887.  In  1880  he  became  a
diriH-tor  of  the  Canadian  Pacific  railway  comjianr,
was  largely  instrumental  in  securing  the  Kuccetmful
completion  of  the  roail.  and  in  1HH6  was  knighted
for  his  services  in  connection  with  this  undertak-
ing. He  is  a  governor  of  McOill  university,  and
gave  |il20,0()()  to  constitute  a  s|iecial  coume  or
colleg«>  for  women  in  conne<'tion  with  that  institu-
tion. With  .Sir  (MH»rge  .Stephen.  I»art..  he  founded
in  1885  tho  Montreal  scholarship  of  the  Royal
college  of  music.  liondon.  for  ri'sidents  of  Montn>al
and  iut  neighborhixxl.  Sir  Donald  has  one  of  the
finest  private  residences  in  tho  Dominion  at  Mon-
treal, a  seat  at  Pictoti.  Nova  Scotia,  and  another  at
Silver  Heights,  near  Winnipeg,  Manitolia.  He  pos-
8esst»8  a  fine  collwiinii  of  picfurei*.

SMITH.  Edward  Delafleld.  lawver.b.  in  Roch-
ester, N.  Y..  8  May.  1826;  d.  in  Shrewsbury.  N.  J.,
13  April.  1878.  He  was  graduate*!  at  tne  Uni-
versity of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1846.  was  ad-
mitted to  the  l)ar  in  1848.  and  practised  in  New
York  city.  He  was  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  the
southern  district  of  New  York  in  1861-'5.  returned
to  practice  in  the  latter  year,  and  from  1871  till
1875  was  cor|>f>ration  counsel  of  New  York  city.
He  was  an  active  memlierof  the  Republican  party,
and  a  member  of  tho  law  committee  of  the  Univer-
sity of  the  city  of  New  York.  Among  his  many
cases  of  importance  was  that  of  the  People  against
Nathaniel  Gordon,  master  of  the  slave-snip  "Erie,"
whom  he  brought  to  the  scaffold  in  1862.  and  that
against  John  Andrews,  a  leader  of  the  draft  riots
in  New  York  city  in  1863.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  w^as  attorney  of  record  in  the  Eliza  B.
Jumel  estate  case.  Mr.  Smith  also  attained  success
in  private  practice,  and  was  widely  known  for  his
legal  ability.  He  published  "  Avidie,"  a  j)oem  (New
York,  1843) :  "  Destiny,"  a  poem  (1846) ;  *•  Oratory."
a  poem  (1846) ;  "  Reports  of  Cases  in  the  New  York
Court  of  Common  Pleas  "  (4  vols..  1850-'9) ;  and
"  Addresses  to  Juries  in  Slave-Trade  Trials  "  (1861).

SMITH,  Edward  Parmelee,  clergyman,  b.  in
South  Britain,  Conn..  3  June.  1827;  d.  in  Accra,
West  Africa.  15  June.  1876.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1849,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary
in  1855.  was  ordained  in  1856,  and  settled  in  charge
of  the  Congregational  church  in  Pepperell,  Mass.
He  was  superintendent  of  the  western  department
of  the  Christian  commission  in  1863-'5,  field  secre-
tary in  1866-'7.  and  at  the  same  time  general  field
agent  of  the  American  missionar)'  association.  He
became  U.  S.  commissioner  of  Indian  affairs  in
1873.  and  president  of  Howard  university.  Wash-
ington. D.  C.  in  1876.  Mr.  Smith  died  on  a  visit
to  the  coast  of  Africa  in  the  interests  of  the  Ameri-
can missionary  association.  He  published  "  Inci-
dents of  the  United  States  Christian  Commission  "
(Philadelphia.  Pa..  1869).

SMITH,  Eli,  missionary,  b.  in  Northford,  Conn.,
13  Sept.,  1801;  d.  in  lieinit,  Syria,  11  Jan.,  1857.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1821,  and  at  Andover
theological  seminani*  in  1826.  ordaine<l  the  same
year,  and  went  to  Malta  as  su{>erintendent  of  a
missionary  printing  establishment.  He  was  sub-
sequently transferred  to  the  Syrian  mission,  trav-
elled through  Greece  in  1829.  and  with  Dr.  Harri-
son G.  O.  Dwight  in  Armenia.  Georgia,  and  Persia
in  1830-'l,  which  journey  resulted  in  the  establish-
ment of  the  Armenian  and  Nestorian  missions  of
the  American  lioard.  He  settled  in  Ik*irut  in  1838.
and  in  1838  and  again  in  1852  was  the  companion
and  coadjutor  of  Prof.  E<lwanl  Robinson  in  nis  ex-
tensive exploration  of  Palestine.  His  intimate
knowledge  of  Arabic  enabled  him  to  render  im-
portant ser^'ice  in  the  production  of  a  new  and  im-


662


SMITH


SMITH


proved  form  and  font  of  Arabic  type,  which  was
cast  under  his  supervision  at  Leipsic  in  1839. He

Eublished  with  Harrison  G.  O.  Uwight  "  Missionary
lesearches  in  Armenia  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1833),
and  from  1847  until  his  death  was  engaged  in
translating  the  Bible  into  the  Arabic,  which  work
was  subsequently  completed  by  Dr.  Cornelius  V.
Van  Dyke  (New  York,  1866-'7).— His  wife,  Sarah
Lanman, missionary,  b.  in  Norwich, Conn.,  18  June,
1802 ;  d.  in  Boojah,  near  Smyrna,  Asia,  30  Sept.,
1836,  was  the  daughter  of  Jabez  Huntington.  She
married  Dr.  Smitn  in  1833,  accompanied  him  to
Beirut,  and,  having  learned  Arabic,  assisted  him  in
his  translations  into  that  language,  and  taught  in
a  native  school  for  girls  which  she  established.
See  her  "  Memoir,  Journal,  and  Letters,"  edited  by
the  Rev.  Edward  Hooker  (London,  1839).

SMITH,  Ellas,  author,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn.,  17
June,  1769;  d.  in  Lynn,  Mass..  29  June,  1846.
His  early  education  was  scanty,  but  he  became  a
teacher,  and  in  1792  was  ordained  to  the  ministry
of  the  Congregational  church.  He  was  pastor  at  Wo-
burn,  Mass.,  in  1798-1801,  and  afterward  supplied
various  vacant  pulpits.  He  edited  the  "  Christian
Magazine,"  a  quarterly,  in  1805-'7,and  in  1808  began
the  publication  of  the  "Herald  of  Religious  Liber-
ty," the  first  religious  newspaper  that  was  ever
printed,  it  having  preceded  the  "  Religious  Re-
membrancer" of  Philadelphia  by  five  years  and
the  "  Boston  Recorder  "  by  eight.  His  publications
include  "The  Clergyman's  Looking-Glass "  (Wo-
burn,  1803) ;  "  The  History  of  Anti-Christ "  (1803) ;
"  Twenty-two  Sermons  on  the  Prophecies  "  (1808) ;
"  New  Testament  Dictionary  "  (Philadelphia,  1812) ;
"  The  Fall  of  Angels  and  Men  "  (1812) ;  "  Life,  Con-
version, Preaching,  Travels,  and  Sufferings  of  Elias
Smith  "  (Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  1816) ;  "  The  Christian
Pocket  Companion  "  (Exeter,  N.  PL,  1825) ;  "  The
Family  Physician  and  Family  Assistant "  (Boston,
1832);  and  the  "People's  Book"  (1836).— His  son,
Mattheiv  Hale,  author,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,  in
1816 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  7  Nov.,  1879,  was  edu-
cated in  the  public  schools,  and  at  seventeen  years
of  age  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Universalist
church,  from  which  he  withdrew  about  1840,  became
a  Unitarian,  and  in  1842  was  ordained  in  the  Con-
gregational ministry,  and  for  the  subsequent  ten
years  preached  in  Boston,  Nashua,  and  other
churches  in  Massachusetts.  He  studied  law  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1850,  removed  to  New
York  city,  added  journalism  to  his  two  other  pro-
fessions, and  as  correspondent  of  the  "Boston
Journal,"  under  the  pen-name  of  J'  Burleigh,"  at-
tained reputation  for  brilliancy  of  style  and  humor.
He  was  also  a  successful  lecturer,  and  made  several
extensive  tours  in  that  capacity  throughout  the
United  States.  His  publications  include  "Text-
Book  of  Universalism  (Boston,  1836) ;  "  Universal-
ism  Examined,  Renounced,  and  Exposed  "  (1842) ;
"  Universalism  not  of  God "  (New  York,  1847) ;
"Sabbath  Evenings"  (1849);  "Mount  Calvary"
(1866) ;  and  "  Sunshine  and  Shadow  in  New  York  "
(Hartford,  1868-'9).

SMITH,  Elihu  Hubbard,  physician,  b.  in
Litchfield,  Conn.,  4  Sept.,  1771 ;  d.  at  New  York  city,
19  Sept.,  1798.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1786,
subsequently  followed  a  classical  course  under
Dr.  Timothy  Dwight,  and  studied  medicine  in
Philadelphia.  He  then  settled  in  Wethersfleld,
Conn.,  where  he  wrote  as  well  as  practised,  and,  re-
moving to  New  York  city  in  1794,  soon  established
a  reputation  both  in  literature  and  in  his  profession.
His  house  was  the  headquarters  of  the  Friendly
club,  and  a  centre  of  the  literary  society  of  that
city. He  became  a  physician  to  the  New  York  hos-


pital in  1796,  and  the  same  year  was  a  founder  and
editor  of  the  "  Medical  Repository."  During  the
yellow-fever  epidemic  in  1798  he  was  unremitting
m  his  care  of  the  sick,  but  finally  contracted  the
disease,  which  proved  fatal.  He  contributed  to  the
"  Medical  RefKJsitory  "  papers  on  pestilential  fevers ;
edited  "  American  Poems,  Selected  and  Original  "
(Litchfield,  1793);  was  the  author  of  "  Letters  to
William  Buel  on  the  Fever  which  prevailed  in  New
York  in  1793  "  (1794);  "Edwin  and  Angelina,"  an
opera  in  three  acts  (1795);  and  prefixed  to  the  Ameri-
can edition  of  Darwin's  works  an  "  Epistle  to  the
Author  of  the  Botanic  Garden  "  (1798).  He  is  also
supposed  to  have  written  an  anonymous  five-act
tragedy  entitled  "  Andre  "  (1798).

SMITH,  Erasmus  Darwin,  jurist,  b.  in  De
Ruyter,  Madison  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  Oct.,  1806 ;  d.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  11  Nov.,  1883.  He  was  educated
at  Hamilton  college,  admitted  to  the  bar,  became  a
master  in  chancery  in  1832,  serving  three  succes-
sive terms,  was  made  injunction-master  for  the  8th
district  of  New  York  in  1840,  and  clerk  of  that
court  in  1841,  and  was  a  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  New  York  from  1855  till  1877,  wlien  he
was  retired  on  account  of  age.  He  served  on  the
court  of  appeals  in  1862  and  1870,  and  was  general
term  justice  in  1872-7.  Chief-Justice  Chase  said
of  his  decision  in  the  legal-tender  case  of  Hayes  vs.
Powers,  which  settled  the  power  of  the  Federal
government  to  issue  paper  money  as  a  war  measure,
that  "  its  infiuence  on  the  credit  of  the  government
was  'eq|ual  to  a  victory  in  the  field."  Rochester
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1868.

SMITH,  Erasmus  Peshine,  jurist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  2  March.  1814 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
21  Oct.,  1882.  While  he  was  quite  young  his  par-
ents removed  to  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and  his  early
education  was  received  there.  He  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1832,  and  at  the  Harvard  law-school
in  1833,  and  entered  upon  the  practice  of  law  at
Rochester  soon  afterward.  During  the  early  years
of  his  practice  he  was  an  editorial  writer  on  the
Rochester  "  Democrat,"  and  later  he  was  editor  of
the  Buffalo  "  Commercial  Advertiser  "  and  of  the
"  Washington  Intelligencer."  He  was  called  to  the
chair  of  mathematics  in  the  University  of  Roches-
^:er  in  1850,  holding  office  two  years,  when  he  be-
came state  superintendent  of  public  instruction  at
Albany.  In  1857  he  was  appointed  reporter  of  the
court  of  appeals  of  the  state  of  New  York,  and  in
this  post  he  instituted  the  custom  of  numbering
the  reports  consecutively  through  the  entire  series,
and  only  secondarily  by  the  name  of  reporter,  a
custom  that  has  since  been  generally  lollowed.
He  was  appointed  commissioner  of  immigration  atr
Washington  in  1864,  which  post  he  relinquished
soon  afterward  to  become  examiner  of  claims  in
the  department  of  state,  where  he  exercised  much
influence  in  shaping  the  policy  of  the  department
under  William  H.  Seward  and  Hamilton  Fish,  and
where  his  great  knowledge  of  international  law
was  of  value  to  the  government.  In  1871,  Sec.
Fish  being  asked  by  the  Japanese  government  to
name  an  American  to  undertake  the  duties  of  ad-
viser to  the  mikado  in  international  law  (a  post
analogous  to  that  of  the  secretary  of  state  in  the
United  States),  Mr.  Smith  wjis  recommended.  He
was  the  first  American  that  was  chosen  to  assist
the  Japanese  government  in  an  official  capacity,  and
remained  in  Japan  five  years,  making  treaties  and
establishing  a  system  of  foreign  relations.  While
thus  engaged  he  rendered  an  important  service
to  the  world,  as  well  as  to  the  government  by
which  he  was  employed,  in  breaking  up  the  coolie
trade. The  Peruvian  ship  "  Maria  Luz,"  having  a


SMITH


SMim


G63


oarfi^  of  coolios,  was  wrecke<l  off  the  ooost  of
Jttpuii,  uiul,  uiulor  Mr.  Smith's  advice,  the  230
wrecked  Chinuincn  were  detained  hy  the  .Tafianaso
govorniuent.  The  cue  was  8ubn)ittf><l  to  th«'  arl)i-
tratioii  of  the  emperor  of  Kus.sia,  and  under  his
decision,  Mr.  Smith  represfntinff  the  Juitanese
government,  the  r.(K>lies  were  sent  iMick  to  China,
with  the  nvHult  of  hreakin^;  up  the  trade.  Mr.
Smitii  ttubUshe<l  a  "  Manual  of  Political  Fktonomy  "
(New  \ork,  18.W),  in  refutation  of  the  theories  of
Hicardo  and  Malthus.  It  is  "an  attempt  to  con-
struct  a  skeleton  of  [Mlitical  economy  on  the  basis
of  purely  phvsical  laws,  and  thus  to  obtain  for  its
conclusions  that  absolute  certainty  that  l)efonjjs  to
the  iMwitive  sciences."  In  this  repird  the  work  is
wholly  orif^inal,  and  has  largely  affected  the  work
of  later  economists.  It  has  tK>en  trunslatinl  into
French.  Mr.  Smith  contributed  a  word  to  the
English  language  in  suggesting,  through  the  Al-
bany "Evening  Journal,"  the  use  of  "telegram"
in  place  of  cumbrous  phrases,  such  as  "  telegraphic
message  "  and  "  telegnipliic  despatch."  lie  re-
tunie<l  from  Japan  in  18 « 6.

SMITH,  Erminnie  Adelle,  scientist,  b.  in
Marcellus,  N.  Y.,  20  April,  1830 ;  d.  in  Jersey  City,
N.  J.,  9  June,  18^.  Her  maiden  name  was  Piatt.
She  was  educated  at  Mrs.  Willard's  seminary  in
Trov.  N.  Y.,  and  in  1855  married  Simeon  II.  Smith,
of  Jersey  City,  N.  J.  She  early  devoted  herself  to
geology,  and  made  one  of  the  largest  private  col-
lections in  the  country.  She  spent  four  years  in
Europe  with  her  sons,  studying  science  and  lan-
guage, during  which  periml  she  was  grathmted  at
the  ScluK)l  of  mines,  Freiberg,  Saxony,  and  after
her  return  gave  frequent  courses  of  lectures.  She
organized  and  became  president  of  the  -^thetic
society  of  Jersey  City,  whose  monthly  receptions
from  1879  to  1886  were  widely  known.  In  1878
she  undertook  ethnological  work  under  the  au-
spices of  the  Smithsonian  institution,  and  ob-
tained and  classified  over  15,000  words  of  the  Iro-
auois  dialects.  To  facilitate  her  work  in  this
irection.  she  spent  two  summers  with  the  remnant
of  the  Tuscaroras  in  Canada.  She  published  nu-
merous papers  on  scientific  subjects,  and  was  a
member  of  the  Historical  society  of  New  York,  of
the  London  scientific  societv,  and  the  first  lady
fellow  of  the  New  York  aca<(emy  of  sciences.  At
the  meeting  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science  in  1885  she  was  secretary
ot  the  section  of  g»*ology  and  geography.  Her
Iroquois-English  dictionary  was  in  course  of  print-
ing at  the  time  of  her  death.  A  volume  of  essays
and  poems  by  the  Esthetic  society,  written  and
delivered  under  her  direction,  was  issued  in  1883.
In  1888  a  geological  prize  was  founded  at  Vassar
college  in  her  honor.

SMITH,  Ethan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Belchertown,
Mass.,  19  Dec,  1702  ;  d.  in  Pompey,  N.  Y.,29  Aug.,
1849.  He  was  apprenticed  to  the  leather  trade  in
his  lx)yhood,  was  a  private  in  the  Continental  army
in  1780-'!,  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1790,
and  the  .same  year  licensed  to  preach.  From  1791
till  1833  he  was  pastor  of  Congregational  churches
in  Massachusetts,  New  IIampsnirt>,  New  York,  and
Vermont,  and  he  served  as  citv  missionary  in  Bos-
ton from  the  latter  date  until  liis  death.  He  was  a
founder  of  the  New  Hampshire  missionary  society,
its  secretary  for  sixteen  years,  and  the  author  of
numerous  sermons:  "  Dissertation  on  the  Prophe-
cies "  (Concord,  N.  11.,  1809) ;  "  Key  to  the  Figura-
tive Language  of  the  Prophecies"  (1814);  "A
View  of  the  Trinity  "  (1824) ;  "  A  View  of  the  He-
brews," designed  to  prove  that  the  at>origines  of
America  are  descended  from  the  twelve  trities  of


Israel  (Poultney.  Vt,  182.5);  "A  Key  to  the  Reve-
lation "  (New  Y  ork,  1833) ;  and  a  "  Prophetic  Cate-
chism "  (18;{9).

S.MITH.  En^ene  Allen,  geologist,  b.  in  Ala-
Iwma,  27  Ot.,  1841.  He  was  grmluated  at  the
University  of  Alabama  in  1802,  whore  he  was  as-
sistant in  mathematics  and  Ijatin  in  1868-'5,  and
then  spent  three  vears  at  the  universities  of  Berlin,
GOttingen,  and  lleidellwrg,  receiving  in  1868  the
degree  of  Ph.  I),  from  the  last-name<l  institution.
In  1868  he  became  a.ssistant  state  geologist  of  Mis-
sissippi, and  he  held  that  office  until  1871,  and  in
1873  he  was  made  state  geologist  of  AlalMima,  which
appointment  he  has  .since  filliHl.  Dr.  .Smith  was
calUnl  to  the  chair  of  mineralogy  and  geology  in  the
University  of  Alabama  in  1871,  and  in  1874  t)ie  title
of  his  chair  was  change<l  to  that  of  chemistry  geol-
ogy, and  natural  history,  which  he  still  fills.  He
was  honorary  commissioner  to  the  World's  fair  in
Paris  in  1878,  and  during  1880-'2  was  special  census
agent  engaged  in  the  pre|iaration  of  reports  on  cot-
ton-production in  Alabama  and  Florida.  In  1885-'6
he  was  commissioner  for  selecting  lands  that  had
been  given  to  the  University  of  Alalxima.  Dr.
Smith  is  a  member  of  various  scientific  societies,
has  IxHsn  secretary  of  the  section  on  ^ology  and
geography  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science,  and  is  a  memlx>r  of  the
American  committee  of  the  International  geologi-
cal congress,  and  its  reporteron  the  marine  tertiary
in  1886^'8.  Besides  geological  memoirs,  his  publi-
cations include  annual  "  Geological  Reports  of  the
Alalxiina  State  Survey  "  (Montgomery,  1874  et  seq,),
also  special  refxjrts  to  the  U.  S.  geological  survey,
the  U.  S.  entomological  commission,  and  the  U.  S.
census  bureau.

SMITH,  Ezekiel  Ezra,  educator,  b.  in  Duplin
county,  N.  C,  23  May,  1852.  He  is  of  African
descent  and  was  born  a  slave,  but  enjoyed  early
educational  advantages,  studied  in  the  public
schools,  and  became  a  teacher  in  1870.  In  1873-'4
he  was  one  of  the  Jubilee  singers  that  raised  $20,t
000  for  Shaw  university,  at  which  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1878,  and  in  the  next  year  he  was  licensed
to  preach.  He  was  principal  of  the  graded  school
at  Goldsborough,  N.  C.  from  1879  till  1883,  when
he  became  princifwl  of  the  State  colored  normal
sc!hf>ol  at  Fayetteville,  N.  C.  He  was  secretary  of
the  State  colored  Baptist  convention  in  1876^*83,
commissioned  major  of  the  4th  battalion  of  the
North  Carolina  guards  in  1880,  and  in  1888  was
appointed  U.  S.  minister  and  consul-general  to
Liberia,  Africa.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  North
Carolina  industrial  ass(x:iation,  and  established  and
edited  the  "  Carolina  Enterprise."

SMITH,  Francis,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Eng-
land about  1?20;  <1.  there,  17  Nov.,  1791.  He  be-
came captain  of  the  10th  toot  in  1747,  major  in
1758,  lieutenant-colonel  in  1702,  colonel  and  aide-
de-camp  to  the  king  in  1775,  and  the  same  year
commanded  the  tnxjps  that  were  sent  to  destroy
the  American  stores  at  Concord,  Mass.  He  was
wounded  in  the  fight  at  Lexington,  became  briga-
dier-general in  1770,  and  commanded  a  brigade  in
the  battles  on  Long  Island  in  August  of  that  year,
and  at  Quaker  Hill  in  1778.  He  was  promoted
to  the  grmle  of  major-general  in  1779,  and  lieu-
tenant-general in  1787.

SMITH,  Francis  Hennejr,soldier.b. in  Norfolk,
Va.,  18 Oct.,  1S12  ;  d.  in  Lexington.  Vju.  21  March,
1890.  He  was  gra<liiated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  IKW.  and  whs  assistant  professor  there;
also  professor  of  mathematics  at  Hampden  Sidney
in  1837-'9,  and,  on  the  organization  of  the  Virginia
military  institute  in  the  latter  year,  became  its  su-


564


SMITH


SMITH


peri  n  ten  dent,  and  professor  of  mathematics  and
moral  and  political  philosophy,  in  which  office  he
continued.  He  was  apjwinted  colonel  of  a  Vir-
ginia regiment  soon  after  the  Ijeginnine  of  the
civil  war.  and  was  stationetl  at  Norfolk  and  in  com-
mand of  the  fort  at  Craney  Island.  Dunne  the
campaigns  against  Richmond  in  1864,  with  his
corps  of  cadets  he  aided  in  its  defence,  and  was
subsequently  transferred  to  Lynchburg  to  protect
that  city  against  the  National  forces  under  Gen.
David  Hunter.  The  institute  buildings  having
been  destroyed  by  fire  during  the  war,  he  tooK
active  measures  to  reconstruct  them  when  he  re-
turned to  his  duties  there  in  1805,  and  subsequent-
ly he  successfully  administered  its  affairs.  William
and  Mary  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  in  1878.
He  published,  with  Roliert  M.  T.  Duke,  a  series  of
arithmetics  (New  York,  1845);  a  series  of  algebras
(1848) ;  and  was  the  author  of  "  The  Best  Methods
of  conducting  Common  Schools  "  (1849) ;  "  College
Reform  "  (1850) ;  and  a  "  Report  to  the  Legislature
of  Virginia  on  Scientific  Education  in  Europe "
(1859).  He  translated  Bicot's  "  Analytical  Geome-
try "  from  the  French  (1840).

SMITH,  Francis  Hopklnson,  artist,  b.  in  Bal-
timore, Md.,  23  Oct.,  1838.  He  is  by  profession  an
engineer,  and  has  built  a  large  number  of  public
works,  many  of  them  under  contract  with  the  U.  S.

fovemment.  These  include  the  Race  Rock  light-
ouse  off  New  London  harbor.  Long  Island  sound
(1871-7) ;  Block  Island  breakwater  (1879).  He  is
well  known  as  an  artist,  and  has  produced  some
very  effective  work  in  water-colors  and  charcoal.
Among  his  water-colors  are  "In  the  Darkling
Wood^'  (1876) ;  "  Peggotty  on  the  Harlem  "  (1881) ;
"  Under  the  Towers,  Brooklyn  Bridge  "  (1883) ;  "  In
the  North  Woods  "  (1884) ;  and  "  A  January  Thaw  "
(1887).  He  has  been  occupied  also  in  book  and
magazine  illustration,  and  he  is  known  as  an  author
by  his  books  "  Well-worn  Roads  "  (Boston,  1886) ;
"Old  Lines  in  New  Black  and  White "  (1886) ;  and
"A  Book  of  the  Tile  Club"  (1887),  partly  illus-
trated by  himself.  From  1875  till  1878  he  was
treasurer  of  the  American  water-color  society.

SMITH,  Francis  Osmond  Jon,  congressman,
b.  in  Brentwood,  N.  H.,  23  Nov.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Deer-
ing.  Me.,  14  Oct.,  1876.  He  was  educated  at  Phillips
Exeter  academy,  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised
in  Portland.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature
in  1832,  president  of  the  state  senate  in  1833,  and
sat  in  congress  from  December  of  the  latter  year
till  1839,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Whig.  During
his  later  life  he  was  connected  with  many  local  and
national  improvements,  was  instrumental  in  estab-
lishing the  Portland  ^  company,  and  the  York
and  Cumberland  and  Portland  and  Oxford  Central
railroads,  the  latter  having  been  mainly  built  by
him.  But  his  greatest  pubRc  service  was  the  intro-
duction of  the  Morse  electric  telegraph,  which  owes
much  of  its  success  to  his  labor.  He  published
"  Reports  of  Decisions  in  the  Circuit  Courts-Mar-
tial of  Maine"  (Portland,  1831);  "Laws  of  the
State  of  Maine"  (2  vols.,  1834);  and  "Secret  Cor-
responding Vocabulary :  Adopted  for  Use  to  Morse's
Electro-Magnetic  Telegraph  *'  (1845).

SMITH,  Frank,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in  Rich
Hill,  Armagh,  Ireland,  in  1822.  He  accomoanied
his  father  to  Canada  in  1832,  and  settled  near
Toronto.  He  was  engaged  in  business  in  London,
Ont,  from  1849  till  1867,  when  he  removed  to
Toronto,  and  there  continued  the  business  of  a
wholesale  grocer.  He  was  mayor  of  the  city  of
London  in  1866,  and  is  president  or  director  of
several  financial  or  industrial  institutions.  Mr.
Smith  became  a  member  of  the  Canadian  senate  in


February,  1871,  and  of  the  Dominion  cabinet,  with-
out a  portfolio,  29  July,  1882.  He  resigned  in  1887,
but  his  resignation  was  not  accepted.

SMITH,  Frank  Hill,  artist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  15  Oct.,  1842.  He  studied  architecture  in
his  native  city  with  Hammatt  Billing,  later  be-
came a  pupil  at  the  Atelier  Suisse,  Pans,  and  stud-
ied painting  also  under  L^on  Bonnat.  His  work  in
oil  includes  portraits,  figure-pieces,  and  landscajies.
Some  of  his  Venetian  pictures  belong  to  the  Som-
erset club.  Boston.  In  the  course  of  his  studies  in
Europe  he  gave  much  attention  to  interior  decora-
tion, making  many  sketches  of  famous  interiors.
Of  late  years  he  has  devoted  himself  especially  to
this  branch  of  art.  He  has  decorated  the  Windsor
hotel  and  the  opera-house  at  Holyoke,  Mass.,  and
numerous  public  and  private  buildings  in  Boston
and  Cambridge  and  other  cities.  Mr.  Smith  has
been  a  director  of  the  school  of  the  Boston  mu-
seum of  fine  arts.

SMITH,  Georee,  historian,  b.  in  Delaware
county.  Pa..  12  Feb..  1804;  d.  in  Upper  Darby,
Delaware  co..  Pa.,  10  March,  1882.  His  father,
Benjamin,  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania
legislature  in  1801-'4,  and  held  several  minor  offices
of  trust  in  his  county.  George  was  graduated  at
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1826.  but  retired  from  practice  after
five  years,  and  served  in  the  state  senate  in  1832-'6.
He  was  an  associate  judge  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  of  Delaware  county  from  the  latter  date  till
1857,  and  was  re-elected  in  1861  for  a  term  of  five
years.  He  was  chosen  the  first  superintendent  of
the  Delaware  county  common  schools  in  1854,  and
for  the  subsequent  twenty-five  years  was  president
of  the  school  board  of  Upper  Darby  school  district.
He  also  devoted  much  attention  to  scientific  pur-
suits, especially  to  geology.  Dr.  Smith  was  a
founder  of  the  Delaware  county  institute  of  science,
and  its  president  from  1833  until  his  death,  pre-
senting it  with  his  valuable  herbarium  about  1875.
He  was  also  an  honorary  member  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania historical  society,  and  a  contributor  on  his-
torical and  scientific  subjects  to  the  press.  He
published  several  essays  and  "  A  History  of  Dela-
ware County,  Pa.,  from  the  Discovery  of  the  Terri-
tory included  within  its  Limits  to  the  Present
Time"  (Philadelphia,  1862).— His  son,  Clement
Lawrence,  educator,  b.  in  Delaware  county.  Pa.,
13  April,  1844,  was  graduated  at  Haverford  col-
lege, Pa.,  in  1860,  and  at  Harvard  in  1863.  He
was  assistant  professor  of  classics  and  mathematics
at  Haverford  in  1863-'5,  student  of  classical  phi-
lology at  GOttingen  for  one  year  in  1865-'6,  trav-
elled a  year  (1866-'7)  in  England  and  on  the  conti-
nent, about  half  of  the  time  being  spent  in  study
and  travel  in  Italy  and  Greece;  then,  after  two
years'  study  at  home,  assisted  in  the  organization
of  Swarthmore  college  in  1869-'70,  filling  the  chair
of  Greek  and  German.  He  became  tutor  in  Latin
at  Harvard  in  1870,  in  1873  assistant  professor,  and
in  1883  professor  of  the  same,  and  since  1882  he
has  been  dean  of  the  college  faculty.  He  has
published  several  papers  on  philological  and  edu-
cational matters,  ana  is  now  (1888)  engaged,  with
Prof.  Tracy  Peck,  of  Yale,  in  etliting  a  "  College
Series  of  Latin  Authors,"  several  volumes  of  which
are  in  an  advanced  state  of  preparation.

SMITH,  Oeoi^e,  banker,  b.  in  Old  Deer,  Aber-
deenshire, Scotland,  8  March,  1808.  He  passed
two  years  in  Aberdeen  college  with  the  intention
of  studying  medicine,  but,  his  eyesight  failing,  he
turned  to  farming.  In  1833  he  came  to  this  coun-
try, and  in  1834  settled  in  Chicago,  where  he  in-
vested largely  in  city  lots. He  also  bought  land


SMITH


SMITH


560


where  thi»  c-ity  of  MiIw«ukoo  now  KtumU,  but  »old
his  rcnl  «'Mate  in  188l{  fur  oiif  i|UHrter  in  ensh  and
the  (mIhik'o  in  notes,  and  returntNl  to  Scotland.
The  financ'iHl  depression  of  1H87  nia«le  it  necessary
for  him  t«»  return  to
Chicago  and  take  ImmjU
the  land  he  had  sold.
In  1H37  ho  obtaino<l  a
charter  for  the  Wis-
consin murine  and  fire
insurance  conij^any,
which  enabliHl  him  to
receive  de|>ostts  and
issue  certificates  there-
for to  the  amount  of
11.500.000.  Alexander
Mitchell  was  ma<le  sec-
rotary  of  the  company,
with  hemlquarters  at
Milwaukee.  The  in-
j^ t_^ »  surancecomfMiny'scer-

"S^  ^^jL  * y^j^  tiflcates circulated  free-
/.  r /ytAj^  C'^f"^  ly,  and  were  for  many
years  the  most  j>opu-
lar  currency  in  the  northwest.  In  1889  Mr.  bmith,
under  the  "flrm-name  of  ttoorge  Smith  and  Co.,
foundwl  the  first  bankinjc-house  in  the  city  of
("hicapo.  When,  in  1854,  the  Wisconsin  legislature
»upprosse<l  the  circulation  of  the  Wisconsin  ma-
rine and  fire  insurance  company's  certificates.  Mr.
Smith  sold  the  insurance  company,  of  which  he
had  become  sole  owner,  to  Alexander  Mitchell,
and  bought  the  charters  of  two  banks  in  Georgia,
which  together  had  the  right  to  issue  notes  to  the
extent  of  $:},000,000.  These  notes  were  duly  issued
in  Georgia,  sent  to  Chicago,  and  there  circulated  by
,  George  Smith  and  Co.  Mr.  Smith  l)egan  to  close  up
his  business  affairs  in  1857.  and  in  1861  he  returned
to  Gri'at  Mritain,  residing  chiefly  in  London.

SMITH,  George  WiUiamson,  clergyman,  b.
in  Catskill,  N.  Y.,  21  Nov.,  1*^6.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Holmrt  in  1857,  was  principal  of  Bladens-
burg  aca<lemy,  Md.,  in  18.58-'9,  and  serveil  as  a  clerk
in  the  U.  S.  navy  department  in  1861-'4,  at  the
same  time  studying  theology.  He  was  ordained
deacon  in  1860.  and  priest  in  1864,  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  and  was  an  assistant  at  various
churches  in  Washington,  D.  C.  He  was  acting
professor  of  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.  naval  acad-
emy at  Newport,  K.  I.,  in  1864-'5,  chaplain  at  the
Anna[x)lis  academy  in  186.5-'8.  and  chaplain  on  the
U.  S.  steamship  "  iPranklin  "  in  1868-'<  1.  He  was
rector  of  Grace  church,  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  in  1872-'81,

of  the  Church  of
■■'ym,^  the Retleeraer,

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
in 18^'3, and
since the latter
date has been
president  of  Trin-
ity ct)llego,  a  i)or-
tion  of  whicn  is
_^^^^^^^_^ shown  in  the  ac-
!y  ' '  Hf-'^^^^^^^^^^^^K (-'('nijNinying  illus-
lli' i>H'-ii4r^^^^^^^F tration. He re-

ceive«l  the  degree
of  I).  I),  from  Ho-
Ijart  in  1880,  and
fniin  Columbia  in
1887.  Trinity

gave  him  the  de-
LL.  D.  in  the  latter  year.  He  has  pub-
lished occasional  sennons.  and  is  the  author  of  a
"Memoir  of  Rev.  John  H.  Van  Ingen"  (printed
privately,  liochester,  N.  Y.,  1878).


gree  of


SMITH,  Goldwin.  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Reading.  Berkshins  Knglan<l.  18  Aug..  1828.  He
wa«  educated  at  Kton  and  Oxford,  where  be  waa
graduated  in  1845.  In  1847  he  was  elected  a  fellow
of  University  collegi»,  Ix>ndon,  where  he  acted  for
some  time  as  a  tutor,  and  in  the  same  year  he  was
admitttnl  to  the  bar  at  Lincoln's  Inn,'but  he  has
never  practised.  In  1850  he  was  appf»inte<l  assist-
ant secretary  of  the  royal  commission  that  was
charge<l  with  the  duty  of  making  an  inquiry  into
the  condition  of  Oxfonl  university,  and  he  was
secretary  to  the  second  Oxford  commission,  which
effected  many  salutary  changes  in  the  constitution
and  government  of  that  institution.  He  was  ap-
pointe<l  a  member  of  the  Popular  e4iucation  tom-
mission  in  1858,  and  the  same  year  was  made
regius  professor  of  mo<lern  history  at  Oxford,
which  chair  he  held  till  1866.  He  was  an  active
champion  of  the  U.  S.  government  during  the  civil
war,  when  he  wrote  "  Does  the  Bible  Sanction
American  Slavery t"  (Ix)ndon,  1868),  "On  the
Morality  of  the  Emancipation  Proclamation "
(1868),  and  other  pamphlets  that  influenced  pub-
lic opinion  on  this  subject.  In  1864  he  visited  this
country  and  gave  a  series  of  lectures,  receiving  an
enthusiastic  welcome  and  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Brown  univer-
sity. He  returned
to  the  United  States
in  1868,  wasapjx)int-
ed  professor  of  Eng-
lish and  constitu-
tional history  in
Cornell  university,
and  resided  at  Itha-
ca till  1871,  when  he
exchanged  his  chair
for  that  of  a  non-
resident professor,
and  removed  to  To-
ronto, where  he  has
resided  ever  since.
Prof.  Smith  was  ap-
pointed a  member
of  the  senate  of
Toronto  university,
was  elected  first  president  of  the  council  of  public
instruction,  and  was  for  two  years  president  of  the
Provincial  teachers'  association.  He  edited  the
"Canadian  Monthly"  in  I^?i-'4,  founded  the
"Nation"  in  1874,  the  "  BysUnder"  in  1880,  and
the  Toronto  "  Week,"  the  principal  literary  and
political  journal  in  Canada,  in  1884.  In  his  writings
and  lectures  he  has  advocated  annexation  of  that
country  to  the  United  States,  which  he  regards  as
the  manifest  destiny  of  the  Dominion,  anu  he  has
also  favored  the  project  of  commercial  union,  or
unrestricted  reciprocity  with  this  country,  which
was  adopted  as  a  plank'  in  the  political  platform  of
the  Canadian  Liberals  in  1888.  He  has  written
much  for  the  English  reviews,  and,  among  other
works,  has  published  "Irish  History  and  Irish
Character  "  (London,  1861);  "  I^ectures  on  Modem
History"  (1861);  "Rational  Religion  and  the
Rationalistic  Objections  of  the  Bampton  Lectures
for  1858"  (1861);  "The  Empire"  (1863);  "The
Civil  War  in  America  "  (1866) ;  "  Experience  of  the
American  Commonwealth"  (1867);  "Three  Eng-
lish Statesmen"  (1867);  "The  Reorganization  of
the  University  of  Oxfonl  "  (1868);  "The  Relations
between  America  and  England  :  A  Reply  to  the
Speech  of  the  late  Mr.  Sumner"  (1869);  '*'A  Short
History  of  England  down  to  the  Reformation"
(1869);  "The  Conduct  of  England  to  Ireland"
(1882);  and  "  False  Hopes"  (1888).


^^^^♦d^ru*. (.^''^H.t^^fc"


666


SMITH


SMITH


SMITH,  (Unstarns  Woodson,  soldier,  b.  in
Scott  county,  Ky.,  1  Jan.,  1822.  He  was  {gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1842,  ap-
pointed to  the  engineer  corps,  and  for  the  subse-
quent two  years  engaged  in  constructing  fortifica-
tions in  New  London  harbor,  C^onn.  He  was  as-
sistant professor  of  engineering  in  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1844- o,  commanded  the  sappers,
miners,  and  pontoniers  during  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz  and  in  the  subsequent  operations  of  the  war
with  Mexico,  and  in  1847  was  brevetted  1st  lieu-
tenant for  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  in  the
battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  and  captain  for  Contreras.
He  was  recalled  to  the  U.  S.  military  academy  as

Erincipal  assistant  professor  of  engineering  in  1849,
Bcame  1st  lieutenant  in  1853,  and  resigned  from
the  army  the  next  year. He  was  subsequently  em-

r)loyed  in  the  construction  of  various  government
•uildings,  and  in  the  iron-works  of  Cooper  and
Hewitt,  Trenton,  N.  J.  He  was  street  commis-
sioner of  New  York  city  in  1858-'61,  and  a  mem-
ber of  the  board  to  revise  the  programme  of  in-
struction at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1860.
He  returned  to  Kentucky  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war,  entered  the  Confederate  service,  and  in
September,  18(51.  was  appointed  major-general.  He
succeeded  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston  in  temporary
command  of  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  on  31
May,  1862,  and  subsequently  commanded  at  Rich-
mond, was  in  charge  of  the  state  forces  of  Georgia
in  1864-'5,  and  was  taken  prisoner  at  Macon  on  20
April  of  the  latter  year.  He  was  superintendent
in  charge  of  the  Southwest  iron-works  at  Chatta-
nooga, Tenn.,  in  1866-'9,was  insurance  commis-
sioner of  the  state  of  Kentucky  in  1870-6,  and  since
that  time  has  resided  in  New  York  city.

SMITH,  Hamilton  Lanplicre,  educator,  b.  in
New  London,  Conn.,  5  Nov.,  1819.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1839,  and,  while  a  student  there,
constructed  what  was  then  the  largest  telescope  in
this  countrv,  and,  in  connection  with  Ebenezer  P.
Mason,  made  an  extended  series  of  observations  on
various  nebute,  the  results  of  which  were  published
in  the  proceedings  of  the  American  academy  of
arts  and  sciences  (Philadelphia,  1844). He  was

Rrofessor  of  natural  philosophy  and  astronomy  at
[enyon  college,  Gambier,  Ohio,  in  1853-'68,  and
since  the  latter  date  has  held  the  same  chairs  at
Hobart.  Trinity  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
in  1871.  He  is  president  of  the  American  society
of  mieroscopists  and  a  member  of  several  foreign
and  domestic  learned  societies.  His  publications
include  "Natural  Philosophy"  (Cleveland,  Ohio,
1847) ;  "  First  Lessons  in  Astronomy  and  Geology  "
(1848) ;  "  Species  Typic«e  Diatomacearum,"  750
specimens  in  thirty  cases  (1885-*7);  and  addresses
biefore  the  American  society  of  mieroscopists.

SMITH,  Sir  Henry,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
London,  England.  23  April,  1812 ;  d.  in  Kingston,
Ont.,  18  Sept.,  1868.  When  he  was  eight  years  old
he  accompanied  his  parents  to  Canada.  He  was
educated  at  Montreal  and  Kingston,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1836,  and  in  1846  be-
came queen's  counsel.  Soon  after  the  union  of
Upjjer  and  Lower  Canada  in  1841  he  was  elected
a  memljer  of  the  Canadian  pjirliament  for  Pronte-
nac,  and  he  represented  it  till  1861,  when  he  was
defeated.  He  l)ecame  a  member  of  the  MacNab-
Morin  administration  as  solicitor-general,  west,  in
1854,  and  held  this  portfolio  in  successive  adminis-
trations till  1858,  when  he  was  appointed  speaker.
In  this  capacity  he  went  to  London  in  1859  and  in-
vited the  queen,  in  behalf  of  the  Canadian  parlia-
ment, to  visit  Canada  and  open  the  Victoria  bridge.
During  the  visit  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  to  Canada


in  1860  he  was  knighted,  and  soon  afterward  left
the  (V)ns(>rvative  party  and  was  defeated  as  a  can-
didate for  pariiHinpnt.

SMITH,  Henry,  police  commissioner,  b.  in
Amsterdam.  Montgomery  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  Oct.,  1820;
d.  in  New  York  city,  23  Feb.,  1874.  Early  in  life
he  engaged  in  trade  in  New  York  city,  and  for
twenty-five  years  he  was  one  of  the  most  active

B}liticians  in  the  Whig  and  Republican  parties,
e  was  a  meml)er  of  the  New  York  board  of  coun-
cilmen  in  1854-'7,  supervisor  in  1862-'8,  and  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  police  in  1868-'74.

SMITH,  Henry  Boynton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  21  Nov.,  1815;  d.  in  I^w  York  city,
7  Feb.,  1876.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in
1834,  was  tutor  there  for  several  years,  and  studied
at  Andover  and  Bangor  theological  seminaries,
and  subsequently  at  Halle  and  Berlin.  He  was
[)astor  of  the  West  Amesbury.  Mass..  Congrega-
tional church  in
1842-'7,  professor
of  mental  and  mor-
al philosophy  at
Amherst  in  1847-
'50,  of  church  his-
tory in  Union  the-
ological seminary,
New  York  city,
for  the  subsequent
five  years,  and  of
systematic  theolo-
gy there  from  1855
till  his  resignation
in  1873.  He  was
moderator  of  the
assembly  of  the
new-school  Pres-
byterian church  in
1863,  and  at  the
general  assembly  of  the  next  year  delivered  a
discourse,  which  was  published  under  the  title  of
the  "  Reunion  of  the  Presbyterian  Churches"  (New
York,  1864).  He  was  subsequently  a  member  of
the  general  assembly's  committee  on  reunion  with
the  old-school  branch  of  the  church,  and  presented
a  report  on  a  doctrinal  basis  of  reunion  (1867).
He  read  a  "  Report  on  the  State  of  Religion  in  the
United  States  before  the  Evangelical  alliance
which  met  in  Amsterdam  in  1867,  to  which  body
he  was  a  delegate.  He  founded  the  ''American
Theological  Review,"  and  was  its  editor  from  1859
till  1862,  when  it  was  consolidated  with  the  "  Pres-
byterian Review,"  which  he  edited  till  1871.  The
University  of  Vermont  gave  him  the  degree  ol
LL.  D.  in  1850,  and  Princeton  that  of  D.D.  in
1869.  His  principal  works  are  "The  Relations  of
Faith  and  Philosophy "  (New  York,  1849);  "The
Nature  and  Worth  oi  the  Science  of  Church  His-
tory" (1851);  "The  Problem  of  the  Philosophy  of
History  "  (1853) ;  "  The  Idea  of  Christian  Theology
as  a  System  "  (1857) ;  "  An  Argument  for  Christian
Churches"  (1857);  "History  of  the  Church  of
Christ  in  Chronological  Tables"  (1859);  a  new
edition  of  the  Edinburgh  transla{.ion  of  Greseler's
"Church  History,"  volumes  iv.  and  v.  of  which
he  chiefly  translated  (5  vols.,  1859-'63);  a  revis-
ion of  the  Edinburgh  translation  of  Hagenbach's
"  History  of  Christian  Doctrine "(2  vols.,  1861-2);
a  new  edition  of  Stier's  "  Words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"
with  James  Strong  (1864  et  seq.) ;  and,  with  Ros-
well  D.  Hitchcock.  "  The  Life,  Writings,  and  Char-
acter of  Edward  Robinson  "  (1864).

SMITH,  Henry  HoHingsworth,  surgeon,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10  Dec,  1815;  d.  there,  11
April,  1890. He  was  graduated  at  the  yniversity  of


Kfie^wy  ^J .  /hvLciC


SMITH


SMITH


667


Pennsvlvnnia  in  1H37,  and  at  the  mmlicnl  depart-
iiieiit  III  1H80,  spoilt  a  year  in  study  abrtrnd.  and
on  his  ivturn  M^ttlfil  in  practice  in  Philadelphia.
Ho  became  a  siiri^jon  U>  St.  .IctM'phV  h«>spital  in
1H41).  sur^iHrn  to  the  KpiHco|>aJ  hospital  soon  after-
ward, one  of  the  surjncal  staff  to  Hloc-kley  hospital
in  1H.'»4.  and  wa«t  nrofes.«or  <»f  surgi'ry  in  the  iiumII-
cal  tlepartment  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvunia
from  IHW  till  1H71,  when  he  Uvaine  orofesMir
ciiieritus.  At  the  lK>piiiiiii^  of  the  civil  war  he
was  ap|Hiiiite<l  to  or^^nize  the  hospital  de|>artincnt
of  Pennsylvania,  and  at  the  same  time  made  8ur-
gwon->ji'neral  of  PennsylviuiiH.  In  tliisuapncitv  he
oontril)ute<l  much  to  the  elllciency  of  the  medical
services  of  the  Pennsylvaiiiu  reserves  and  other
state  ri'giments.  At  the  first  Iwttle  at  Winches-
ter, Va..  he  ori(;inate<l  the  pliiii  of  removing  the
woundinl  from  the  buttle-fleld  to  large  hospitals
in  IU>atling,  PhiliKleli>hiii,  Ilarrisbiirg,  and  other
cities,  and  estjiblisluMl  the  custom  of  einlmlming
the  ileiwl  on  the  battle-ground.  He  organize<l  aim
directed  a  corps  of  surgeons,  with  steamers  aa
floating  hospitals,  at  the  siegt)  of  Yorktown.  and
served  the  wounded  after  the  battles  of  Williams-
burg, West  Point,  Fair  Oaks,  and  Cold  liarlwr.
After  thor«)Ughly  organizing  the  department  of
which  he  was  in  charge,  he  resigned  his  commis-
sion in  18tt3,  and  continued  actively  engaged  in
the  practice  of  his  profession.  Dr.  Smith  was
widely  known  as  a  medical  author.  His  publi-
cations include  "An  Anatomical  Atlas,"  to  illus-
trate William  K.  Horner's  "S|)ecial  Anatomy"
(Philatlelphia,  1843);  "Minor  Surgery"  (1846);
'•System  of  Ofwrative  Surgery,"  with  a  biograph-
ical index  to  the  writings  and  operations  of  Ameri-
i«n  surgeons  for  2;i4  years  (2  vols.,  1852);  "The
Treatment  of  Disunitcil  Fractures  by  Means  of  Ar-
tificial Limbs  "(185.'));  "  Professional  Visit  to  Lon-
don and  Paris"  (1855);  "  Practice  of  Surgery"  3
vols.,  1857-'0Ji);  and  numerous  surgical  articles
in  medical  journals:  and  he  translated  from  the
French  Civiale's  "Treatise  on  the  Medical  and
Prophylactic  Treatment  of  Stone  and  Gravel"
(Philadelphia,  1841).  and  etlited  the  "  United  States
Dissector  "  (1844),  and  Spenser  Thompson's  "  Do-
mestic Medicine  and  Surgery  "  (1853). — His  cousin,
Francis  (Earner,  physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  8  March,  1818;  d.  there,  6  April,  1878,  was
gradaated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
1837,  and  at  its  medical  department  in  1840,  and
became  a  resident  physician  to  the  Pennsylvania
hospital  for  the  insane  in  1841,  lecturer  on  physi-
ology in  the  Philadelphia  medical  asstx-iation  in
1842,  and  in  1850  professor  of  the  same  branch  in
the  Pennsylvania  medical  college.  He  was  pro-
fessor of  the  institutes  of  medicine  in  the  medi-
cal de[jartment  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
fr«)in  18«:j  till  1877,  was  one  of  the  first  medical
staff  of  the  Episcopal  hospital,  and  for  six  years  an
attending  physician  and  clinical  lectui-er  in  the
Pennsylvania  hospital.  During  the  civil  war  he
was  physician  in  charge  of  a  military  hospital.
Ho  founded  and  established  the  first  lalioratory  in
which  i)hysiology  was  taught  experimentally  and
by  demonstration  in  the  Lniversity  of  Pennsylva-
nia, was  the  first  president  of  the  Philadelphia  ob-
stetrical society,  and  vice-president  of  the  Ameri-
can medical,  association  in  1870.  For  nine  years
he  was  an  editor  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Medical
Examiner."  He  contributed  frwiuently  to  me<Iical
literature,  translated  and  edited  Barth  anil  Htiger's
** Manual  of  Auscultation  ami  Percussion"  (Phila-
delphia, 1849);  edite«l  Daniel  Drake's  "  Systematic
Treatise,"  with  H.  Hanbury  Smith,  on  the  "  Dis-
of  the  Interior  Valley  of  North  America"


(1854):  William  H.  CarjK'nter's  "  Principles  of  Hu-
man Physiology  "  (1850);  his  "  Microflcone  and  its
Revelations  and  Uses"  (18.V));  and  William  S.
Kirke  and  James  Pag«t's  **  Physiology  "(1836) ;  and
was  the  author  of  "Ikimestic  Medicine,  Surgenr,
and  Materia  .Metlica"  (1852).  ami,  with  John  Keifl,
an  "Analytical  (*<im|>cndiiim  of  Mwlicine  "  (1857).

SNITri,  Hoz<>klah,  dergvman,  b.  on  Ixmg
Island,  N.  Y.,  21  April,  173'7:  «1.  in  HaverhilH
-Mass.,  22  Jan.,  1805.  He  was  gradiiat«'«l  at  Prince-
ton in  1762,  and  soon  afterwanl  was  ordained  to
the  ministry  at  Charleston,  S.  C.  In  17(i4  be
visited  New  England  and  preached  for  some  time
in  Haverhill,  Mass.  In  1765  a  ItaptLit  church  was
organized  in  this  place,  and  Mr.  .Smith  liecame  its
pastor.  He  maintained  this  relation  to  the  end  of
his  life,  a  jjeritni  of  forty  years.  Under  his  minis*
try  the  church  grew  into  commanding  strength
and  influence.  Meanwhile  he  jHTformwl  extensive
missionary  tours  through  destitute  regions  of  New
Hampshire  and  Maine.  In  1776-'80  he  filled  the
oflfice  of  chaplain  in  the  American  army.  In  this
service  he  became  acquainted  with  Washington,
besides  possessing  the  confidence  and  esteem  of  the
whole  army.  In  encouraging  the  soldiers  and
ministering  to  the  wounditl,  he  re|>eatedly  exixised
his  life  in  battle.  He  was  an  ardent  friend  of  edu-
cation, and  was  especially  active  in  establishing
and  supporting  Brown  university,  of  whose  board
of  fellows  he  was  long  a  meml)er.  From  this  uni-
versity he  received  in  1797  the  degree  of  D.  D.  See
his  life,  entitled  "Chaplain  Smith  and  the  Bap-
tists," by  lieuben  A.  Guild  (Philadelphia,  1885).

SMitH,  Hezekiah  Bradley,  inventor,  b.  in
Brid^ewaler.  Vt.,  24  .July,  18Hi;  d.  in  Smithville,
Burlington  co..  N.  J.,  3  Nov.,  1887.  He  learned  the
trade  of  a  cabineL-maker,  and  became  an  inventor
and  manufacturer  of  wooden  machinery.  He  set-
tled in  Wotxlbury,  Mass.,  about  18(J0,  en^ged  in
the  manufacture'of  txindow-blinds,  and  invented
a  machine  that  cut  and  cleansed  forty  mortises  a
minute,  for  which  the  Mas.sachusetts  mechanical
association  presented  him  with  a  gold  medal.  He
subsequently  took  out  more  than  forty  [>atents  for
original  inventions.  He  established  a  wood-manu-
factory in  Smithville,  N.  J.,  in  1871,  which  settle-
ment was  named  in  his  honor,  and  spent  large
sums  in  building  moiiel  houses,  halls,  and  places  of
amusement  for  his  workmen.  He  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1878,  served  one  term,
and  in  1882  was  elected  state  senator,  declining  re-
nomination.

SMITH,  Hezekiah  Wright,  engraver,  b.  in
Edinburgh.  Scotland,  in  1828.  He  came  to  New
York  with  his  family  in  1833,  and  entered  the  es-
tablishment of  an  engraver,  where  he  remained
until  his  majority.  He  then  passed  two  years  with
Thomas  I)oney,  a  mezzotint  engraver,  and  in  1850
went  to  Boston  and  l>egan  to  practise  his  profes-
sion, engraving  a  large  number  of  plates  for  the
publications  of  Ticknor  and  Field,  and  Little,
Brown  and  Co.  His  most  im|K)rtant  plates  are  a
full-length  of  Daniel  Webster,  after  ('nester  Har-
ding ;  a  three-quarter  lengt  h  P2«lwarti  Everett,  after
Moses  Wright;  and  Washington, after Gill^ert Stu-
art's Athenanim  head,  this  last  being  the  l>ejst  ren-
dering of  the  picture  that  has  yet  lieen  produced
Vjy  the  engraver.  It  was  a  labor  of  love  with  Mr.
Smith,  and  to  its  completion  he  devoted  all  the
leisun'  he  could  secure  from  his  regular  work  dur-
ing several  years.  His  plates  are  executed  in  the
dotted  style,  improi>erly  called  stipple,  and  most  of
his  smaller  |H)rtraits  have  considerable  roulette
work,  giving  them  a  mezzotint  appearance.  In
1870  he  returned  to  New  York,  and  in  1877  he  re-


568


SMITH


SMITH


moved  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  remained  until
the  beginning  of  April,  1879.  He  then  suddenly
expressed  a  determmation  to  give  up  engraving.
di^posed  of  all  his  effects,  left  the  city,  and  noth-
ing has  since  been  heard  of  him.  During  the  last
year  of  his  residence  in  Philadelphia  he  essayed
etching  in  the  style  of  Henry  B.  Hall,  and  pro-
duced ten  plates  in  this  manner,  his  last  being  a
S>ortrait  of  James  L.  Claghorn,  president  of  the
^ennsvlvania  academy  of  the  fine  arts.

SMITH,  Isaac,  patriot,  b.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  in
1736;  d.  there,  29  Aug.,  1807.  He  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1755,  was  a  tutor  there,  studied
medicine,  and  subsequently  practised  that  profes-
sion, and  early  espoused  the  patriot  cause,  com-
manding a  regiment  in  1776.  He  was  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  New  Jersey  from  1783  till  1801,
served  in  congress  in  1795-'7,  and  in  the  latter
year  was  appointed  bv  President  Washington  to
treat  with  tne  Seneca  Indians.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  president  of  the  Bank  of  Trenton.

SMITH,  Isaac  Townsend,  consul-general,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  12  March,  1813.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Latin  and  the  English  high-schools  in
Boston,  and  at  Capt.  Alden  Partridge's  military
academy  at  Middletown,  Conn.  He  entered  com-
mercial life,  and  as  supercargo  made  several  voy-
ages to  the  East  Indies,  China,  Manila,  Singapore,
Java,  and  Africa.  Then  he  settled  in  Xew\ork.
where  as  a  merchant  and  ship-owner  he  conducted
business  for  several  years.  He  was  Hn  incorpora-
tor and  for  many  years  president  of  the  Metropoli-
tan savings-bank,  and  was  a  commissioner  of  emi-
Sation  for  the  state  of  New  York  for  several  years,
r.  Smith  was  a  presidential  elector  at  the  election
of  Abraham  Lincoln  in  1864,  and  is  Siamese  con-
sul-general for  the  United  States.  He  has  been  a
contributor  to  the  "  Magazine  of  American  His-
tory "  and  other  periodicals.

SMITH,  Israel,  senator,  b.  in  Suffield,  Conn.,  4
April,  1759;  d.  in  Rutland,  Vt.,  2  Dec,  1810.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1781,  and  settled  as  a
lawyer  in  Rupert,  Vt.,  but  removed  afterward  to
Rutland.  He  was  a  boundary  commissioner  in  1 789,
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  admission  of  Ver-
mont into  the  Union.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
convention  that  adopted  the  Federal  constitution
in  1791,  a  member  of  congress  from  that  year  till
1797,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat,  and  was
U.  S.  senator  from  1803  till  1807,  when  he  I'esigned
to  Ijecome  governor  of  Vermont.  In  1809  he  was
a  presidential  elector.

SMITH,  James,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Ireland  about  1720 ;  d.  in  York,
Pa.,  11  July.  1806.  The  date  of  his  birth  is  un-
certain, for  he  never  told  it.  His  father  emigrated
with  his  family  to  this  country  in  1729,  and  en-
gaged in  farming  on  Susquehanna  river.  James
was  educated  at  the  College  of  Philadelphia,  studied
law,  and  settled  first  in  Shippensburg  as  a  lawyer
and  surveyor,  and  afterward  in  York,  Pa.,  where  for
many  years  he  was  the  sole  practitioner  at  the  bar.
During  this  period  of  his  life  he  was  as  widely
known  for  his  humorous  stories,  his  wit,  and  con-
viviality as  for  his  learning  and  success  in  prac-
tice, his  drollery  being  heightened  by  an  awkward-
ness of  gesture,  a  ludicrous  cast  of  countenance,
and  a  drawling  utterance.  He  also  successfully
engaged  in  extensive  iron-manufactures  on  Codo-
rus  creek,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution
possessed  considerable  property.  In  1774  he  raised
the  first  volunteer  company  in  the  state  for  the

Eurpose  of  resisting  Great  Britain,  and  was  a  mem-
er  of  the  convention  to  consider  the  expediency
of  abstaining from importing  any  goods  from


England,  and  also  of  assembling  a  general  congress.
At  this  meeting  he  was  one  of  a  committee  of  three
to  prepare  instructions  for  the  rei)resentatives,  and
these  instructions,  together  with  Smith's  essay
"  On  the  Constitu-
tional Power  of  Great
Britain  over  the  Col-
onies in  America,"
gave  the  first  strong
mipulse  to  the  patriot
cause  in  that  region.
He  was  a  member
of  the  Pennsylvania
convention  in  Janu-
ary, 1776,  and  of  the
provincial  conference
that  assembled  on  18
June  of  the  same  year
to  form  a  new  gov-
ernment for  Pennsyl-
vania, and  seconded
the  resolution  that
was  ofiFered  by  Dr.
Benjamin  Rush  in
favor  of  a  declaration  of  independence.  This,  hav-
ing been  unanimously  adopted,  was  signed  by  the
members,  and  presented  to  congress  a  few  days  be-
fore the  Declaration.  On  the  day  of  the  adoption
of  the  resolution.  Smith  was  appointed,  with  Col.
John  Bayard  and  .others,  to  organize  a  volunteer
camp  of  Pennsylvania  militia  for  the  protection
of  Philadelphia.  He  was  a  raeml)er  of  the  con-
vention of  15  July,  1776,  that  assembled  in  Phila-
delphia for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  new  constitu-
tion for  the  state,  and  on  the  20th  of  the  same  month
was  elected  to  congress,  remaining  in  that  body  till
1778.  In  1779  he  served  in  the  general  assembly  of
Pennsylvania.  In  1780  he  was  commissioned  judge
of  the  high  court  of  appeals.  In  1782  he  was  ap-
pointed brigadier-general  of  Pennsylvania  militia.
He  was  appointed  a  counsellor  on  the  part  of  Penn-
sylvania m  the  controversy  between  that  state  and
Connecticut  in  1784,  and  in  the  following  year  was
chosen  to  congress  in  the  place  of  Matthew  Clark-
son,  who  had  resigned,  but  his  advanced  age  com-
pelled him  to  dechne  a  re-election.  After  the  peace,
having  lost  his  fortune  during  the  war,  he  resumed
the  practice  of  his  profession,  m  which  he  continued
till  1801.  He  was  the  personal  and  political  friend
of  Washington  and  an  ardent  Federalist.

SMITH,  James,  pioneer,  b.  in  Franklin  county.
Pa.,  in  1737 ;  d.  in  Washington  county,  Ky.,  in  1812.
He  was  captured  by  the  Indians  when  he  was
eighteen  years  of  age,  and  adoptetl  into  one  of  their '
tribes,  but  escaped  in  1759,  was  a  leader  of  the
"black  boys"  in  1763-'5,  and  a  lieutenant  in  Gen.
Henry  Bouquet's  expedition  against  the  Ohio  In-
dians in  1764.  He  was  one  of  an  exploring  party
into  Kentucky  in  1766,  settled  in  Westmoreland
county  in  1768,  and  during  Lord  Dunmope's  war
was  captain  of  a  ranging  company,  and  in  1775
major  of  the  Associated  battalion  of  Westmoreland
county.  He  served  in  the  Pennsylvania  conven-
tion in  1776,  and  in  the  assemblyin  1776-"7.  In
the  latter  year  he  commanded  a  scouting  party  in
the  Jerseys,  and  in  1777  was  commissioned  colonel
in  command  on  the  frontiers,  doing  good  service  in
frustrating  the  marauds  of  the  Indians.  He  settled
in  Cane  Ridge,  near  Paris,  Ky.,  in  1788,  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Danville  convention,  and  represented
Bourbon  county  for  many  years  in  the  legislature.
He  published  two  tracts  entitled  "  Shakerism  De-
veloped "  and  "  Shakerism  Detected,"  "  Remark-
able Adventures  in  the  Life  and  Travels  of  Col.
James  Smith  "  (Lexington,  1799;  edilejj  by  Will-


SMITH


SMITn


509


iam  M.  nnrlinKtnn,  and  rppiihlishetl.  CincinnHti.
1870),  Hiiil  "A  TroHtise  <»n  t(u«  M<Kle  and  ManiUT
of  liidiiiii  Wiir"  (Paris.  K\..  IS()4>.

SMITH,  JaineH,('HimdiHii  jurist,  h.  in  Montreal
in  1H()H.  He  wait  tMlucateil  in  hiH  native  city  an<l
in  Scotland,  i<tiidie«l  law,  was  mlmitted  to  the  bar
of  Ii«iwer  Canada  in  IKK),  and  in  1844  wan  electetl
t<»  the  [tarliament  of  Canada  fur  the  county  of
Mis8iss(|uoi.  He  hcM  ofllce  as  attorney-jteiieral,
east,  in  the  Vi^^•r•I)ra|)er  administration  till  22
April,  1847,  when  he  n^ign(><|,  and  wu.s  H|t|><>inte<l
a  judjfe  of  the  court  «»f  (jueen's  Ixuich  of  Ijower
Cana«ia.  He  afterward  U-came  one  of  the  judges
of  the  suiK>rior  court.

SMITH,  JaineM  Milton,  governor  of  Georgia,
b.  in  Twiggs  county,  (>a.,  24  Oct.,  182^1  He  was
educated  at  Cullo«len  acatleniy,  Monroe  county,  Oa.,
becanie  a  lawyer,  entered  the  Confe<lerate  army  in
1861  as  major  in  the  lUth  Georgia  regiment,' be-
came ctilonel  in  18(52,  and  was  a  meml»er  of  the
Con  federal*  congress  from  that  year  until  the  close
of  the  civil  war.  He  served  iii  the  legislature  in
1871-'2.  was  s|)e«ker,  and  in  1872  was  chosen  gov-
ernor to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Rufus  B.  Bul-
lock, which  ofllce  he  held  by  re-election  till  1874.

SMITH,  James  »'heaton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  26  June.  1823.  lie  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1848,  and  at  Newton  theological
seminary  in  1851.  In  1853  he  became  pastor  of
the  Spruce  street  Baptist  church  in  Philmlelphia,
Pa.,  and  he  continued  in  this  relation  until  1870,
when  he  went  out  from  it  with  a  colony  which  es-
tablishnl  the  Beth  Eden  church.  He  held  the
pastoral  charge  of  this  body  until  1880.  Im-
jMiired  health  obliging  him  to  resign,  he  was  there-
upon electetl  pastor  emeritus.  He  is  the  author  of
*a"  Life  of  John  P.  Croser"  (Philadelphil^  18(58).
In  18(52  he  rweived  from  Lewisburg  (Bucknel)
univcrsitv  the  degree  of  I).  D.

SMITH,  James  Youngs,  governor  of  Rhode
Island,  b.  in  Groton.  Conn.,  15  Sept.,  1809 ;  d.  in
Pnividence,  R.  1.,  26  March,  1876.  He  removed  to
Providence  in  1826,  engaged  in  the  lumber  business,
an«l  in  lKi8  in  the  manufacture  of  cotton  goods  in
Willimantic,  Conn.,  and  Woonsocket,  R.  I.,  ac-
quiring a  fortune.  He  served  several  terms  in  the
Rh(Mle  Island  legislature,  was  mayor  of  Providence
in  1855-'7,  and  governor  of  Rhode  Island  in  1863-'5.
During  his  service  he  efficiently  supported  the
National  cause,  and  largely  contributed  to  it  with
his  private  fortune.  He  controlled  extensive  manu-
facturing enterprises,  and  occupied  many  posts  of
trust  in  Itanking  and  other  corporations.  He  was
a  Reiiiiblican  from  the  organization  of  that  party.

SMITH,  Jeremiah,  jurist,  b.  in  Peterl)orough,
N.  H.,  29  Nov..  1759;  d.  in  Dover,  N.  H..  21  Sept..
1842.  He  enlisted  in  the  patriot  army  about  1775,
and  wjis  wounded  at  the  little  of  Bennington,  Vt.
He  then  renewed  his  studies,  was  gradiiated  at
Rutgers'in  1780,  studied  law,  and  was  admitteti  to
the  liar  of  Dover,  N.  H.,  earlv  attaining  to  emi-
nence as  a  lawyer  and  a  scholar.  He  served  in
congress  in  1791-'7,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Federalist,  and  ably  suii|)orte«l  the  measures  of
Washington.  He  was  (j.  S.  district  attorney  in
179H-1H(K),  a  judge  of  the  U.  S.  circuit  court  of
New  Hampshire  in  1801-2,  and  then  became  chief
justice,  but  resigned  in  1809  to  become  governor,
in  which  office  he  servetl  one  term.  He  then  re-
turne<l  to  practice,  and  was  again  chief  justice  in
1813-'16,  but  afterward  m-cupied  no  public  tifflce.
He  was  president  of  the  Kxeter  l»ank  for  thirty-
nine  years,  trustee  and  treasurer  of  Phillips  An-
dover  academv,  and  a  meml)er  of  the  State  histori-
cal society. His  extraordinary  mental  endowinenta


were  unim[iaire<l  by  age,  and  were  retained  until
his  death. For  many  years  he  was  the  [mtron  and
cl«)se friend of Daniel Wclwter. Harvard gave
him  the  degre«-  of  LL.  D.  in  1807. He  published
a  sketch  of  Judge  Caleb  KIlis  (Haverhill.  1816).
See  his  "  Life  "  by  John  H.  Morison  (lioston,  1845).
SMITH,  Jerome  ran  CrownlnHhield.  phrsi-
'  cian.  b.  in  Conway,  N.  H.,  20  July,  IHOO;  d.  in  Jfew
1  York  city,  21 Aug.,  187S». He  was  grailuatetl  at
the  me<lical  de|>artment  of  Brown  in  1818,  nnd  at
,  Ik'rkshire  metlical  school  in  1825,  Ix'coming  its  first
,  professor  of  anatomy  and  physiology. He  s<'ttled
in  Boston  in  1825,  e<lited  the  "  VVwltly  News-Ijet-
ter"  for  two  years,  was  jKirt  physician'in  182(J-'49,
and  mayor  of  Btjston  in  18.54. He  subsecjuently
occupied  the  chair  of  anatomy  and  physiology,  and
afterward  of  anatomy  alone,  in  New  Vork  medical
college. He  established  in 1823,  and  editecl  for
many  years,  the  "  Boston  Metlical Intelligencer,"
contfucted the "  lioston Medical and Surgical
Journal  "  in  1828-*5«,  and  the  "  Medical  World  "  in
1857-'9. His publications include  "  The Claas-
Book  of  Anatomy  "  ( lioston,  1830) ;  "  Life  of  An-
drew Jackson"  (1832);  "Natural  History  of  the
Fishes  of  Massachusetts"  (1833);  "  Pilgrimage  to
Palestine"  (1861):  "  Pilgrimage  to  Egypt"  (1852);
"Turkey  and  the  Turks" (1854);  and  a  "Prize
I  Essay  on  the  Physical  Indications  of  Longevity"
I  (New York, 1869). He  also edited "  Scientific
Tracts"  (6  vols., 1833-'4)  and "The  American
Medical  Almanac  "  (3  vols..  1839-'41).

SMITH,  Jesse  C.,  soldier,  b.  in  Butternuts,
Otsego  c-o.,  N.  Y.,  18  July,  1808 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  YT.  11  July,  1888.  He'was  graduated  at  Union
in  1832,  and  studied  law  in  New  York  city,  under
Alva  Clark.  He  took  much  interest  in  military
affairs,  became  adjutant,  and  subsequently  major,
of  the  75th  regiment  of  New  York  militia,  and
afterward  colonel  of  the  14th  regiment.  While
commanding  the  latter,  he  suppressed  the  "  Angel
Gabriel "  riots,  which  were  cause<l  by  the  preach-
ing of  a  lunatic  who  gave  himself  that  ap[)ella-
tion.  Gen.  Smith  was  surrogate  of  Kings  county
in  1850-'5,  and  state  senator  in  1862.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  was  instnimental  in
the  reorganization  of  the  National  guard,  and  in
forming  the  139th  regiment  of  New  Vork  volun-
teers. He  commanded  the  11th  brigade  of  the
National  guartl'at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg.  After
the  war  he  practised  law  in  Brooklyn.

SMITH,  Job  I^wis,  physician,  b.  in  Spafford,
Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  Oct.,  1827.  Ho  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1849  and  at  the  New  York  college
of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1853,  after  which  he
settled  in  New  York  city,  and  has  been  a  success-
ful practitioner  there,  making  a  specialty  of  the
diseases  of  children.  He  is  clinical  processor  of
that  branch  in  Bellevue  medical  college  and  physi-
cian to  the  New  York  charity  hospital  and  the  >Jew
York  foundling  and  infant  asvlums.  His  publica-
tions include  a  "  Treatise  on  Diseases  of  Children  "
(Philadeljihia,  1876).

SMITH,  John,  adventurer,  b.  in  Willoughby,
Lincolnshire,  F^ngland,  in  January,  1579;  d.  in  Lon-
don, 21  June,  1632.  Biographies  of  Smith  are  gener-
ally based  on  Smith's  own  accounts  of  his  life  and
services,  which  are  not  trustworthy.  He  was  the
eldest  son  of  George  and  Alice  Smith,  i»oor  tenants
of  Peregrine  Bertie,  Ivord  Willoughby,  and  was
baptizetl  in  the  parish  church  at  Wilk)ughby,  6  Jan.,
15(9,  (>.  S.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  was  appren-
ticed to  a  trade,  but  ran  awav  from  his  master  and
served  uncler  Ijord  Willoughby  in  the  Netherlands
and  other  countries.  Smitii  represents  himself  as
one  of  the  train  of  Peregrine  Bertie,  a  young  son


670


SMITH


SMITH


Qyrwt^,


of  Lord  Willoughby,  but,  on  a  list  recently  discov-
ered of  the  raemljers  of  that  company,  Smith's
name  appears  as  a  servant.  He  went  abroad  again
to  fight  against  the  Turks  under  Haron  Kisell,  l)e-
came  a  captain,  and,  he  says,  distinguished  him-
self by  danng  exploits  in  Hungarv  and  Transylva-
nia, receiving  from  Sigismund  liathori,  prince  of
Transylvania,  a  patent  of  nobility  and  a  pension,
but  after  engaging  in  many  blooUv  battles  he  was
left  for  dead  on  tne  field  in  a  fight  three  leagues
from  Rothethurm,  and,  having  fallen  into  the  ene-
iny's  hands,  was  sent  as  a  slave  to  Constantinople.

There  he  professes
to  have  gained  the
affection  of  his
mistress,  a  young
woman  of  noble
birth,  who  sent
him  with  a  letter,
in  which  she  con-
fessed her  feelings
for  him,  to  her
brother,  a  pacha
on  the  Sea  of
Azov.  The  prince
maltreated  Smith,
until  at  length  he
beat  out  his  mas-
ter's brains  with  a
flail,  put  on  the
dead  M)an'sclothes,
and  finally  reached
a  Russian  garri-
son. Smith  also
says  that  he  was  authorized  to  wear  three  Turks'
heads  in  his  arms,  in  token  of  three  Turks  killed
by  him  in  a  series  of  remarkable  single  combats,  at
this  time,  and  that  "Sigismundus  Bathor,  Duke  of
Transilvania,  etc.,"  afterward,  in  Deceml)er,  1603,
gave  him  a  patent  to  that  effect ;  but  the  Turks
were  Sigismund's  allies  in  1599-1602,  and  he  was
not  duke  of  Transylvania  in  December,  1603 ;
neither  was  he  king  of  Hungary,  as  "  writ  in  the
table  "  over  Smith's  tomb.  Other  accounts  of  these
wars  do  not  mention  Smith,  and  the  accounts  fur-
nished by  himself  are  evidently  untrustworthy.

After  travelling  throughout  Europe  and  at-
tempting to  take  part  in  a  war  in  Barbary,  Smith
returned  to  England,  probably  al)out  1605,  and
was  persuaded  by  Capt.  Bartholomew  Gosnold,  who
had  already  visited  the  coasts  of  America,  to  en-
gage in  the  founding  of  a  colony  in  Virginia.  The
expedition,  which  set  sail,  19  Dec,  1606,  consisted
of  3  vessels  and  105  men.  The  ships  were  com-
manded by  Capt.  Christopher  Newport  in  the
"Susan  Constant,"  Capt.  Gosnold  in  the  "God-
Speed,"  and  Capt.  John  Ratcliffe  in  the  "  Discov-
ery." Smith  is  described  in  the  list  of  passengers
as  a  planter.  By  the  charter  no  local  councillors
were  named  for  the  colony,  but  sealed  instructions
were  delivered  to  Newport,  Gosnold,  and  Ratclifife,
which  were  to  be  opened  within  twenty-four  hours
of  their  arrival  in  Virginia,  wherein  would  be
found  the  names  of  the  persons  who  had  been  des-
ignated for  the  council.  On  the  voyage  dissen-
sions sprang  up  among  the  colonists.  Smith  says
that  he  was  accused  of  intending  to  usurp  the  gov-
ernment, murder  the  council,  and  make  himself
king.  When  they  reached  the  Canaries  he  was
kept  a  prisoner  for  the  rest  of  the  voyage.  But  no
mention  of  this  quarrel  is  made  bjr  any  contempo-
rary writers,  and  Smith  omits  it  m  his  "  True  Re-
lation," although  he  describes  it  in  his  "  Generall
Historie."  It  is  probable  that  his  vanity,  his  pre-
sumption, his  previous  adventurous  career,  and  the


fact  that  he  had  the  interest  of  the  colony  at  heart
and  was  a  lx)rn  leader  of  men,  excite<l  the  suspi-
cion of  his  fellow-adventurers  that  he  had  designs
against  the  expedition.  The  box  of  sealed  instruc-
tions was  opened  on  the  night  of  their  arrival  at
Old  Point  Comfort,  Va.,  14  May,  1607.  Smith  was
named  a  councillor,  but,  as  he  was  under  arrest,  he
was  not  sworn  in.  On  22  May,  with  Newport  and
22  others,  he  set  out  to  discover  the  source  of  James
river,  and  made  a  league  of  friendship  with  Pow-
hatan and  other  great  Indian  chiefs.  On  their  re-
turn they  found  the  settlers  embroiled  in  difficul-
ties with  the  Indians,  and  Smith's  counsels  regard-
ing defences  and  obtaining  a  proper  supply  of  food
so  far  obtained  recognition  that  on  10  June  he  was
admitted  into  the  council.  His  enemies  had  urged
that  he  return  to  England  with  Capt.  Newport,  who
was  going  home,  but  Smith  demanded  to  be  tried
by  the  colony,  and  was  acquitted.  Scanty  food  be-
gan to  reduce  their  numbers.  President  Wingfield
was  accused  of  embezzling  the  stores  and  deposed,
and  Ratcliffe  became  his  successor,  but  Smith,  by
his  energy  and  fertile  resources,  became  the  real
head.  He  at  once  set  about  procuring  food  by
trading  with  the  neighlwring  Indians,  and  built  up
and  fortified  Jamestown  against  their  depretlat ions.
He  explored  the  Chickahominy  in  November,  dis-
covered and  visited  many  villages,  and  procured
Provisions.  While  on  a  similar  voyage  up  the
ames,  he  was  taken  prisoner  by  Powhatan,  who,
after  a  six-weeks'  captivity,  sent  him  back  to
Jamestown.  Smith  makes  no  allusion  to  the  le-
gend of  his  rescue  by  the  chiefs  daughter  Poca-
hontas (q.  V.)  till  1616  when,  about  the  time  of  Po-
cahontas's arrival  in  England  as  the  wife  of  John
Rolfe,  he  wrote  an  account  of  it  in  a  letter  ad-
dressed to  Anne,  queen  of  James  I.  The  Indian
princess  by  that  time  had  become  a  person  of  some
importance,  and  her  substantial  friendship  to  the
colony  had  been  acknowledged  by  Smitn  in  his
"True  Relation,"  in  which  he  referred  to  her  as
the  "  Nonpareil "  of  Virginia.  In  this  letter  he
says  of  the  heroic  act :  "  At  the  minute  of  my  exe-
cution she  hazarded  the  beating  out  of  her  own
braines  to  save  mine,  and  not  only  that,  but  so
prevailed  upon  her  father  that  I  was  safely  con-
veyed to  Jamestown."  This  is  all  that  was  said  of
it,  except  a  brief  reference  in  his  "New  England
Trials"  (London,  1622),  till  the  an|warance  of  his
"Generall  Historie"  (London,  1634).  It  may  be
that,  while  the  story  as  given  by  Smith  is  false  as
to  detail,  Pocahontas,  who  was  at  that  time  twelve
or  thirteen  years  of  age,  was  touched  with  com-
passion for  the  caj)tive  and  induced  her  father  to
treat  him  kindly.  When  Smith  returned  to  James-
town he  found  the  colony  retluced  to  forty  men,
many  of  whom  had  determined  to  return  to  Eng-
land, but  his  entreaties  and  the  arrival  of  Cant.
Nelson  with  140  emigrants  reviveil  their  spirits.
In  June  and  July,  1608,  he  explored  the  coasts  of
the  Chesapeake  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Pa-
tapsco,  and  on  24  July  set  out  on  another  expetii-
tion,  and  explored  the  head  of  the  Chesai)eake,  re-
turning to  Jamestown  on  7  Sept.  On  these  two
voyages  Capt.  Smith  sailed,  by  his  own  computa-
tion about  3,000  miles,  and  from  his  surveys  con-
structed a  map  of  the  bay  and  the  country  boixler-
ing  upon  it.  In  all  this  exploration  he  showed
himself  as  skilful  as  he  was  vigorous  and  adven-
turous. In  his  encounters  with  the  savages  he
lost  not  a  man,  traded  squarely  with  them,  kept  his
promises,  and  punished  them  when  they  deserved  it.
In  consequence,  they  feared  and  respectetl  him.

On  10  Sept.,  1608,  bv  the  election  of  the  council
and  the  retjuest  of  the  company,  Sipith  became


SMITH


SMITH


671


preHident.  He  repaired  thn  churrh  and  store-
nous4>.  nslucw!  the  fort  to  a  "  flve-soimrp  form,"
tmiiifil  till*  WRl<-h.  and  cxercisttnl  tn*-  cotniMiny
every  Sntunlay,  Hut  t\w  rfturn  of  ('m|)L  N«w|»ort
with  seventy  colonist,-*  did  not  improve  the  condi-
tion of  afTuirs.  The  new  sett  lent  were  ea^r  to  ob-
tain riches,  not  to  build  up  the  colony.  Ncw[iort
an<l  liatdifTe  conspired  to  de|M)s«  Smith,  several
explorinfi^  expeditions  prr)ved  fruitless,  and  jjreat
discontent  followed.  In  the  next  year  there  were
Indian  uprisiufrs  and  insubordination  nmon^;  the
settlers,  and  evil  accounts  of  Smith's  ailministra-
tion  were  carrietl  to  England  l)y  Xew|Kirt  and  Cai)t.
Samuel  Argall.  The  com|Miny  at  home  wen>  dis-
gusted that  the  retuniing  shijw  were  not  freighted
with  the  products  of  the  country ;  the  promoters
had  received  no  profits  from  their  ventures,  and  no
gold  had  been  found.  A  new  charter  was  grante<l,
and  the  powers  that  were  previously  reserve*!  to
the  king  were  transferred  to  the  company.  Ixjrd
Delaware  was  matle  governor,  and  three  commis-
sioners—  Newjjort,  Sir  Thomas  Gates,  and  Sir
George  Soraers — were  empowernl  to  manage  the
affairs  of  the  colony  until  nis  arrival.

In  May,  1609,  they  set  sail  with  more  than  500
people  and  nine  shi[>s;  but  one  vessel  was  sunk  on
the  voyage,  and  the  "  Sea- Venture,"  with  150  men,
the  new  commissions,  bills  of  lading,  all  sorts  of
instructions,  and  much  provision,  was  wrecked  on
the  Bermudas.  (This  incident  furnished  the  basis
for  Shakesjx«are's  play,  "  The  Tcmjtest.")  Seven
vessels  reached  Jamestown  in  August,  bringing
mveral  gentlemen  of  good  means  and  a  crowd  of
the  riff-raff  of  Ix)ndon,  "  dissolute  gallants,  broken
tradesmen,  gentlemen  impoverished  in  spirit  and
in  fortune,  rakes  and  liliertines  men  more  fitted  to
corrunt  than  to  found  a  commonwealth."  Disorder
quickly  ensueil,  and  the  newcomers  would  have  de-
posed Smith  on  rejmrt  of  the  new  commission,  but
they  could  show  no  warrant,  the  state  papers  having
been  sent  over  in  the  wrecked  "  Sea- Venture."  He
therefore  held  on  to  his  authority  and  enforced  it  to
save  the  whole  colony  from  anarchy.  But  at  the  ex-
piration of  his  year  he  resigned,  and  Capt.  Martin
was  elected  president.  But,  knowing  his  inability,
he  too  resigned  after  holding  office  three  hours,
and  Smith  again  liecame  president.

Havinfjsubtlued  the  refractory,  he  set  out  on  new
explorations,  and  endeavore<l  to  establish  new  set-
tlements. On  one  of  these  he  met  with  the  acci-
dent that  suddenly  terminated  his  career  in  Vir-
ginia. While  he  was  sleeping  in  his  lx)at  his
powder-bag  exploded,  severely  wounding  him.  To
quench  the  flames,  he  lea[^)ed  into  the  river,  and
before  he  was  rescued  was  nearly  drowned.  When
he  returne<l  to  the  fort,  the  rebels  Rateliffe.  Archer,
and  others,  who  were  awaiting  trial  for  cons[ti-
racy,  united  against  him,  and  ne  would  probably
have  been  murdered  hatl  he  not  promise*!  to  re-
turn to  England.  He  arrived  in  Ix)ndon  in  the
autumn  of  1609.  Failing  to  obtain  employment
in  the  Virginia  company  in  1614.  he  persuaded
some Ix>ndon merchants to fit him out for  a

Erivate  sailing  adventure  to  the  coast  of  New
Ingland.  With  two  ships  he  arrived  in  April
within  the  territory  appn>priated  to  the  Plvm-
outh  company,  named  several  |>oint^  and  made  a
map  of  "such  portion  as  he  saw."  This  is  the
first  fair  approach  to  the  real  contour  of  the  New
England  coast.  Having  examined  the  shore  from
Penobscot  to  Cape  Co*!,  and  se<Mired  40,000  cotl-
flsh,  he  returned  to  England  within  six  months  of
his  departure.  This  was  his  wljole  ex|)erience  in
New  England,  which  he  ever  afterwan!  regarded  as
particularly  his  discovery,  and  spoke  of  as  one  of


his  children,  Virginia  lieing  the  other.  In  Janiuuy,
1615,  he  again  sailed  from  Plymouth  with  two
shi|>s.  His  intention  was.  after  the  fishing  was
over,  to  remain  in  New  England  with  fifteen  men
and  begin  a  colony.  Within  130  leagues  out  a
storm  compelle*!  him  to  return.  On  34  June  he
again  set  out  with  a  vessel  of  sixty  tons  and  thirty-
eight  men.  but  his  ship  was  capturetl  by  a  French
man-of-war,  and  he  was  carrie<!  to  Im  Kochelle.
He  esca|K*cl,  and  on  his  return  home  wrote  an  ac-
count of  his  voyages  to  New  England,  which  he
publishe<i  (1016)'.  He  then  set  himself  nwtluteljr
to  obtain  means  to  establish  a  colony  in  New  Eng-
land, devoting  the  remainder  of  his  life  to  that
project,  everywhere  bi-seeching  a  hearing  for  his
scheme,  and  so  far  succeeding  that  he  obtaine<l  the
promise  of  twenty  ships  of  sail  to  go  with  him  the
next  year  (1617),'  the  title  of  admiral  during  his
life,  and  half  the  profits  of  the  enterprise  to  be  di-
vided between  himself  and  his  companions.  But
nothing  came  of  this  fair  l)eginning  excejit  the
title  of  "  Admiral  of  New  Englaml,"  which  he
at  once  assumed  and  wore  all  his  life,  styling  him-
self on  the  title-page  of  all  that  he  printed  "Some-
time governor  of  Virginia  and  admiral  of  New
England."  After  this  he  remained  in  England
and  devoted  himself  to  his  works,  which  are  large-
ly eulogistic  of  himself.

Smith  was  a  product  of  his  adventurous  and
boastful  age.  His  low  origin  may  have  hindered
his  advancement,  but  it  doubtless  embittered  his
spirit  toward  those  better  l)om.  He  had.  no  doubt,
courage,  immense  energy,  and  a  great  deal  of  tact.
His  reputation  rests  almost  wholly  uj>on  his  own
writings,  and  he  is  the  most  entertaining  of  the
travel-writers  of  his  day.  He  had  a  better  compre-
hension of  colonization  than  most  of  his  Virginia
associates,  and  the  "sticking"  of  the  settlement
for  two  and  a  half  years  was  largelv  due  to  his
courage  and  good  sense.  But  he  has  doubtless  ap-
propriated credit  to  himself  in  Virginia  that  was
due  to  others.  Smith's  romantic  ap{>earance  in
history  is  chiefly  due  to  his  facility  as  a  writer  of
romance.  He  was  never  knighted,'although  it  has
been  said  that  he  was.  His  arms  were  not  grant-
ed for  services  in  America.  William  Segar,  "the
King  of  Armes  of  England,"  in  August.  1625
(nearly  a  generation  after  the  services  are  said  to
have  been  rendered),  certified  that  he  had  seen
Sigismund's  patent,  and  had  had  a  cony  thereof
recorded  in  the  herald's  office.  All  tnis  is  evi-
dent ;  but  Segar  must  have  been  imi>0(«ed  upon  (in
the  uatent  itself),  as  he  was  when  he  granted  "  the
royal  arms  of  Arragon,  with  a  canton  of  Brabant,
to  George  Brandon,  the  common  hangman  of  I^on-
don."  Smith  owes  his  exalted  |x)sition  in  our  his-
tory to  the  Oxford  Tract  of  1612.  and  to  his  own
"  Generall  Historic."  a  work  which  is  thus  i)erfectly
describe*!  by  Capt.  George  Percy  in  a  letter  to  the
Earl  of  Northumberland:  "The  Author  hathe  not
spare*!  to  appropriate  many  desert,s  to  himself  which
he  never  performtnl.  ami  has  stuffed  his  relacyons
with  many  falseties  and  malycvous  detnutyons,"
He  was  buriet!  in  St.  Sepulchre's  church.  Ixndon.
His  works  are  "  A  True  Relation."  the  first  tract
ever  publishe*!  relating  to  the  colony  at  Jamestown
(Ix)ndon,  KJOH;  repnnted.  with  introduction  and
notes,  by  Charles  Deane,  Boston,  1867);  "A  Map
of  Virginia"  (1612);  "A  Description  of  New  Eng-
land "  ( 1616 ;  reprinted  in  the  "  Collections  "  of  the
Ma-v-sachusetts  historical  s<x'iety);  "New  England's
Trials"  (162(>:  reprinte*!  privately,  B*>ston,  1867);
"The  Generall  Historic  of  Virginia,  New  England,
am!  the  Summer  Isles"  (1622)  api>eared  in  "  Pur-
chas's  Pilgrimes,'*and  was  republishe«l  with  Smith's


672


SMITH


SMITH


"True  Relation"  (Richmond,  Va.,  1819);  "  An  Ac-
cidence for  Young  Seamen  "  (162G) ;  "  The  True
Travels  "  (1630) ;  and  "  Advertisements  for  the  In-
experienced Planters  of  New  England"  (1631  ;
new  ed..  Boston,  1865).  His  life  has  been  written
by  Mrs.  Edward  Robinson  (London,  1845) ;  William
Gilmore  Simms  (New  York,  1846);  Charles  Deane,
in  his  "  Notes  on  Wingfield's  Tract  on  a  Discourse
on  Virginia  "  (Boston,  1859)  ;  George  Channing
Hill  (1858) ;  George  S.  Hillard,  in  Jared  Snarks's
"American  Biography";  Charles  Dudley  Warner
in  the  series  of  "American  Worthies"  (New  York,
1881) :  and  Charles  Kittridge  True  (1882).

SMITH,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Hamilton  county,
Ohio,  in  1735;  d.  there,  10  June,  1816.  He  had
few  early  advantages,  but  by  persistent  effort  ac-
quired a  respectable  education,  and,  possessing
much  natural  ability,  was  one  of  the  most  conspicu-
ous of  the  early  politicians  in  Ohio.  He  was  also  a
popular  Baptist  preacher,  and  in  1790  organized
at  Columbia  the  first  church  of  that  denomina-
tion in  the  state.  He  was  a  member  of  the  first
territorial  legislature  in  1798,  and  in  180;3-'8  was
U.  S.  senator  from  Ohio,  having  been  chosen  as  a
Jeffersonian  Democrat.  During  the  early  part  of
his  service  he  enjoyed  the  close  friendship  of  Presi-
dent Jefferson,  who  in  1804  sent  him  on  a  confi-
dential mission  to  Louisiana  and  Florida  to  dis-
cover the  attitude  toward  the  United  States  of  the
Spanish  officers  that  were  stationed  in  these  states,
that  he  might  learn  how  far  their  friendship  was
to  be  depended  on  in  the  event  of  a  war  between
this  country  and  France.  Smith's  intimacy  with
Jefferson  was  interrupted  by  the  charge  of  his
implication  in  the  Aaron  Burr  treason.  Smith
and  Burr  were  personal  friends,  and  appearances
were  so  much  against  him  that  a  motion  was  made
in  the  U.  S.  senate  to  expel  him ;  but  it  failed  by
one  vote.  Smith  denied  all  connection  with  the
affair,  and  was  believed  to  be  innocent  by  his  con-
stituents. See  "  Notes  on  the  Northwestern  Ter-
ritory," by  Jacob  Burnet  (New  York,  1847).

SMITH,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Mastic,  near
Brookhaven,  N.  Y.,  12  Feb.,  1752 ;  d.  there,  12  Aug.,
1816.  He  was  carefully  educated,  served  in  the
legislature  in  1784-'99,  and  was  in  congress  from
the  latter  year  till  1804,  when  he  took  his  seat  in
the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of  De  Witt  Clinton,  who
had  resigned,  holding  office  till  1813.  He  had  been
chosen  as  a  Democrat.  After  the  close  of  his  term
he  l)ecarae  U.  S.  marshal  for  the  district  of  New
York,  and  he  was  also  a  major-general  of  militia
for  many  years.

SMITH,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newbury,
Mass.,  21  Dec,  1752;  d."  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  30
April,  1809.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1773,  and  served  as  tutor  there  from  1774  till  1778,
when  he  became  professor  of  languages  in  the  col-
lege, holding  that  office  and  that  of  college  pastor
until  his  death.  Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1803.  He  was  college  librarian  for  thirty
years,  delivered  lectures  on  systematic  theology  for
two  years,  and  published  "  Hebrew  Grammar "
(Hanover,  1772);  "  Latin  Grammar"  (1802);  "  He-
brew Grammar"  (1803);  an  edition  of  "Cicero  de
Oratore,  with  Notes  and  a  Brief  Memoir  of  Cicero
in  English  "  (1804) ;  a  "  Greek  Grammar  "  (1809) ;
and  several  sermons. — His  wife,  Snsan  Mason,
b.  in  Boston  in  1765;  d.  in  1845,  was  the  daughter
of  Col.  David  Mason.  In  her  eightieth  year  she
wrote  a  "  Memoir  "  of  her  husband  (Boston,  1843).

SMITH,  John,  congressman,  b.  in  Barre,  Mass.,
14  Aug.,  1789;  d.  in  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  26  Nov.,  ia58.
He  removed  to  St.  Albans  in  boyhood,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1810,  and  established  a  prac-


tice. He  was  state's  attorney  for  Franklin  coun-
ty in  1826-'32,  a  member  of  congress  in  1839-'41,
resumed  practice  at  the  latter  date,  became  chan-
cellor of  Vermont,  and  was  subsequently  interested
in  railroad  enterprises. — His  son,  John  Gregrory,

fovernor  of  Vermont,  b.  in  St.  Alban's,  Vt.,  22
uly,  1818.  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Ver-
mont in  1838,  and  at  the  law  department  of  Yale
in  1841.  He  began  practice  with  his  father,  whom
he  succeeded  as  chancellor  in  1858.  became  active
in  railroad  interests  in  Vermont,  was  a  member  of
the  state  senate  in  1858-'9,  and  of  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives in  1861-'2,  becoming  speaker  in  tne
latter  year.  He  was  governor  of  Vermont  in
1863-'5,  and  actively  supported  the  National  cause
during  the  civil  war.  He  became  president  of  the
Northern  Pacific  railroad  in  1866,  and  subsequent-
ly was  president  of  the  Central  Vermont  railroad,
"the  University  of  Vermont  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1871.

SMITH,  John  Augnstine,  physician,  b.  in
Westmoreland  county,  Va.,  29  Aug.,  1782 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  9  Feb.,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at
William  and  Mary  in  1800,  studied  medicine,  and
settled  as  a  physician  in  New  York  city  in  1809,
becoming  lecturer  on  anatomy  at  the  College  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  and  editor  of  the  "  Medi-
ical  and  Physiological  Journal."  He  was  presi-
dent of  William  and  Mary  college  from  1814  till
1826,  when  he  resigned,  resumed  practice  in  New
York  city,  and  was  president  of  the  College  of  phy-
sicians and  surgeons  in  1831-43.  He  published
numerous  addresses,  lectures,  and  essays,  includ-
ing an  "Introductory  Discourse  before  the  New
Medical  College,  Crosby  Street,  New  York  City"
(New  York,  1837) ;  "  Functions  of  the  Nervous
System  "  (1840) ;  "  Mutations  of  the  Earth  "  (1846) ;
"  Monograph  upon  the  Moral  Sense  "  (1847) ;  and
"  Moral  and  Physical  Science  "  (1853).

SMITH,  John  Eugene,  soldier,  b.  in  the  can-
ton of  Berne,  Switzerland,  3  Aug.,  1816.  His  father
was  an  officer  under  Napoleon,  and  after  the  em-
peror's downfall  emigrated  to  Philadelphia,  where
the  son  received  an  academic  education  and  be-
came a  jeweler.  He  entered  the  National  army
in  1861  as  colonel  of  the  45th  Illinois  infantry,  en-
gaged in  the  capture  of  Fort  Henry  and  Fort  Don-
elson,  and  in  the  battle  of  Shiloh  and  siege  of  Cor-
inth, became  brigadier  -  general  of  volunteers,  29
Nov.,  1862,  commanded  the  8th  division  of  the
16th  army  corps  in  December,  1862,  was  engaged
in  the  Vieksburg  campaign,  leading  the  3d  divis-
ion of  the  17th  corps  in  June,  1863,  and  was  trans-
ferred to  the  15th  corps  in  September,  taking  part
in  the  capture  of  Mission  Ridge,  and  in  the  At-
lanta and  Carolina  campaigns  in  1864-'5.  In  De-
cember, 1870,  he  was  assigned  to  the  14th  U.  S.  in-
fantry. He  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  ser-
vice in  April,  1866.  and  became  colonel  of  the  27th
U.  S.  infantry  in  July  of  that  year.  He  received
the  brevet  of  major-general  of  volunteers  on  12
Jan.,  1865,  for  faithful  services  and  gallantry  in
action,  and  the  brevets  of  brigadier-  and  major-
general,  U.  S.  army,  on  2  March,  1867,  for  his
conduct  at  the  siege  of  Vieksburg  and  in  action
at  Savannah  in  December,  1864.  In  May,  1881,
he  was  retired.

SMITH,  John  Hyatt,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sara-
toga, N.  Y.,  10  April,  1824 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
7  Dec.,  1886.  His  father,  a  Presbyterian  clergy-
man, gave  him  a  thorough  education,  and  he  then
engaged  in  business  in  Detroit,  Mich.  Deciding
to  study  for  the  ministry,  he  removed  to  Albany,
N.  Y.,  and  while  preparing  for  that  profession
worked  in  a  bank. He  was  licensed  to'preach  in


SMITH


SMITH


078


1848,  WM  i»ast(>r  of  I^ptiHt  churches  in  Poueh-
keetwie.  N.  Y..  Cleveland,  Ohio.  Buffalo.  N.  Y.,
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and  Bivxiklyn,  N.  Y.  During
his  iH'eupation  of  the  last  oharee  his  advocacy  of
ojH>n  eominunion  caustMl  the  exclusion  of  Mr,  Smith
and  his  <'oii);re|fation  from  the  L<jng  Island  IJaj)-
tist  association.  He  wa.s  electe<l  to  congress  in
1880.  a-s  an  InilejK-ndent,  receiving  22.(XS5  votes,
against  20,62<J  votes  for  Simeon  B.  Chittenden,
lii'puhlican.  For  a  time  he  did  double  duty  in  his
chun-h  and  in  congress,  but  resigne*!  his  pulpit  in
SeptemlH>r,  1881.  and  on  the  expiration  of  his  con-
gressional term  became  pastor  of  the  East  Con-
gregational church.  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.  His  publi-
cations include  "Oilead"  (New  York.  1803),  and
"The()jtMMj  Door"  (1870).

SMITH,  John  Lawrence,  chemist,  b.  near
Churlostoii.  S.  v..  17  Dec.  1818;  d.  in  Ijouisville,
Kv..  12  Oct..  188:i.  He  entere.1  the  University  of
Virginia  in  1880,  and  devote<l  two  vears  to  the

stutlyof  chemis-
try, natural  phi-
losophy, and  civ-
11  engineering,
after  which  for
a  year  he  was  as-
sistant engineer
in  the  const mc-
tion  of  a  rail-
road line  be-
tween Charles-
ton and  Cincin-
nati. Abandon-
ing civil  engi-
neering, he  stud-
ied medicine,
and  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Medi-
cal college  of  the
state  of  South
Carolina  in  1840.  After  studying  in  Paris,  he  de-
terniinetl  in  1841  to  devote  himself  to  chemistrj',
and  thereafter  he  spent  his  summei-s  in  Giessen
with  Baron  Justus  von  Liebig  and  his  winters  in
Paris  with  Theonhile  J.  Pelouze.  He  returned  to
Charleston  in  1844,  began  the  practice  of  medicine,
delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  toxicology  at  the
Medical  college,  and  in  1840  establi:ihed  the  "  Medi-
cal and  Surgical  Journal  of  South  Carolina.''  Mean-
while he  hf«i  published  in  the  "American  Journal
of  Sc'ience  "  several  pajiers,  including  one  "  On  the
Means  of  detecting  Arsenic  in  the  Animal  Bodv
and  of  ctiunteracting  its  Effects"  (1841),  in  which
certain  of  the  conclusions  of  Orflla  were  shown  to
be  erroneous,  and  one  on  "  The  Composition  and
Products  of  Distillation  of  Spermaceti  "  (1842),
which  was  the  most  elaborate  investigation  on  or-
ganic chemistry  published  by  an  American  up  to
that  time.  Dr.  Smith's  fondness  for  chemistry  le<l
to  his  ap|)ointment  by  the  state  of  South  Carolina
to  assay  the  bullion  that  came  into  commerce  from
the  gold-fields  of  Georgia  and  the  Carolinas.  About
this  time  his  attention  was  directed  to  the  marl-
IxhIs  in  the  vicinity  of  Charleston,  and  his  investi-
gations of  the  value  of  these  deposits  for  agricul-
tural purposes  were  among  the  earliest  scientific
contributions  on  this  subject.  He  also  investiijated
the  meteorological  conditions,  soils,  and  miHles  of
culture  that  affect  the  growth  of  cott«>n.  and  made
a  reixirt  on  these  siibjects.  In  1840  he  was  invited
bv  tne  sultan  of  Turkey,  on  the  reci>mmendation
o\  James  Buchanan,  to  teach  Turkish  agricultu-
rists the  proper  method  of  cott<m-culture  in  Asia
Minor.  On  reaching  the  East,  he  found  the  pro-
poeed  scheme  to  be  impracticable,  and  was  tnen


^^^^f€*^^^f~


appointed  by  the  Turkish  gi>vemment  to  explore
it.s  mineral  res4»urces.  For  four  years  he  devoted
his  energies  to  this  work,  and  the  Turkish  govern-
ment still  derives  jiart  of  its  income  frr»m  his  di»-
coveries.  Ik'sides  the  chrome-ore  and  coal  that  he
maile  known,  his  discover)'  of  the  emerv-<le|K)»itH  of
Asia  Minor  was  of  gre«t  value,  for  tlie  island  of
Xaxos  was  at  that  time  the  only  source  of  supply,
and.  in  consequence  of  the  o|>ening  of  new  defiosits,
the  use  of  the  sulwtance  was  extended.  The  sulv
sequent  discovery  and  ap|)lication  of  emery  in  this
country  is  due  to  his  publications  on  the'subiect.
In  1856  he  severed  his  relations  with  the  Turkish
authorities,  spent  some  time  in  Paris,  and  projected
there  the  inverte<l  microscofH*.  which  he  completed
after  his  return  to  the  Unite«l  States  in  October.
Dr.  Smith  then  made  New  Orleans  his  home,  and
was  electe<l  to  a  chair  in  the  sc-ientiflc  dettartment
of  the  university  of  that  city,  but  in  18.52  he  suc-
ceeded Robert  "E.  Rogers  iii  the  professorship  of
chemistry  in  the  University  of  \  irginia.  While
filling  this  chair,  with  his  assistant.  George  J.  Brush,
he  undertook  the  "  Re-examination  of  American
Minerals,"  which  at  the  time  of  its  completion  was
the  most  important  contribution  to  mineral  chem-
istry by  any  American  chemist.  He  resigned  this
appointment  in  1854.  and  settle<l  in  Louisville.  Ky.,
wnere  he  married  Sarah  Julia  Guthrie,  daughter  of
James  Guthrie,  secretary  of  the  treasury  in  1853-'7.
Dr.  Smith  filled  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the  medi-
cal department  of  the  University  of  Ijouisville  till
1800,  and  was  superintendent  of  the  gas-works  in
that  city,  of  which  he  also  acted  as  president  for
several  years.  He  establishetl  a  laboratory  for  the
pnxluction  of  chemical  reagents  and  of  the  rarer
phannaceutical  preparations,  in  which  he  a-ssoci-
ated  himself  witn  Dr.  Edward  R.  Squibb.  From
the  time  of  his  settlement  in  Ix)uisvine  he  devoted
attention  to  meteorites,  and  his  collection,  begun
by  the  purchase  of  that  of  Dr.  Gerald  Troost,  be-
came the  finest  in  the  Unite<l  .States.  It  is  inferior
only  to  those  of  Ijondon  and  Paris,  and  is  now
owned  by  Harvard.  His  interest  in  this  subject
led  to  the  study  of  similar  minerals  with  the  sej>a-
ration  of  their  constituents,  and  while  investigating
smarskite,  a  mineral  rich  in  the  rare  earths,  ne  an-
nounced his  discovery  of  what  he  consideretl  a  new
element,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  mosandrum.
Dr.  Smith  was  exceeding  ingenious  in  devising
new  api^aratus  and  standard  methods  of  analysis.
He  was  a  chevalier  of  the  Lecion  of  honor,  and  re-
ceiye<l  the  order  of  Nichan  Iftalwr  and  that  of  the
Medjidieh  from  the  Turkish  government,  and  that
of  St.  Stanislas  from  Russia.  In  1874  he  was
president  of  the  American  association  for  the  atl-
vancement  of  science,  and  he  was  president  of  the
American  chemical  society  in  18«7.  In  addition
to  membership  in  many  foreign  and  American  sci-
entific bo<lies.  he  was  one  of  the  original  members
of  the  National  acatlemy  of  sciences,  and  in  1879
was  electetl  corresjxmding  meml»erof  the  Acjidemy
of  sciences  of  the  institute  of  Franc«\  to  succeed  Sir
Charles  Lyell.  The  liaptist  oqihan  home  of  Louis-
ville was  founded  and  largely  endowed  by  him.  In
1807  he  was  one  of  the  commissioners  to  the  World's
fair  in  Paris,  furnishing  for  the  government  re-
ports an  able  contribution  on  "The  Proerea*  and
Condition  of  Several  Departments  of  Industrial
Chemistry."  and  he  repn'sente<l  the  Unite<l  States
at  Vienna  in  1873.  where  his  report  on  "Chemicals
and  Chemical  Industries"  supplements  his  excel-
lent work  at  the  earlier  exhioition.  At  the  Cen-
tennial exhibition  in  Philadelphia  in  1870  he  was
one  of  the  judges  in  the  dettartment  relating  to
chemical  arts,  and  contributeu  a  valuable  paper  on


674


SMITH


SMITH


"  Petroleum  "  to  the  official  reports. His  published
papers  were  about  150  in  number. The  more  im-

Eortant  of  them  were  collected  and  published  by
im  under  the  title  of  "  Mineralogy  and  Chemistry,
Original  Researches"  (Louisville,  1873;  enlarged,
with  biographical  sketches,  1884).  Mrs.  Smith  trans-
ferred to  the  National  academy  of  sciences  $8,000,
the  sum  that  was  paid  by  Harvard  university  for
Dr.  Smith's  collection  of  meteorites,  the  interest  of
which  is  to  be  expended  in  a  Lawrence  Smith  medal
valued  at  $200  and  presented  not  oftener  than  once
in  two  vears  to  any  person  that  shall  make  satisfac-
tory original  investigations  of  meteoric  bodies.  The
first  presentation  of  this  medal  was  on  18  April,
1888,  to  Prof.  Hubert  A.  Newton  (q.  v.).

SMITH,  John  Speed,  congressman,  b.  in  Jes-
samine county,  Ky.,  31  July,  1792 ;  d.  in  Madison
county,  Ky.,  6  June,  1854.  He  received  a  public-
school  education,  became  a  skilled  Indian  nghter,
served  under  Gen.  William  H.  Harrison  at  the  bat-
tle of  Tippecanoe,  and  was  his  aide  in  the  battle  of
the  Thames,  5  Oct.,  1813.  He  was  frequently  in
the  legislature,  its  speaker  in  1827,  and  a  member
of  congress  in  1821-'3.  having  been  elected  as  a
Democrat.  During  the  admmistration  of  John
Quincy  Adams  he  was  secretary  of  the  delegation
that  was  sent  by  the  United  States  to  the  South
American  congress  which  met  at  Tacubaya.  In
1828-'32  he  was  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  Ken-
tucky. In  1839  he  was  appointed,  with  James  T.
Morehead,  a  commissioner  to  Ohio  to  obtain  the
passage  of  a  law  for  protecting  slave  property  in
Kentucky.  For  several  years  previous  to  his  death
he  was  state  superintendent  of  public  w^orks,  and
in  1846-'8  he  was  a  member  of  the  Kentucky  sen-
ate.— His  son.  Green  Clay,  soldier,  b.  in  Rich-
mond, Ky.,  2  July,  1832,  was  named  for  his  grand-
father. Gen.  Green  Clay.  After  serving  a  year  in
the  Mexican  war  as  lieutenant  of  Kentucky  caval-
ry, he  entered  Transylvania  university,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1850,  and  at  Lexington  law-
school  in  1853,  and  practised  in  partnership  with
his  father.  In  1858  he  removed  to  Covington.
In  1853-'7  he  served  as  school  commissioner.  In
1860  he  was  a  member  of  the  Kentucky  legislature,
where  he  earnestly  upheld  the  National  govern-
ment, and  in  1861  he  entered  the  army  as  a  private.
He  became  colonel  of  the  4th  Kentucky  cavalry  in
February,  1862,  served  under  Gen.  Ebenezer  Du-
mont,  and  was  wounded  at  Lebanon,  Tenn.  He
was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  11  June,
1862,  but,  having  been  chosen  a  member  of  con-
gress, resigned  his  commission  on  1  Dec,  1863,
after  taking  part  in  numerous  engagements.  He
served  till  1866,  when  he  resigned  on  being  ap-
pointed by  President  Johnson  governor  of  Mon-
tana, where  he  remained  till  1869.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Baltimore  Republican  convention  in
1864,  and  on  13  March,  1865,  was  given  the  brevet
of  major-general  of  volunteers.  On  his  retirement
from  the  governorship  of  Montana  he  entered  the
Christian  ministry,  was  ordained  in  1869,  and  be-
came in  the  same  year  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church
in  Frankfort,  Ky.  Much  of  his  later  ministry  has
been  employed  in  evangelistic  service.  Gen.  Smith
has  also  taken  an  active  part  in  furthering  the
temperance  reform,  and  in  1876  was  the  candidate
of  the  Prohibition  party  for  the  presidency  of  the
United  States,  receiving  a  popular  vote  of  9,522.

SMITH,  John  Talbot,  clergyman  and  author,  b.
in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  22  Sept.,  1855.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Christian  Brothers'  schools,  Albany,
and  at  St.  Michael's  college,  Toronto,  Canada,  was
ordained  a  priest  in  1881.  and  appointed  curate  of
Watertown,  N.  Y. He  was  made  pastor  of  Rouse's


Point  in  1883,  and  subsequently  appointed  pro-
moter fisculis  of  the  diocese  of  Ogdensburg.  He
is  a  regular  contributor  to  the  "  Catholic  World  "
and  other  magazines  and  journals,  and  makes  a
specialty  of  questions  connected  with  labor.  He
has  written  "  Woman  of  Culture,"  a  novel  (New
York,  1882) ;  "  History  of  Ogdensburg  Diocese "
(1885);  "Solitary  Island,"  a  novel  (1^88);  and
"  Prairie  Boy,"  a  story  for  boys  (1888).

SMITH,  Jonathan  Bayard,  member  of  the
Continental  congress,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  21
Feb.,  1742;  d.  there,  16  June,  1812.  His  father,
Samuel,  a  native  of  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  settled  in
Philadelphia,  where  he  became  a  well-known  mer-
chant. The  son  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1760,  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  He  was
among  the  earliest  of  those  who  espoused  the  cause
of  independence,  and  he  was  active  in  the  Revo-
lutionary struggle.  In  1775  he  was  chosen  secre-
tary of  the  committee  of  safety,  and  in  .February,
1777,  he  was  elected  by  the  assembly  a  delegate
to  the  Continental  congress.  He  was  a  second
time  chosen  to  this  post,  serving  in  the  congresses
of  1777-'8.  From  4  April,  1777,  till  13  Nov.,  1778,
he  was  prothonotary  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.
On  1  Dec,  1777,  he  presided  at  the  public  meeting,
in  Philadelphia,  of  "  Real  Whigs,"  by  whom  it  was
resolved  "  That  it  be  recommended  to  the  council
of  safety  that  in  this  great  emergency  .  .  .  every

Eerson  between  the  age  of  sixteen  and  fifty  years
e  ordered  out  under  arms."  During  this  year  he
was  t*ommissioned  lieutenant-colonel  of  a  battalion
of  "  Associators  "  under  Col.  John  Bayard,  who  was
Col.  Smith's  brother-in-law,  and  the  latter  subse-
quently commanded  a  battalion.  In  1778  he  was
appointed  a  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,
quarter  sessions,  and  orphans'  court,  which  post  he
held  many  years.  He  was  appointed  in  1781  one
of  the  auditors  of  the  accounts  of  Pennsylvania
troops  in  the  service  of  the  United  States.  In  1792,
and  subsequently,  he  was  chosen  an  alderman  of
the  city,  which  was  an  office  of  great  dignity  in  his
day,  and  in  1794  he  was  elected  auditor-general
of  Pennsylvania.  He  became  in  1779  one  of  the
founders  and  a  member  of  the  first  board  of  trus-
tees of  the  University  of  the  state  of  Pennsylvania,
and  when  in  1791  this  institution  united  with  the
College  of  Philadelphia,  under  the  name  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  he  was  chosen  a  trus-
tee, which  place  he  held  until  his  death,  and  was
also  from  1779  till  1808  a  trustee  of  Princeton.  He
was  a  vice-president  of  the  Sons  of  Washington,
and  grand-master  of  Masons  in  Philadelphia,  and
for  forty  years  was  a  member  of  the  American
philosophical  society. — His  son,  Samuel  Harri-
son, editor,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1772 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  1  Nov.,  1845,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1787,  edited  the
"  New  World  "  in  1796-1800,  and  on  the  rembval
of  the  seat  of  government  to  Washington,  D.  C,
on  31  Oct.  of  the  latter  year,  founded  the  "  Nation-
al Intelligencer,"  which  he  edited  till  1818.  He
was  commissioner  of  revenue  from  1813  till  the
office  was  abolished.  He  published  '*  Remarks  on
Education  "  (Philadelphia,4798) ;  "  Trial  of  Samuel
Chase,  Impeached  before  the  U.  S.  Senate,"  with
Thomas  Lloyd  (2  vols.,  Washington,  1805) ;  and  an
"Oration"  (1813).— His  wife,  Margaret  Bayard,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1778;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  in  1844,  was  the  daughter  of  Col.  John
Bayard,  of  Philadelphia.  She  was  educated  at  the
Moravian  seminary,  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  married  Mr.
Smith  in  1800,  and  removed  with  him  to  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  where  she  was  for  many  years  a  popular
leader  of  society,  her  house  being  th^  resort  of


SMITH


SMITH


575


several  of  the  early  presidents  and  of  ITenry  Clay.
She  cuf^af^ed  in  many  relif^ious  and  charitable  en-
terprises*. .Mrs.  Smith  wn)t«  with  fat- ilitv,  and  \m\>-
lished  several  tales  and  t(i<»^raphical  sketches,  in-
clu<linK  "A  Winter  in  \VHshin>ft<>n"(2  vols..  Wash-
injrton.  lH-^7)  and  "  What  is  (iontility  t"  (1880).

SMITH,  Joseph,  naval  ofllcer,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  }K)  Man-h.  17W);  d.  in  WashinKton.  I).  C,  17
Jan.,  1H77.  He  enteriHl  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,
16  July,  1800,  and  was  comraiN<ione<l  a  lieutenant,
24  July,  1818.  He  was  the  Ist  lieutenant  of  the  bri|;
"Elagle"  in  the  victory  on  Lake  C'hamplain,  11
Sept.,  1814,  and  was  severely  wounded  in  (he  bat-
tle, but  continueii
at  his  p<ist.  With
other  olTlcers,  he
received  thcthanks
of  congress  an<l  a
silver  medal  for  his
services.  In  the
frigate  "Constella-
tion," in  the  Medi-
terranean in  1815-
'17,  he  co-operated
in  the  capture  of
Algerine  vessels,
and  he  sailed  again
to  the  Mediterra-
nean in  1819.  re-
turning in  1822.
He  was  commis-
sioned commander
3  March,  1827,  and
captain,  9  Feb.,
During  two  years,  until  December,  1845,  he


^;y^xf:<^'9-c^e^^}


1887.


commanded  tne  Mediterranean  squadron,  with  the
^frigate  "  Cumberland  "  as  flag-ship.  Upon  his  re-
turn home  he  was  apt)ointed  chief  of  the  bureau  of
yards  and  docks,  which  post  he  filled  until  the
spring  of  1869.  He  was  then  president  of  the  ex-
aminmg  lx)ard  for  the  promotion  of  officers  until
Septemlwr,  1871.  He  nad  been  retired,  21  Dec.,
180l,  and  promoted  to  rear-admiral.  10  July,  1862.
He  resideu  at  Washington  after  his  service  with
the  examining  board  until  his  death,  at  which  time
he  was  the  senior  officer  in  the  navy  on  the  retired
list.  He  was  highly  esteemed  by  Cora.  Isaac  Hull,
whose  flag-ship  "Ohio"  he  commanded  in  18J19.
His  son  was  killed  on  board  the  "  Congress  "  when
she  was  nttticked  by  the  "  Merrimac."  8  March.
1862.  Whoa  the  admiral  heard  that  the  ship  had
surri'ndered.  he  exclaimed :  "  Then  Joe  is  dead."

SMITH,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Westmore-
land county.  Pa..  15  July,  1796;  d.  in  Greensburg,
Pa.,  4  Dec.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  col-
lege in  1815,  studied  at  Princeton  theological  serai-
nary,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1819,  and  became
a  missionary  in  Culpeper,  Madison,  and  Oran^
counties,  Va.  He  was  principal  of  an  academy  m
Staunton,  Va.,  for  several  years,  removed  to  Fred-
erick city,  M<i.,  about  1832',  and  was  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  there  and  principal  of  an
academy.  He  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Clairs-
ville,  Ohio,  in  1840,  and  became  president  of
Franklin  college,  New  Athens.  Ohio,  in  1844,  but
resigntnl  on  account  of  his  conservative  views  re-
garding slavery,  resumed  his  former  charge  in
Frederick  city,  Md.,  and  was  president  of  the  new-
ly organized  college  there.  He  l)ecame  general
a^nt  of  the  synods  of  the  Presbyterian  church  for
the  territory  embracing  western  Pennsylvania,
northwestern  Virginia,  and  eastern  Ohio,  lie  sub-
sequently held  charges  in  Round  Hill  and  Greens-
burg. Pa.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  frora
Jefferson  college. His  publications  include  "Old


Redstone,  or  H  istorical  Sketches  of  Western  Pra-
bvterianism"  (Philatlelphia,  1854),  and  "  iiisUtrrof
Jefferson  College,  Pa,"  (1867).

SMITH.  Joseph.  Mormon  prophet,  b.  in  Sha-
ron, Vt..  *i  Dec.,  18(W :  d.  in  Carthage,  III.,  27  June,
1844.  His  parents  Wfre  [Kxir,  and  when  he  wai«  ten
years  of  age  thi*y  move<l  to  Palmyra.  N.  V..  and
four  years  later  to  Manchester,  a  few  miles  distant.
In  the  spring  of  1H20,  in  the  midst  of  great  relig-
ious excitement,  four  of  his  father's  family  having
{'oined  the  Presbyterian  church.  Joseph  claimed  to
lave  gone  into  the  woods  to  pray,  wtien  he  had  a
vision  in  some  respects  similar  to  St.  Paul's,  but  was
told  by  his  religious  atlvisers  that  "it  is  all  of  the
devil,"  an<l  he  was  ridicule<l  by  the  public.  On  the
evening  of  21  Sept.,  1823.  after  going  to  l)ed,  he
claimed  to  have  had  another  vision.  Acconling  to
his  story,  an  angel  name*!  Moroni  visiteil  him  and
told  hira  of  a  liook  written  upon  golden  plates,  in
which  was  a  history  of  the  former  inhabitants  of
this  country  and  "  the  fulness  of  the  everlasting
gospel,"  and  indicated  to  him  where  the  b<x)k  was
ae|tosited  in  the  earth.  He  subst>«juentlv  went  to
the  spot  that  he  had  seen  in  his  visi<m,  found  the

filates  of  gold,  but  an  unseen  power  prevented  hira
rora  removing  them.  Moroni,  with  whom  Smith
claimed  to  have  had  many  interviews,  told  him
that  he  had  not  kept  the  Lord's  command,  that  he
valued  the  golden  plates  more  than  the  records
upon  them,  and  not  till  his  love  for  gold  had
abated  and  he  was  willing  to  {pve  his  time  to  the
lx)rd  and  translate  the  inscriptions  u;x)n  the  plates
would  they  ever  bo  delivered  to  him.  It  is  claimed
that  this  was  done  by  the  angel,  22  Sept.,  1827.
Smith  told  of  his  visions  from  time  to  time,  and,
to  escape  the  jeers  and  ridicule  of  the  i>eople  of
Manchester,  he  went  to  reside  with  his  wife's  family
in  Susquehanna  county.  Pa.,  where,  according  to  his
own  account,  he  began  to  copy  the  characters  on  the
plates  and  by  the  aid  of  "L  rim  and  Thummira,"
a  pair  of  magic  spectacles,  translateil  them  from
behind  a  curtain,  dictating  the  "  Book  of  Monnon  "
to  Martin  Harris  and  later  to  Oliver  Cowdery,  who
joined  hira  in  April,  1829.  These  two  frequently
went  into  the  woods  to  pray  for  divine  instruction,
and  on  15  May,  1829,  they  claimed  that  they  were
addressed  by  the  materialized  spirit  of  John  the
Baptist,  who  conferred  uwm  thera  the  priesthood
of  Aaron  and  commandetl  that  they  baptize  each
other  by  immersion  for  the  remission  of  sins.
Both  claimed  after  they  were  baptized  to  have  re-
ceived the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  from  that
time  had  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  The  "  Book  of
Mormon  "  was  printe«i  in  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  by  Eg-
bert B.  Grandin  in  1830.  The  Aformon  church  was
organized,  6  April,  1880,  by  six  "  saints,"  at  the
house  of  Peter  Whitraer,  in  Fayette.  N.  Y.,  and
Oliver  Cowdery  preached  the  first  sermon  on  the
following  Sunday,  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Whitraer,
when  several  were  baptized.  The  first  confer-
ence of  the  church  was  held  in  June,  1830.  at
which  thirty  members  were  present,  and  there-
after the  "  prophet "  claimed  supeniatural  powers.
Numerous  miracles  were  performed  by  mm.  of
which  the  casting  the  devil  out  of  Newell  Knight,
of  Colesville,  N.  Y.,  was  the  first  that  was  done
in  the  church.  The  meml)ership  increa.sed  rap-
idly, and  Kirtland,  Ohio,  was  declarwl  to  be  tne
promised  land  of  the  Mormons.  In  February.
Smith  and  the  lewlers  of  the  church  settled  in  that
place,  and  almost  at  once  missionaries  were  sent  to
make  converts.  Early  in  June.  Missouri  was  an-
nounce<l  by  Smith  to  be  the  chi)sen  land,  and  in
July  he  locateil  the  new  city  of  Zion.  Soon  after-
ward he  returned  to  Kirtland,  and  during  a  visit


676


SMITH


SMITH


to  Hiram,  Ohio,  with  Sidney  Rigdon,  he  was  tarred
and  feathered.  (See  Riodon,  Sidney,  for  the
subsequent  events  of  this  period.)  Meanwhile
the  building  of  the  first  "temple"  in  Kirtland
was  decided  upon,  and  each  Mormon  was  com-
pelled to  give  one  seventh  of  his  time  in  labor
for  its  completion  in  addition  to  the  tithes  that
were  paid  into  the  treasury.  It  was  80  feet  long,
59  feet  wide,  and  50  feet  high,  and  was  dedicated
on  27  March,  1836.  At  a  conference  of  the  elders,
held  3  May,  1834,  the  name  of  "  The  Church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter- Day  Saints"  was  adopted,
and  on  14  Feb.,  1835,  a  quorum  of  the  twelve  apos-
tles was  organized.  During  1837-8  dissensions
arose  in  the  church,  owing  to  the  financial  difficul-
ties of  the  time,  and  many  of  the  members  left  it.
Smith  was  charged  with  having  recommended  two
of  his  followers  to  take  the  life  of  Grandison  Newell,
an  opponent  of  Mormonism,  but,  although  he  was
brought  before  the  courts,  he  was  discharged,  owing
to  the  lack  of  evidence.  The  failure  of  the  bank,
charges  of  fraud,  and  other  difficulties  occurred,
and  on  13  Jan.,  1838,  he  made  his  escape  to  Illinois,
ultimately  reaching  Far  West,  Mo.  Toward  the
close  of  the  year  the  conflict  between  the  Mormons
and  Missourians,  who  had  previously  insisted  that
the  former  should  leave  their  territory,  assumed
the  proportions  of  civil  war.  The  Mormons  armed
themselves  and,  assembling  in  large  bodies,  fortified
their  towns  and  defied  the  officers  of  the  law.  The
militia  of  the  state  was  called  out  by  the  governor.
Smith  and  many  of  his  associates  were  lodged
in  jail,  having  been  indicted  for  "  murder,  treason,
burglary,  arson,  and  larceny,"  but  on  16  April,
1839,  during  their  removal  to  Boone  county,  made
their  escape  to  Illinois,  whither  their  families  had
fled.  After  this  the  leadere  of  the  church  were  fre-
quently arrested  on  various  charges,  the  "  prophet "
being  in  custody  nearly  fifty  times.  Most  of  the
refugees  met  in  Hancock  county.  111.,  and  on  the
site  of  the  town  of  Commerce  the  city  of  the  saints,.
Nauvoo,  was  founded  and  a  charter  obtained,  signed
by  the  governor,  16  Dec,  1840.  The  municipal
election  was  held  on  1  Feb.,  1841,  Smith  was  elect-
ed mayor,  and  two  days  previously  he  was  chosen
sole  trustee  of  the  Mormon  church,  with  unlimited
powers.  The  charter  of  the  city  granted  the  right
to  form  a  military  organization,  called  the  Nauvoo
legion,  which  at  one  time  contained  about  1,500
men.  and  on  4  Feb.,  1841,  Smith  was  elected  lieu-
tenant-general. The  erection  of  a  new  temple
was  begun,  missionaries  were  sent  to  England,
through  whom  large  accessions  were  made  to  the
church,  and  in  1842  Smith  was  at  the  height  of  his
prosperity.  Not  only  was  his  fame  known  from
one  end  of  the  land  to  the  other,  but  his  favor  was
sought  eagerly  by  the  leaders  of  the  two  great  po-
litical parties,  who  flattered  and  praised  him  that
they  might  win  his  support.  Jealousies  soon  arose
among  the  leaders,  some  of  whom  were  driven
from  the  church,  and  by  his  revelation  of  12  July,
1843,  authorizing  him  to  take  spiritual  wives,  he
antagonized  certain  of  his  followers,  among  whom
were  Dr.  Robert  D.  Foster  and  William  Law,
whose  wives  he  had  solicited  to  enter  into  the
married  state  with  him.  In  1844,  with  other  apos-
tate Mormons,  Foster  and  Law  decided  upon  the
establishment  of  a  newspaper  in  Nauvoo,  for  the
purpose  of  making  war  upon  the  leaders  of  Mor-
monism. This  was  the  "  Nauvoo  Expositor,"  the
first  and  only  numl^er  of  which  contained  what
purported  to  be  affidavits  from  sixteen  women
who  insisted  that  Smith  and  Sidney  Rigdon  were
guilty  of  moral  impurity  and  were  in  favor  of
the  "spiritual-wife system,  which  they  openly


denounced.  These  accusations  greatly  incensed
the  "  prophet,"  and  the  city  council  declared  the
paper  a  nuisance,  and  ordered  that  it  should  \ye
abated.  Under  cover  of  this  ordinance  the  follow-
ers of  Smith  attacked  the  building,  destroyed  the
presses,  and  made  a  bonfire  of  the  paper  and  fur-
niture. Foster  and  Law  fled  to  Carthage,  and  a  war-
rant was  issued  for  the  arrest  of  Joseph  Smith,  the
mayor  of  Nauvoo,  and  seventeen  of  nis  adherents.
He  refused  to  acknowledge  the  validity  of  the  war-
rant, and  the  constable  who  served  it  was  marched
out  of  Nauvoo  bv  the  city  marshal.  The  militia
was  called  out,  ani  the  Mormons  gave  up  their  pub-
lic arms.  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith  were  arrested
on  a  charge  of  treason  and  taken  to  Carthage  jail.
The  governor  visited  the  Smiths  in  jail,  made
a  promise  of  protection  to  them,  and  had  a  guard

S laced  over  tne  building.  On  the  evening  of  27
une,  1844,  a  band  of  more  than  100  men,  with
blackened  faces,  rushed  into  the  jail  and  fired
upon  the  brothers,  killing  Hyrum  first,  while
Joseph  was  pierced  with  four  bullets  and  fell  dead.
See  "  Mormonism  and  the  Mormons,"  by  Daniel  P.
Kidder  (New  York,  1842) ;  "  The  Mormons :  or  Lat-
ter-Day Saints,  with  Memoirs  of  Joseph  Smith"
(London,  1851);  and  the  "Earlv  Davs  of  Mormon-
ism," by  J.  H.  Kennedy  (New  York,  1888).— His
son,  Joseph,  b,  in  Kirtland.  Ohio,  6  Nov.,  1832,
after  the  death  of  his  father  in  1844  remained
in  Nauvoo  with  his  mother,  who  would  not  ac-
knowledge the  authority  of  Brigham  Young.  For
vears  she  kept  a  hotel,  in  which  her  son  assisted
her.  He  also  was  clerk  in  a  store,  worked  on  a
farm,  was  sub-contractor  on  a  railroad,  and  studied
law.  After  standing  aloof  from  the  Mormon
church  till  he  was  about  twenty-four  vears  of  age,
he  resolved  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  a  "  reor-
ganized "  branch  of  it,  which  he  did  in  1860.  In
1866  he  left  Nauvoo  and  took  up  his  abode  as  edi-
tor and  manager  of  "  The  Saints  Herald  "at  Piano,
111.  He  then  went  abroad  and  preached  frequently
for  about  fifteen  years,  and  tnen  removed  to  La-
moni,  Iowa,  where  he  now  (1888)  resides,  as  the
acknowledged  head  of  the  reorganized  church  of
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-Day  Saints,  a  strong  oppo-
nent to  the  doctrine  and  practices  of  the  polyga-
mists  of  Utah.

SMITH,  Joseph  Lee,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Britain,
Conn.,  28  May,  1776 ;  d.  in  St.  Augustine,  Fla..  27
May,  1846.  His  father,  Elnathan,  was  an  officer
in  the  old  French  war,  and  a  major  in  the  commis-
sary department  in  the  Revolution.  Joseph  was
educated  at  Yale,  studied  law  in  Hartford,  and
practised  in  his  native  county  until  the  second  war
with  Great  Britain,  when  he  was  appointed  major
in  the  25th  infantry,  participating  in  the  invasion
of  Canada.  In  the  battle  of  Stonjr  Creek,  6  June,
1813,  in  which  Gen.  William  H.  Winder  was  taken
prisoner,  he  saved  his  regiment  by  a  judicious
movement.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel
and  brevetted  colonel,  U.  S.  armv,  for  that  action,
and  became  colonel  of  the  3d  \J.  S.  infantry  in
1818.  He  resigned  from  the  army  in  that  year,
removed  to  Florida  in  1821,  and  was  U.  S.  judge
of  the  superior  court  in  1823-'37.  Of  the  1,000
cases  that  he  decided  previous  to  1836,  not  one  was
reversed.  Judge  Smith  was  remarkable  for  his
great  physical  strength  and  imposing  appearance.
He  married  Frances  Marvin,  daughter  of  Ephraim
Kirby. — His  son,  Ephraim  Kirby,  soldier,  b.  in
Litchfield,  Conn.,  in  1807;  d.  near  the  citv  of
Mexico,  11  Sept.,  1847,  was  graduated  at  the  tJ.  S.
military  academy  in  1826,  served  on  frontier  duty
in  1828-'9,  and  was  dismissed  from  the  army  in
October,  1830,  for  inflicting  corporal  punishment


SMITH


SMITH


677


UTUyUy  ^£p%t.v^


on  mutinous  soldiers,  but  was  reinstated  in  1B33.
He  bocatne  Ist  lieutenant  in  1888,  captain  in  1888,
and  duriiiir  the  war  with  Mexico  wax  engaged  in
numeruuit  oHttles.  includinj;  Molinodel  Itev,  where
he  was  HKirtaiiy  woundfMl  in  loading  the  light  in*
fantry  battalion  under  his  ooniiuand  in  an  assault
on  one  of  the  enemy's  l)atterie«. — Another  son,
Edmund  Kirbjr,  soldier,  b.  in  St.  Augustine,  Kla..
10  May,  1824,  wa8  t^raduatod  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary aeadomv  in  1845,  and  appointed  brevet  2d
lieutenant  of  infantry.  In  the  war  with  Mexico
he  was  twice  brevettcd,  for  gallantry  at  Cerro
Gordo  and  Contreras.  He  was  assistant  professor
of  mathematics  at  West  Point  in  184rf-'52,  be-
came captain  in  the  3d  cavalry  in  1855,  served

on  the  frontier,  and
was  wounded,  13
May,  1859,  in  an
engagement  with
Comanche  Indians
near  old  F'ort  At-
chison.Tex.  In  1861
he  was  thanked
by  the  Texas  legis-
lature for  his  ser-
vices against  the
Indians. He  was

Jromoted  major  in
anuary,  1861,  but
resigned  on  6  April,
on  the  secession  of
Florida,  and  was
appointed  lieuten-
ant-colonel in  the
corps  of  cavalry  of
the  Confederate  ar-
my. He  became
1861,  major-general.


brigadier-general, 17  June,

11  Oct.,  1861,  lieutenant-general,  9  Oct.,  1862,  and

Ssneral,  19  Feb.,  1864.  At  the  battle  of  Bull
un,  21  July,  1861,  he  was  severely  wounded  in
the  beginning  of  the  engagement.  In  1862  he  was
placed  in  command  of  the  Department  of  East
Tennessee,  Kentucky.  North  Georgia,  and  Western
North  Carolina.  He  led  the  advance  of  Gen.  Brax-
ton Bragg's  army  in  the  Kentucky  campaign,  and
defeated  the  National  forces  under  Gen.  William
Nelson  at  Richmond,  Ky.,  30  Aug.,  1862.  In
February,  1863,  he  was  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  Trans-Mississippi  department,  including
Texas,  Louisiana,  Arkansas,  and  Indian  territory,
and  was  ordered  to  organize  a  government,  which
he  did.  He  made  his  communications  with  Rich-
mond bv  running  the  blockade  at  Galveston.  Tex.,
and  Wilmington,  N.  C,  sent  large  quantities  of
cotton  to  Confederate  agents  abroad,  and,  introduc-
ing machinery  from  Europe,  established  factories
and  furnaces,  opene<I  mines,  made  j)owder  and  cast-
ings, and  had  made  the  district  self-supporting  when
the  war  closed,  at  which  time  his  forces  were  the
last  to  surrender.  In  1864  he  opposed  and  defeated
Gen.  Nathaniel  P.  Banks  in  tiis  Red  river  cam-
paign. Gen.  Smith  was  president  of  the  Atlantic
and  Pacific  telegraph  company  in  1866-'8,  and
chancellor  of  the  University  of  Nashville  in  1870-'5,
and  has  been  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  Uni-
versity of  the  South,  Sewanee,  Tenn.,  since  1875.
— Epl^^raim  Kirbv's  8<m,  Joseph  Lee  Klrbjr.  sol-
dier, b*.  in  New  'fork  city  in  IKW;  d.  at  Corinth,
MLss.,  12  Oct.,  1862,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1857,  served  as  assistant  top-
opuphical  engineer  in  the  ofldce  of  the  Missis-
sippi delta  survey  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1857-'8,
on  the  Utah  expedition,  the  survey  of  the  northern
lakes  in  1859-'d1,  and  then  became  1st  lieutenant

VOL.  T. — 87


of  topographical  engineen*.  During  the  civil  war
he  8erve<i  on  (ien.  Nathaniel  1'.  lianks's  stalT  in
July  and  August,  1861,  received  the  brevet  of  cap-
tain, U.  S.  army,  in  the  latter  month  "for  gallant
and  meritorious  service  in  the  Siienandoah  valler,
Va.,"  biHiame  wilonel  of  the  43<1  Ohio  volunt«.H>nf  in
Septemln-r,  and  was  in  command  of  a  briga<le  of
the  Armv  of  the  Mississippi  in  the  capture  o(  New
Mailrid.  ^lo.,  in  March.  1862.  He  was  brcvetted
major,  U.  S.  army,  for  the  capture  of  Island  No.
10,  7  April.  1862.' served  on  the  expedition  to  Fort
Pillow,  fought  at  the  siege  of  Corinth  in  May  of
that  year,  and  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  in
the  C  S.  army  for  rejielling  a  Confe<lerate  sortie
from  that  city.  He  was  in  command  of  a  r(*giinent
in  o{M;rations  in  northern  .Mississi[ipi  in  .September
and  October,  was  engaged  at  the  l>attle  of  luka,
and  mortally  wounded  at  Corinth,  4  Oct.,  while
charging  **  iront  forward  "  to  re[)el  a  desperate
attack  on  Battery  Robinett.  For  this  service  he
was  brt^vetted  colonel  in  the  regular  army,  his  com-
mission dating  4  Oct.,  1862.

SMITH,  Joseph  Mather,  physician,  h.  in  New
RtK-helie,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.".  14  March.  1789:
d.  in  New  York  city,  22  April,  1866.  His  father.
Dr.  Matson  Smith,  was  a  well-known  physician  in
Westchester  county,  N.  Y.,  and  his  motfier  was  a
descendant  of  the  Mather  family  of  Massachusetts.
Joseph  was  educated  in  the  academy  of  his  native
town,  attended  medical  lectures  at  Columbia  in
1809-'10,  was  licensed  to  practise  in  1811,  and  in
1815  was  graduated  at  the  New  York  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons.  He  then  settled  in  jirac-
tice  in  that  city,  and  aliout  that  time  was  a  founder
of  the  Medico-physiological  society,  and  edited  the
first  volume  of  its  transactions,  to  which  he  con-
tributed a  paper  entitled  the  "  Efficacy  of  Emetics
in  Spasmodic  Diseases"  (1817),  whicli  won  him
reputation.  He  was  physician  to  the  New  York
state  prison  in  1820-'4,  liecame  in  1821  a  fellow  of
the  New  York  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons,
in  which  he  was  appointed  professor  of  the  theory
and  practice  of  physic  in  1826,  held  office  for  mor«
than  thirty  years,  and  in  1855  was  transferred  to
the  chair  of  materia  medica,  which  he  held  until
his  death.  He  became  an  editor  of  the  New  York
"  Medical  and  Physiological  Journal  "  in  1828,  a
visiting  physician  to  the  New  York  hospital  in  1829,
president  of  the  Academy  of  medicine  in  1854,
vice-president  of  the  National  Quarantine  and  sani-
tary convention  in  1859,  ana  pn-sident  of  the
Citizens'  association  of  New  York  on  the  organiza-
tion of  the  council  of  hygiene  in  1864.  During  the
cholera  epidemic  of  1849  he  was  one  of  the  medical
council  of  the  sanitary  committee  of  New  York
city,  and  performed  anluous  and  excessive  lalwrs
throughout  the  j>estilence.  He  contributed  largely
to  professional  literature.  His  publications  in-
clude "  Elements  of  the  Etiology  and  Philosophy  of
Epidemics."  of  which  an  eminent  English  autnority
said :  "  It  is  fifty  years  in  advance  of  the  medical
literature  of  the  tlay  on  that  subject  "  (New  York,
1824);  "Discussion  on  Cholera  Morbus"  (1881);
"Public  Duties  of  Medical  Men"  (1846J;  "  Influ-
ence of  Diseases  on  Intellectual  and  Moral  Powers"
(1848);  "  RetKirt  on  Public  Hygiene  "  (1850) ;  "  Illus-
trations of  Me<lical  Phenomena  in  Military  Life"
(1850) ;  "  PueriH>ral  ^Vver  "  (1857) :  "  Therapeu-
tics of  Albuminuria"  (1862);  and  several  addresses
that  were  sulksetjuently  published,  and  include  that
on  the  "  Epidemic  Cholera  of  Asia  and  Europe"
(18^31),  and  an  admirable  "  Report  on  the  Medical
Topography  and  Enidemics  of  the  .State  of  New
York, '  deliveretl  l)eforethe  American  me<lical  asso-
ciation. In  the  meteorological  portions  of  this


678


SMITH


SMITH


work  he  introduced  several  new  and  appropriate
scientific  terras,  which  have  since  been  adoptetl  by
scientific  writers,  and  he  illustrated  the  climate  of
the  state  in  an  original  and  ingenious  manner  by
maps,  plates,  and  tables  (1860).

SMITH,  Joseph  Rowe,  soldier,  b.  in  Stillwater,
N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Monroe,  Mich.,  3  Sept.,
1868.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1823.  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1832
and  captain  in  1838,  and  served  in  the  Florida  war
in  1837-'42.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  was  bre-
vetted  major  for  gallantry  at  Cerro  Gordo,  and
lieutenant-colonel  for  Contreras  and  Churubusco,
receiving  in  the  latter  engagement  a  wound  that
ever  afterward  disabled  his  left  arm.  He  became
major  of  the  7th  infantry  in  1851,  at)d  in  1861  was
retired  on  account  of  his  wounds,  but  in  the  follow-
ing year  was  appointed  mustering  and  disbursing
officer  for  Michigan,  with  headquarters  on  the
lakes.  He  became  chief  mustering  officer  of
Michigan  in  1862,  military  commissary  of  musters
in  1863,  and  in  1865  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,
U.  S.  armv,  for  "  long  and  honorable  service."

SMITrt,  Joshua  Tonlmin,  British  author,  b.
in  Birmingham,  England,  29  May,  1816 ;  d.  in
Lansing,  Sussex,  England,  28  April,  1869.  He  was
educated  in  the  public  schools  of  his  native  city,
and  became  an  eminent  publicist,  constitutional
lawyer,  and  scholar,  being  especially  learned  in  the
Scandinavian  languages  and  literature.  He  resided
in  this  country  in  1837-'42,  and  while  here  pub-
lished his  "  Discovery  of  America  by  the  Northmen
in  the  10th  Century  ^'  (Boston,  1839).  This  work
is  accompanied  by  maps  and  plates,  and  has  ever
since  been  regarded  as  the  standard  authority  on
that  subject.  The  most  eminent  American  his-
torians have  quoted  it,  and  it  was  the  ground  of  his
election  as  a  corresponding  member  of  the  Society
of  northern  antiquaries,  Copenhagen,  Denmark.
On  his  return  to  Europe  he  devoted  himself  to  con-
stitutional and  old  Saxon  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1849,  for  eight  years  edited  the  "  Parliament-
ary Remembrancer,"  and  gave  much  time  and
study  to  antiquarian  researches,  physical  science,
geology,  and  mineralogy.  His  publications  in-
clude ''  Popular  View  of  the  Progress  of  Philoso-
f)hy  among  the  Ancients  "  (London,  1836) ;  "  Paral-
els  between  the  Constitution  and  the  Constitutional
History  of  England  and  Hungary  "  (1849) ;  •'  The
Parish,  its  Obligations  and  Powers  "  (1854) ;  "  The
Laws  of  Nuisances  and  Sewerage  Works  "  (1855) ;
"  The  Right  Holding  of  the  Coroner's  Court "
(1859) ;  and  "  History  of  the  English  Guilds  "  (1870).

SMITH,  Josiah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1704;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  October,
1781.  His  grandfather,  Thomas,  was  a  landgrave
and  governor  of  the  province  of  South  Carolina.
Josiah  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1725,  being  the
first  native  of  South  Carolina  to  receive  a  college
degree.  He  was  ordained  in  1726,  returned  to
Charleston,  and  was  successively  pastor  of  Presby-
terian churches  in  Bermuda,  Cainhoy,  and  Charles-
ton. S.  C.  He  maintained  a  learned  disputation
with  Hugh  Fisher  in  1730  on  the  subject  of  the
right  of  private  judgment,  and  in  1740  espoused
the  cause  of  George  Whitefield,  whom  he  invited  to
occupy  his  pulpit.  He  was  an  earnest  friend  of
American  independence,  and  on  the  surrender  of
Charleston  became  a  prisoner  of  war,  was  taken  to
Philadelphia,  and  died  there  while  in  confinement.
He  published  numerous  discourses,  and  a  volume
of  sermons  (Charleston,  1752).

SMITH,  Josiah  Torrey,  clergyman,  b.  in  Will-
iamsj)ort,  Mass.,  4  Aug.,  1815.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  in  1842,  ordained  in  1845,  and  has  been


Eastor  successively  of  Baptist  churches  in  Lanes-
orough,  Sandisfleld,  and  Hinsdale,  Mass.,  Bristol,
Conn.,  Amherst,  Mass.,  Woodstock,  Conn.,  and
Warwick.  R.  I.  Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of
M.  A.  in  1879,  and  the  University  of  Iowa  that  of
D.  D.  in  1880.  His  publications  include  many  maga-
zine articles,  miscellaneous  contributions  to  the  re-
ligious press,  and  "  Examination  of  '  Sprinkling  as
the  Onlv  Mode  of  Baptism,'  etc.,  by  Absalom  Peters,
D.  D."  (Boston,  1849):  and  "The  Scriptural  and
Historical  Arguments  for  Infant  Baptism  Exam-
ined "  (Philadelphia,  ia50).

SMITH,  Judson,  educator,  b.  in  Middlefield,
Hampshire  co..  Mass,  28  June,  1837.  He  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  1859,  andatOberlin  theo-
logical seminary  in  1863.  was  tutor  in  Latin  and
Greek  in  Oberlin  in  1862-'4,  instructor  in  mathe-
matics and  metaphysics  in  Williston  academy,
Easthampton,  Mass.,  for  the  subsequent  two  years,
professor  of  Latin  at  Oberlin  in  1866-'70,  occupied
the  chair  of  ecclesia-stical  history  and  positive  insti-
tutions in  Oberlin  theological  seminary  in  1870-'84,
lecturer  on  modem  history  in  Oberlin  in  1875-'84,
and  lecturer  on  history  in  Lake  Erie  female  semi-
nary in  1879-'84.  In  1866  he  was  ordained  to  the
ministry  of  the  Congregational  church.  He  edited
the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra  "  in  1882-'4,  and  has  since
been  one  of  its  associate  editors,  was  president  of  the
Oberlin  board  of  education  in  1871-84.  and  since
that  date  has  been  foreign  secretary  of  the  Ameri-
can board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions.
Amherst  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1877.  His
publications  include,  besides  many  magazine  arti-
cles, a  series  of  "  Lectures  in  Church  History  and
the  History  of  Doctrine  from  the  Beginning  of
the  Christian  Era  till  1684"  (Oberlin,  1881).  He  is
also  the  author  of  "  Lectures  on  Modern  History  "
(printed  privately,  1881).

SMITH,  Julia  EvaHna,  reformer,  b.  in  Glas-
tonbury, Conn.,  27  May,  1792;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  6  March,  1886.  Her  father  was  a  preacher
and  physician,  an  early  Abolitionist,  and  both
parents  were  Sandemanians.  She  became  known
throughout  the  country  as  one  of  the  five  "  Glas-
tonbury sisters,"  who  resisted  the  payment  of  taxes
because  they  were  denied  suffrage,  and  submitted
to  the  sale  of  their  property  by  the  town  authori-
ties rather  than  obey  the  law.  With  her  sister,
Abigail  H.  (1796-1878),  she  was  an  early  and  active
member  of  the  Woman's  suffrage  party  and  an  in-
teresting and  conspicuous  figure  at  their  conven-
tions. In  1876  they  addressed  a  petition  to  the
legislature  of  Connecticut,  in  which  they  set  forth
their  grievances.  Julia  kept  a  weather-record  from
1832  till  1880.  In  1879  she  married  Amos  G.
Parker,  a  lawyer  of  New  Hampshire,  aged  eighty-
six  years.  The  Glastonbury  sisters  were  well  versed
in  modern  and  ancient  languages,  and  for  many
years  were  engaged  on  a  translation  of  the  Holy
Scriptures  literally  from  the  original  tongues,
which  was  published  (Hartford,  1876).

SMITH,  Junius,  pioneer  of  ocean  steam  navi-
gation, b.  in  Plvmouth,  Mass.,  2  Oct.,  1780;  d.  in
Astoria,  N.  Y.,"  23  Jan.,  1853.  His  father.  Gen.
David  Smith,  was  an  officer  of  militia.  Junius  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1802,  studied  at  the  Litch-
field law-school,  and  in  1803  delivered  the  annual
oration  before  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  of  Con-
necticut. He  practised  at  the  New  Haven  bar  till
1805.  when  he  was  appointed  to  prosecute  a  claim
against  the  British  government  for  the  capture  of
an  American  merchant  ship.  He  pleaded  tne  cause
in  the  admiralty  court  in  London,  succeeded  in  ob-
taining large  damages,  and  on  his  return  to  this
country  extensively  engaged  in  commerce,  and  con-


SMITH


SMITH


579


iluct«l  A  prosfHToun  ))u.«inef«  for  mtmj  years.  He
bcjfan  the  projwt  of  navipitinf;  the  Atlantic  ocean
with  stonmshi[>s  in  lH:t2,  publishtMl  a  prospectus  of
the  enterprise  in  ItViH,  in  18U0  estnblishcMl  the
British  and  American  Hteam  navif^tion  coin|>any.
ami  in  the  sprinjj  of  1^W8  proveil  the  feasibility  of
the  achetno  bv  the  crossinjf  of  the  steamer  "  Sirius."
Capt.  Moses  koj^'rs  ha<l  crosse<l  in  the  "  Savannah,"
usin^  ln>th  sails  and  steam,  in  IrtlJJ.  Mr  Smith's
antieii>ati<>n  of  the  pofuninry  wlvantaf^es  of  the
project  were  not  realize«l,  and  ho  abandoned  it,  en-
gs^nfc  in  the  intnxluction  of  the  tea-plant  into
South  Carolina.  lie  piirohasc<l  an  extensive  planta-
tion near  Greenville,  and  was  endeavoring;  to  prose-
cute the  industry  at  the  time  of  his  death.  Yale
gave  him  the  defjree  of  LL.  D.  in  1840.

SMITH,  Justin  Alinerin,  clcrtryman,  b.  in
Ticonden)^a,  N.  Y.,  29  Dec,  1819.  He  was  prwlu-
ated  at  Union  college  in  1843,  and  durinj;  1844-'r)
was  princijml  of  Union  academy.  East  Hennington,
Vt  Havinp  been  onlainetl  to  the  ministry,  he  was
pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  at  North  Benninirton,
Vt.,  from  1845  till  1849,  and  at  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
from  1849  till  1853.  In  the  last-named  year  he  be-
came editor  of  "  The  Christian  Times,"  now  "  The
StAudard."  in  Chicago,  111.,  and  he  has  continued
in  that  relation  ever  since.  "The  Standard"  is
the  chief  Baptist  journal  of  the  northwest,  and  its
prosperity  is  largely  due  to  the  ability  and  tact
that  have  marke<T  its  editorial  management.  From
1861  to  1860  he  united  with  his  journalistic  labors
the  pastoral  care  of  the  Indiana  avenue  liaptist
church,  Chicago.  Shurtleflf  college,  III.,  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1858.  Dr.  Smith  is  a  mem-
ber of  the  Ixmrd  of  trustees  of  the  University  of
Chicago,  and  of  that  of  Morgan  park  theological
seminary.  His  publications  include  "The  Mart vr
of  Vilvonle."  a  sketch  of  William  Tvndale,  for  chil-
dren (New  York,  1856);  "Sinclair "Thompson,  the
Shetland  Apostle"  (Chicago,  1867);  "The  Spirit
in  the  Worrl"  (1868) ;  "  Memoir  of  Nathaniel  Col-
ver"  (lioston,  1871);  "Uncle  John  upon  his
Travels,"  a  book  for  children  (1871);  "  Patmos,  or
the  Kingdom  and  the  Patience"  (1874);  "  Memoir
of  John  liates  "  (Toronto.  1877) ;  "  Commentary  on
the  Ilevelation"  (Philadelphia,  1884);  and  "Mod-
ern Church  History"  (New  Haven.  1887).

SMITH,  Lucins  Edwin,  educator,  b.  in  Will-
iamstown,  Mjiss.,  29  Jan.,  1822.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  college  in  1843,  studied  law  in  Will-
iamstown.  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845.
He  served  during  1847-'8  as  associate  e<litor  of  the
Hartfonl  "Courant."  and  in  1849  as  associate
editor,  with  Henry  Wilson,  of  the  "  Boston  Ilepul>-
lican."  From  1849  till  1854  he  was  assistant  cor-
responding secretary  of  the  American  Baptist
missionary  union,  Boston.  The  next  three  years
he  sjx'nt  in  Newton  theological  seminary,  where  he
was  grwluated  in  1857,  and  became  in  1858  jwistor
of  the  Baptist  church  in  Groton,  Mass.,  whence  he
was  called  in  1865  to  the  nrofessf)rship  of  rhetoric,
homiletics,  and  pa-storal  tneology  in  Buckiiell  uni-
versity, at  Lewisburg,  Pa.  From  1868  till  1875  he
was  literary  e<litor  of  the  New  York  "  Examiner."
In  1877  he  became  editor  of  the  "Watchman,"
Boston,  of  which  journal  since  1881  he  has  re-
mained associate  eflitor.  While  he  was  professor
at  Bucknell  university  he  etlite<i  the  "  Baptist  Quar-
tcrlv."  He  received  from  Williams  the  degree  of
D.  t).  in  1869.  Besides  cimtributing  numerous
articles  to  t>erio<licals,  Prof.  Smith  has  e<lited
"  Heroes  and  Martvrs  of  the  Mo«lern  Missionary
Enterpris«-"  (Hartford.  Conn..  1*52).

SMITH,  LneUa  Dowd,  author,  b.  in  Sheffield,
Berkshire  oc,  Mass.,  16  June,  1847.  She  was  gradu-


ated at  the  State  normal  school  in  Weatfleld,  MaM.t
in  1866.  and  at  Temple  (trove  neminar^'.  .S«nUoga«
N.  Y.,  in  1868.  Since  the  latter  dale  sii.-  ha«  bMO
a  prmci{>al  of  public  schools  in  MassachusetU,
ConntH'ticut,  an«I  New  York.  She  married  J.  Had-
ley  Smith  in  1875.  .Mrs.  .Smith  has  written  numer-
ous newsfiaper  ariicles  and  publishe<l  "Wayside
Ijcaves  "  under  the  [H-n-name  of  "J.  Luella  Dowd  "
(Boston.  1879).  and  "  Wind-Flowers"  (1887).

SMITH.  Martin  Lutlier,  s'>ldier.  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1819;  <1.  in  Home.  Ga..  29  July,  1886.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1842,  serve<l  in  the  Mexican  war  aslieutenant
of  topographical  engineers,  became  1st  lieutenant
in  18.>3  and  captain  in  1856,  and  resigned  1  April,
1861.  He  then  entered  the  Confederate  service,
became  a  brigatlier-general,  commanded  a  brigade
in  defence  of  New  Orleans,  was  at  the  head  of  the
engine«'r  corps  of  the  armv.  and  planne<l  and  con-
structed the  defences  of  Vicksburg,  where  he  was
taken  pris<iner.  He  subsequently  attaine<I  the  rank
of  major-general.  After  the  war  he  Ijecame  chief
engineer  of  the  Selma,  Rome,  and  Dayton  railnuul.

SMITH,  Mary  LouiHe  Riley,  author,  b.  in
Brighton,  Monroe  co.,  N.  Y.,  27  May,  1842.  Her
maiden  name  was  Riley.  She  was  educated  at
Brockport  (N.  Y.)  collegiate  institute,  and  in  1869
married  Albert  Smith,  of  Springfield,  111.,  with
whom  she  afterward  removed  to  New  York  city.
She  has  published  "  A  Gift  of  Gentians,  and  other
Verses  "  (New  York.  1882),  and  "  The  Inn  of  Rest "
(1888).  Some  of  her  short  poems,  notablv  "  Tired
Mothers,"  have  been  widely  popular,  and  several
of  them,  including  "  His  Name  and  "S<}metime,"
have  been  published  separately  as  booklets,  and
had  a  large  circulation.

SMITH,  Mary  Prudence  Wells,  author,  b.  in
Attica,  N.  Y.,  30  July.  1840.  She  was  gratluated
at  the  Greenville,  Mass..  high-school  in  1857.  and
at  Hartfonl  female  seminary  in  1859,  tAUght  in
Greenville  in  1859-'61,  and  iri  1864-'?2  was  a  clerk
in  Franklin  savings  institution,  being  the  first
woman  employed  in  a  bank  in  Massachusetts.  She
was  secretary  of  the  Greenville  freedmen's  aid  so-
ciety in  186o-'6,  and  schot)l  commissioner  in  1874.
She  married  Judge  Favette  .Smith,  of  Cincinnati,  in
the  latter  year,  and  since  1881  has  been  president
of  the  Cincinnati  branch  of  the  Woman's  auxil-
iary conference  of  the  Unitarian  church.  She  has
published  many  magazine  articles  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  P.  Thome,"  and  "  Jolly  Good  Times,  or
Child  Life  on  a  Farm"  (Boston.  1875);  "Jolly
Goo«l  Times  at  School"  (1877);  "The  Browns''
(1884) ;  and  "  Miss  Ellis's  Mission  "  (18336).

SMITH.  Melancton,  Continental  congressman,
b.  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  in  1?24;  d.  in  New  York  city,
29  July,  )  798.  He  was  educated  at  home,  settled
in  business  in  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  in  1744,  be-
came .sheriff  of  Dutchess  county  in  1777,  and,  says
Chancellor  Kent,  was  early  noted  "  for  his  love  of
reading,  tenacious  memory,  powerful  intellect,  and
for  the  metai)hysical  and  logical  discussions  of
which  he  was  a  master."  He  was  a  member  of  the
first  Provincial  congress  that  met  in  New  York
city,  23  May,  1775,  and  a  commissioner  in  1777  for
detecting  and  defeating  all  conspiracies  forine<i  in
the  state,  ser^-ed  in  the  Continental  coiigress  in
1785-'8,  and  in  the  latter  year  represented  Dutchess
county  in  the  convention  that  met  at  Poughkeepsie
to  consider  the  ratification  of  the  Federal  constitu-
tion of  1787.  In  the  deliberations  of  that  body  he
exhibite<I  talents  of  a  high  order,  and  ably  sup-
ported Gov.  George  Clinton  and  the  State-rights
party.  He  remove*!  to  New  York  city  a)M>ut  1785
and  largely  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits,  at  the


680


SMITH


SMITH


same  time  taking  a  conspicuous  part  as  an  anti-
Federalist  leader.  He  was  in  the  legislature  in
1791,  in  which  year  a  commission — consisting  of
Gov.  Clinton,  State  Secretary  Lewis  L.  Scott,  At-
tornev-General  Aaron  Burr,  State  Treasurer  Ge-
rard ftancker,  and  Auditor  Peter  Y.  Curtenius — sold
6,500,000  acres  of  land  belonging  to  New  York
state,  at  the  sum  of  eighteen  cents  per  acre,  to
Alexander  McComb,  James  Caldwell,  John  and
Nicholas  Roosevelt,  and  others.  When  the  trans-
action became  public,  resolutions  of  censure  were
moved  in  the  legislature ;  but  Jabez  D.  Hammond,
the  historian  of  New  York,  says :  "  After  a  long
and  acrimonious  discussion  of  the  resolutions  of
censure,  they  were  finally  rejected,  and  Melancton
Smith,  as  pure  a  man  as  ever  lived,  introduced  a
resolution  approving  of  the  conduct  of  the  com-
missioners, which  was  adopted  in  the  assembly  by
a  vote  of  thirty-five  to  twenty."  He  canvassed  the
state  for  the  re-election  of  Gov.  Clinton  in  1792,
and  was  subsequently  circuit  judge.  He  died  of
yellow  fever,  his  being  the  first  fatal  case  in  the
epidemic  of  1798. — His  son,  Melancton,  soldier,  b.
in  New  York  city  in  1780;  d.  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,
28  Aug.,  1818,  received  a  military  education,  and,
at  the  beginning  of  the  second  war  with  Great
Britain,  joined  the  U.  S.  army,  became  major  of
the  29th  infantry,  20  Feb.,  1813,  and  colonel  of
that  regiment  the  next  month,  which  office  he  held
until  the  end  of  the  war,  serving  throughout  the
frontier  campaign  of  that  year,  and  commanding
the  principal  fort  at  the  battle  of  Plattsburg  in
September,  1814.  —  The  second  Melancton's  son,
Melancton,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  24
May,  1810,  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  1
Nov.,  1826,  attended  the  naval  school  in  New  York
in  1831,  and  became  a  passed  midshipman,  28  April,
1832. He  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  8  March,

1837,  served  in  the
^  steamer  "  Poin-
sett" until  1840,
and  in  1839,  on
this  cruise,  he
commanded  a  fort
during  engage-
ments with  the
Seminoles  in  Flor-
ida. He  made  a
full  cruise  in  the
frigate  "  Constitu-
tion "  on  the  Med-
iterranean station
in  1848-'51,  and,
after  beingon  wait-
ing orders  for  sev-
^/^.y  y-  /T  '-rfi-  eral  years,  wascom-
.^^fU^CA^U^  ^/?%A.l^  missioned  com-
mander, 14  Sept.,
1855,  after  which  he  was  light-house  inspector.  On
9  Julv,  1861,  while  in  command  of  the  "Massachu-
setts ''  off  Ship  island,  he  had  an  engagement  with  a
Confederate  fort  and  three  Confederate  steamers,
and  on  31  Dec,  1861,  the  fort  at  Biloxi,  La.,  sur-
rendered, cutting  off  all  regular  communication  be-
tween North  Carolina  and  Mobile,  and  getting  pos-
session of  the  sound.  When  in  command  of  the
"Mississippi"  he  passed  Forts  Jackson  and  St.
Philip  with  Farragut,  and  destroyed  the  Confeder-
ate ram  "  Manassas,"  for  which  he  was  highly  com-
mended by  the  admiral.  He  participated  in  the  at-
tack on  Port  Hudson.  In  an  attempt  to  run  the
loatteries  the  "  Mississippi  "  grounded,  and  he  set
his  ship  on  fire  toprevent  her  falling  into  the  hands
of  the  enemy.  Tnis  course  was  approved  by  the
navy  department. He  was  promoted  to  captain,  16


July,  1862  (under  orders  to  return  north),  but  was
assigned  to  the  temporary  command  of  the  "  Mon-
ongahela,"  on  which  vessel  the  admiral  hoisted  his
flagon  his  passage  from  New  Orleans  to  Port  Hud-
son. In  1864  he  had  command  of  the  monitor
"Onondaga,"  and  appointed  divisional  officer  on
James  river,  and  subsequently  he  had  charge  of  the
squadron  in  Albemarle  sound,  N.  C,  and  recaptured
the  steamer  "  Bombshell."  He  participated  in  both
attacks  on  Fort  Fisher  in  the  steam  frigate  "  Wa-
bash." He  was  commissioned  commodore,  25  July,
1866,  and  served  as  chief  of  the  bureau  of  equip-
ment and  recruiting  in  the  navy  department  until
1870.  He  was  commissioned  rear-admiral,  1  July,
1870,  had  charge  of  the  New  York  navy-yard  in
1870-'2,  and  was  retired,  24  May,  1871.  After  he
was  retired,  he  was  appointed  governor  of  the
Naval  asylum  at  Philadelphia.

SMITH,  Meriwether,  statesman,  b.  at  the
family  seat,  Bathurst,  Essex  co.,  Va.,  in  1730;  d.
25  Jan.,  1790.  He  was  a  signer  of  the  articles  of
the  Westmoreland  (county)  association  in  opposition
to  the  stamp-act,  27  Feb.,  1776,  and  also  of  the
resolutions  of  the  Williamsburg  association,  a  mem-
ber of  the  house  of  burgesses  from  Essex  county  in
1770,  and  of  the  Virginia  conventions  of  1775  and
1776,  in  which  he  was  active.  He  was  a  member
of  the  Continental  congress  in  1778-'82,  and  of  the
Virginia  convention  of  1788,  which  ratified  the
constitution  of  the  United  States.  The  belief  is
held  by  his  descendants  that  he  was  the  author  of
the  Virginia  bill  of  rights.  He  was  a  member  of
the  select  committee  to  which  the  draft  of  George
Mason  was  submitted,  and  appears  to  have  sud-
mitted  a  draft  for  the  state  constitution.  He  was
twice  married ;  first,  about  1760,  to  Alice,  daughter
of  Philip  Lee,  and  secondlv,  29  Sept.,  1769,  to
Elizabetn,  daughter  of  Col.  William  Daingerfield.
Of  his  issue  by  the  first  marriage  was  George
William,  lawyer  and  governor  of  Virginia,  who
perished,  with  fifty-nine  others,  in  the  burning  of
the  Richmond  theatre,  26  Dec,  1811.

SMITH,  Morgan  Lewis,  soldier,  b.  in  Oswego
county,  N.  Y.,  8  March,  1822;  d.  in  Jersev  City,
N.  J.,  29  Dec,  1874.  He  settled  in  ^ew  Albany,
Ind.,  about  1843,  and  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the
U.  S.  army  in  1846,  rising  to  the  rank  of  orderly
sergeant,  but  resigned,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  was  engaged  in  the  steamboat  business.
He  then  re-entered  the  service,  having  raised  the
8th  Missouri  infantry,  a  regiment  whose  mem-
bers were  bound  by  an  oath  never  to  surrender.
He  was  chosen  its  colonel  in  July,  1861,  took  part
in  the  advance  of  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant's  army' to
Fort  Henry,  commanded  the  5th  brigade  of  the  3d
division  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  at  Fort
Donelson,  and  successfully  stormed  a  strong  posi-
tion of  the  enemy.  He  led  the  1st  briga<le  oi  the
same  army  at  Shiloh,  was  engaged  at  Corinth  and
Russell  House,  accompanied  Gen.  William  T.  Sher-
man to  Moscow,  Tenn.,  and  was  subsequently  in
charge  of  an  expedition  to  Holly  Springs,  Miss.,
and  Memphis,  Tenn.  He  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  in  July,  1862,  and  m^e  ex-
peditions and  reconnoissances  into  Mississippi  till
November  of  that  year,  when  he  wasplaced  in
command  of  the  2a  division  of  Gen.  William  T.
Sherman's  army,  and  was  severely  wounded  at
Vicksburg,  28  Dec,  1862.  He  assumed  his  com-
mand on  his  recovery  in  October,  1863,  and  was
engaged  at  Missionary  Ridge  in  the  movements  for
the  relief  of  Knoxville  and  in  the  Atlanta  cam-
paign. He  was  then  placed  in  charge  of  Vicksburg,
and,  by  his  stern  adherence  to  military  law,  brought
that  city  into  peace  and  order. He  was  sul^e-


SMITH


SMITH


581


quently  U.  S.  consul  at  Honolulu,  declined  the
govenionthip  of  Colonulo  territory,  and  be-
came a  counxol  in  Woriliiuffton,  I).  (\,  for  the  col-
lection of  claims.  At  the  lime  of  hiK  death  ho  was
connected  with  a  building  as»Mx;iation  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C.  Uun.  William  T.  Sherman  said  of  him  :
"He  waM  one  of  the  bravest  men  in  ai-ti<m  1  ever
knew."— His  brother,  OHej*  Alexander,  soldier,
b.  in  JcffiTson  county,  N.  Y..  2U  Sept.,  182ti ;  d.  in
Blo<jmingt<>n,  111.,  8  Nov.,  1870,  engaginl  in  the
dry-g(xxls  business  in  Cincinnati,  and  sub!MX{uently
in'BhMimington,  111.,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  was  the  proprietor  of  a  hotel  in  flie  last-
named  town.  Ho  became  captain  in  the  8th  Mis-
Bouri  volunteers  in  1861,  was  engagtxl  at  Fort
Henry,  Fort  I)onels<jn,  Shiloh,  and  Corinth,  and  Iw-
came  lieutenant-c«lonel  and  colonel  in  1802.  He  letl
his  regiment  at  the  tirst  attack  on  V'icksburg,  was
wounueil  at  Arkansas  Post,  and  in  the  capture  of
Vicksburg  rescued  Admiral  David  Porter  and  his
iron-<.'lads  when  they  were  surrounded  and  hemmed
in  by  the  enemy.  In  August,  1863,  ho  was  pro-
moted brigmlier-general  of  volunteers  "  for  gallant
and  meritorious  conduct  in  the  field."  He  com-
manded his  brigade  in  the  15th  army  corps  in  the
siege  of  Chattanooga  and  the  battle  of  Missionary
Ilidgc,  in  which  he  was  severely  wounded.  He  led
a  brigade  in  the  15th  corps  in  the  Atlanta  cam-
paign, was  transferred  to  the  command  of  the  3d
division  of  the  17th  army  corps,  fought  at  Atlanta,
and,  in  Sherman's  march  to  tne  sea,  engaged  in  all
the  important  movements,  especially  in  tne  opera-
tions in  and  about  Columbia,  S.  C.  After  the  sur-
render of  Gen.  Iloliert  E.  Lee  he  was  transferred
to  the  25th  army  corps,  became  major-general  of
volunteers  in  1865,  and  continued  in  the  service  till
'  1866,  when  he  resigned,  declining  the  commission
of  colonel  of  cavalry  in  the  regular  armv,  and  set-
tled in  Bloomington,  111.  He  was  a  defeated  can-
didate for  congress  in  1868,  was  second  assistant
postmaster-general  in  1869--'?2,  but  resigned  on
account  of  failing  health.  He  was  a  founder  of  the
Societv  of  the  Army  of  Tennessee.

SMtTH,  Nathan,  phvsician,  b.  in  Rehoboth,
Mass.,  13  Sept.,  1702 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  26
July,  1828.  He  enlisted  in  the  Vermont  militia
during  the  last  eighteen  months  of  the  Revolu-
tionary war,  and,  having  accompanied  his  father
to  an  unsettled  part  of  Vermont,  suljsequently  led
the  life  of  a  pioneer  and  hunter,  having  no  e<iuca-
tion  and  no  advantages.  He  decided  to  become  a
physician  when  he  was  twentv-four  years  of  age.
studied  under  Dr.  Josiah  Gooilhue,  and  practised
for  several  years  in  Cornish,  N.  11.,  when  he  en-
tered the  medical  department  of  Harvard  and
received  the  degree  of  M.  B.  in  1790,  Iwing  the
only  graduate  of  that  year  and  the  third  of  the
department.  At  that  time  the  practice  of  medicine
was  at  a  low  ebb  in  the  state,  and  physicians  were
poorly  educated  and  unskilful.  To  procure  bet-
ter advantages  for  them,  he  established  the  medical
department  of  Dartmouth  in  17U8,  was  ap{>ointed
its  professor  of  medicine,  and  for  many  years
tauj^ht  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  branches  of  the  pro-
fession unaided.  He  held  the  chair  of  anatomy
and  surgery  till  1810,  and  that  of  the  theory  and

Sractice  of  mitlicine  till  1813.  He  was  given  the
egree  of  A.  M.  by  Dartmouth  in  1798,  and  that
of  M.  D.  bv  that  college  in  1801  and  by  Harvanl
in  1811.  He  went  to  Great  Britain  about  180Ji
attended  lectures  in  Edinburgh  for  one  year,  and
on  his  return  resumeti  his  duties.  He  was  elected
professor  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  physics
and  8urger\'  in  the  medical  department  of  Yale  in
1818,  and  neld  the  chair  from  that  date  until  his


death,  alflti  delivering  courHefl  of  lectures  on  medi-
cine and  surgery  at  the  University  of  Vermont  in
1822- '5,  and  at  I^wdoin  on  the  thc<->ry  and  practice
of  medicine  in  1820-'5.  His  practice  extenueil  over
four  states,  and  while  he  was  conservative  in  his
inethtNls,  he  was  more  than  ordinarily  miocewful  as
an  o|>erator.  It  has  Iteen  assertcxl  that  he  was  the
first  in  this  country  to  |>erform  the  o[)erati<>n  of
extirpating  an  ovarian  tumor,  and  that  of  stuphylor-
raphy.  lie  devised  and  introduced  a  mode  of  am-
putating the  thigh  which,  although  resembling
methods  that  had  previously  been  employed,  ts
sufficiently  original  to  bear  his  name,  and  he  de-
veloped important  scientific  principl(>s  in  relation
to  the  pathology  of  necrosis,  on  which  he  founded
a  new  and  successful  mode  of  practice.  He  invent-
ed an  ap{>aratus  for  the  treatment  of  fractures,
and  a  mode  of  reducing  dislocations  of  the  hip.
He  published  '*  Practical  Essaj's  on  Typhus  Fever"
(New  York,  1824),  and  "  Medical  and  Surgical
Memoirs,"  edite<l,  with  addenda,  bv  his  son,  Na-
than Kyno  Smith  (Baltimore,  Md.,  1^31). — His  son,
Nathan  Ryno,  surgeon,  b.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  21
May,  1797;  d.  in  Baltimore.  Md.,  3  July.  1877.  was
gnuluated  at  Yale  in  1817,  and  studied  medicine  un-
der his  father  there,  receiving  his  degree  in  1820.
In  1824  he  began  the  practice  of  surgery  in  Burling-
ton, Vt.,  and  in  1825  ne  was  ap[)ointed  professor  of
surgery  and  anatomy  in  the  University  of  Ver-
mont. In  1827  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  sur-
gery in  the  medical  department  of  the  University
of  Maryland,  but  he  resigned  in  1828  and  l)ecame
professor  of  the  practice  of  medicine  in  Transyl-
vania university,  Lexington,  Ky.  In  1840  he  re-
sumed his  chair  in  the  University  of  Marjiand.
which  he  held  until  1870.  He  invented  an  instru-
ment for  the  easy  and  safe  performance  of  the
operation  of  lithotomy,  and  also  Smith's  anterior
splint  for  treatment  ol  fractures  of  the  thigh.  In
addition  to  articles  in  the  "  American  Journal  of
Medicine,"  Dr.  Smith  published  "  Physiological
Essay  on  Digestion"  (New  York,  1825);'"  Address
to  Medical  Graduates  of  the  University  of  Mary-
land "  (Baltimore,  1828) ;  "  Diseases  of  the  Internal
Ear,"  from  the  French  of  Jean  Antoine  Saissy,
with  a  supplement  (1829):  "Surgical  Anatomy  of
the  Arteries"  (1832-'5);  "Treatment  of  Fractures
of  the  Lower  Extremities  by  the  Use  of  the  An-
terior Suspensory  Apparatus  "  (1867) ;  and  a  small
volume  entitled  "  Legends  of  the  South."  under
the  fHMi-name  "  Viator."  —  Nathan  Ryno's  son,
Alan  Penneman,  physician,  b.  in  Baltimore.  Md«,
3  Feb.,  1840,  received  his  instruction  in  Balti-
more under  private  tuition,  and  was  graduated  in
1861  at  the  school  of  medicine  of  the  University  of
Maryland.  In  1868  he  was  elected  adjunct  pro-
fessor of  surgery  in  that  university,  and  in  1875
professor  of  surgery.  He  is  connected  with  nearly
all  the  hospitals  of  Baltimore  as  consulting  physi-
cian or  surgeon,  and  has  ixTformetl  the  ojieration
of  lithotomy  more  than  100  times,  suctvssfully  in
every  instance.  He  is  one  of  the  original  trustees
of  Johns  Hopkins  university,  and  is  a  member  of
manv  foreign  and  American  medical  societies.

SMITH,  Nathaniel,  jurist,  b.  in  Woodburr.
Conn..  6  Jan.,  1762;  d.  there.  9  March.  1822.  He
studied  law  under  Judge  Tapping  Reeve  at  Litch-
field. Conn.  From  1789  till  1795  he  was  a  member
of  the  legislature,  in  whose  deliU'rations  he  t«K)k  an
energetic  part  in  abolishing  slaven".  founding  the

fiublic-school  system,  and  settling  tlie  public  lands
>elonging  to  Connecticut.  From  1795  till  17J>9  he
was  a  memlxjr  of  c«ingress,  and  assisted  in  ratify-
ing the  Jay  treaty  with  Great  Britain,  which  cloeed
the  century. Mr.  Smith  declined  a  re-election  to


682


SMITH


congress  in  1799.  and,  after  six  years  in  the  state
senate,  was  raised  to  the  suprenje  bench  of  Connec-
ticut, where,  from  1806  till  1819,  he  formulated
decisions,  many  of  which  are  still  quoted.  He
was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  famous  Hartford
convention  in  1814,  to  which  his  own  great  char-
acter helped  to  give  weight,  and  the  pure  patriot-
ism of  whose  purpose  he  strenuously  defended  in
company  with  William  Prescott,  Stephen  Long-
fellow, ('hauncey  Goodrich,  James  Hillhouse,  and
Roger  Minot  Sherman.  "Judge  Smith,"  says
Goodrich  (Peter  Parley),  in  his  "Recollections  of  a
Lifetime,"  "  was  regarded  by  Connecticut  as  one
of  the  intellectual  giants  of  his  time."  Gideon  H.
Hollister,  in  his  "History  of  Connecticut,"  de-
scribes him  as  "one  whom  the  God  of  nations
chartered  to  be  great  by  the  divine  prerogative  of
genius." — His  brother  Nathan,  senator,  b.  in  Wood-
bury, Conn,.  8  Jan.,  1769  ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
6  I)ec.,  1835,  also  studied  law  with  Judge  Reeve,
of  Litchfield,  and,  moving  to  New  Haven,  became
one  of  the  most  distinguished  advocates  in  New

England.  He  was  a
member  of  the  leg-
islature for  many
years,  and  took  an
active  part  in  dis-
solving the  connec-
tion between  church
and  state  in  Con-
necticut and  in
moulding  the  new
state  constitution
that  was  adopted  in
1818.  As  an  ear-
nest member  and
councillor  of  the
Episcopal  church,
he  advocated  suc-
cessfully her  claims
to  an  equal  rec-
ognition with  all
other  religious  bod-
ies, and  was  one  of  the  founders  and  incorporators
of  Washington  (now  Trinity)  college.  He  was  for
several  years  U.  S,  district  attorney,  and  in  1825
the  opponent  of  Oliver  Wolcott  for  the  governor-
ship, but  was  defeated.  In  May,  1832,  he  was
elected  senator  to  succeed  Samuel  A.  Foote,  He
at  once  took  an  active  part  in  the  debates  of  the
senate,  and  at  his  death,  which  took  place  sudden-
ly, was  even  more  conspicuous  for  his  private  vir-
tues than  for  his  public  services.  It  was  said  that
at  his  funeral  in  the  senate  chamber  every  promi-
nent public  man  of  the  day,  including  President
Jackson  and  his  cabinet,  was  present. — Truman,
senator,  a  nephew  of  Nathaniel  and  Nathan  Smith,
b.  in  Woodburv,  Conn.,  27  Nov.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Stam-
ford, Conn.,  3  May,  1884.  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1815,  studied  law,' and  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  1831-'4, of  congress  in  1839-49,  and  U.  S.
senator  from  Connecticut  in  1849-'54,  when  he
suddenly  resigned  from  weariness  of  public  life.
He  was  remarkable  for  his  wide,  though  silent,  in-
fluence in  national  politics,  having  taken  a  de-
cisive part  in  the  nomination  of  Gen.  Zachary
Taylor  for  president  in  1848.  He  conducted  that
presidential  campaign  as  chairman  of  the  Whig
national  committee,  and  was  offered  a  post  in
President  Taylor's  cabinet,  which  he  declined.  He
was,  in  conjunction  with  Daniel  Webster,  the
foremost  opponent  of  the  "  spoils  system"  in  con-
gress. He  strenuously  comoated  the  views  of
Stephen  A.  Douglas  in  the  passage  of  the  Kansas-
Nebraska  bill. After  resigning  from  the  senate,


^yfaJ^a^d^^


SMITH

Mr,  Smith  practised  law  in  New  York  until  he  was
appointed  by  President  Lincoln  in  1862  judge  of
the  court  of  arbitration,  and  afterward  of  the
court  of  claims.  He  was  also  legal  adviser  to  the
government  in  many  questions  arising  out  of  the
civil  war.  He  wrote  one  book,  "  An  Examination
of  the  Question  of  Anjesthesia"  (Boston,  1859),
published  as  "An  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  Mod-
ern Anaisthesia"  (Hartford,  1867).  and  published
many  separate  speeches.  Mr.  Smith  was  a  man  of
giant  frame,  and  lived  to  be  nearly  ninety-three
years  old. — Perry,  senator,  of  the  same  ancestry,
b.  in  Woodbury,  Conn.,  12  May,  1783 ;  d.  in  New
Milford,  Conn.,  8  June,  1852,  studied  law,  and
made  his  residence  in  New  Milford,  where  he  lived
during  the  remainder  of  his  days.  Becoming  well
known  in  his  profession,  he  was  chosen  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1822-'4,  and  again  in  1835-'6,
and  in  the  mean  time  was  judge  of  the  probate
court.  In  1837  he  was  elected  U,  S.  senator  from
Connecticut,  serving  till  1843.  He  resigned  the
practice  of  his  profession  on  going  to  Washington,
and  never  resumed  it.  He  published  a  "Speech
on  Bank  Depositaries" (1838). — Of  Nathan's CTand-
sons,  the  Rev.  Cornelius  Bishop  Smith,  D.  D.,  has
been  rector  of  St.  James  church.  New  York  city,
since  1869,  and  his  younger  brother,  the  Rev.
Alexander  Mackay-Smith  (o.  v.),  was  first  arch-
deacon of  the  diocese  of  New  York.

SMITH,  Oliver,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Hatfield,
Mass.,  in  January,  1766 ;  d.  there,  22  Dec,  1845.
He  engaged  in  farming  at  an  early  age,  and  ac-
quired large  wealth  by  stock-raising.  He  was  a
magistrate  for  forty  years,  twice  a  representative
to  the  legislature,  and  in  1820  a  member  of  the
State  constitutional  convention.  He  amassed  a
large  fortune,  which  he  bequeathed  to  establish
the  "Smith  Charities,"  a  unique  system  of  be-
nevolence, now  holding  $1,000,000,  the  interest  of
which  is  expended  in  marriage-portions  to  poor
and  worthy  young  couples, — llis  niece,  Sopnia,
founder  of  Smith  college,  b,  in  Hatfield,  Mass.,  27
Aug.,  1796;  d.  there,  12  June,  1870,  received  few
early  advantages,  and  led  a  life  of  retirement  in
her  native  village  until,  at  the  age  of  sixty-five,
she  inherited  a  large  fortune  from  her  brother
Austin.  She  then  determined  to  found  a  college
for  the  higher  education  of  women,  and  passed  the
remainder  of  her  life  in  perfecting  plans  for  its
organization.  By  the  terms  of  her  will  the  insti-
tution was  established  at  Northampton,  Mass.,  and
endowed  with  $387,468.  It  was  opened  in  the
autumn  of  1875,  and  its  charter  was  the  first  that
was  ever  issued  by  the  state  of  Massachusetts  to
an  institution  for  the  education  of  women.  Miss
Smith  also  bequeathed  $75,000  to  the  town  of
Hatfield  for  the  endowment  of  a  school  prepara-
tory to  Smith  college.

SMITH,  Oliver  Hampton,  senator,  b.  on
Smith's  island,  near  Trenton,  N.  J.,  23  Oct.,  1794 ;
d.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  19  March,  1859.  He  received
scanty  early  education,  emigrated  to  Indiana  in
1817,  and  was  licensed  to  practise  law  in  1820,  He
was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1822,  prosecut-
ing attorney  for  the  3d  judicial  district  of  Indiana
in  1824,  and  served  in  congress  in  1827-'9,  having
been  chosen  as  a  Jackson  Democrat.  He  then  re-
sumed the  practice  of  his  profession,  in  which  he
took  high  rank,  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  as  a
Whig  in  1836,  served  one  term,  and  was  chairman
of  the  committee  on  public  lands.  He  was  de-
feated in  the  next  senatorial  canvass,  settled  in
Indianapolis,  largely  engaged  in  railroad  enter-
prises, and  was  the  chief  constructor  of  the  Indi-
anapolis and  Bellefontaine  road. lie  published


SMITH


SMITH


088


•♦  R«ool  left  ions  of  a  Conjfrwwional  Life  "  (Cincln-
nati,  1KH4),  and  "  Early  Indiana  Trials,  Slcetohen,
and  Kciitiniscenoea"  (1857).

SMITH,  Pewlfor  Frazer,  wddier,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia. I'a,,  in  November,  1798;  d.  in  Kort  Ii«'av-
cnworth,  Kan.,  17  May,  1858.  His  grandfather.
Col.  Itt)bert  Smith,  wa»  an  ofllwr  in  the  Hevolu-
tion.and  his  nintenial  pnindfather,  Persifor  Fnuer,
wan  a  lieiiteniint-cohint'l  in  the  same  army.  Persifor
was  gnuluttted  at  Princ-etxin  in  1815,  studied  law
under  Charles  ("hnuneey,  and  M'ttletl  in  Newl>rleans,
La. At  the  l)c>:inninjf  of  the  Florida  war.U'injf  ad-

J'litant-^eneral  of  the  slate,  he  volunteeriHl  under
len.  FxTmund  P.  (Jaines  as  colonel  of  liouisiana  vol-
unteers and  si'rved  in  the  eam[«igns  of  183(1  and
1888.  He  was  appointeil  e<)li>nel  of  a  rifle  rejfi-
ment  in  May,  1H4(S,  commanded  a  brieado  of  ni-
fantry  from  SepteinU'r  of  that  year  till  the  close
of  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  received  the  brevet
of  brijjmlier-jfeneral,  U.  S.  army,  for  his  service
at  Monterey,  and  major-f;eneral  in  the  same  for
Churubusco'  and  Contreras,  20  Aug.,  1847.  The
official  report  of  the  latter  battle  records  "  that  he
closely  directed  the  whole  attack  in  front  with
his  habitual  coolness  and  ability."  He  also  fought
at  Cha|>ulte[)ec  and  at  the  Bi>len  gate,  and  in  the
latter  l>attle  is  desc-ribed  by  Gen.  Winfield  Scott
as  "cool.  uneml)arra.ssed,  and  ready."  He  was
commissioner  of  armistice  with  Mexico  in  October,
1847,  afterward  commnnde«l  the  2d  division  of  the
U.  S.  army,  became  military  and  civil  governor  of
Vera  Cruz  in  Mav,  1848,  and  subsequently  ha<l
charge  of  the  dejMirtments  of  California  and  I'exas.
He  was  brevetted  major-general,  V.  S.  army,  in
1849,  api)ointe<l  to  the  full  rank  of  brigatlier-gen-
eral,  30  I)ec.,  1850,  and  ordered  to  Kansas.  Just
before  his  death  he  was  placed  in  coiniuHnd  of  the
Utah  expedition. — His  cousin,  Perslfor  Frazer,
lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1808 :  d.  in  West
Chester,  Pa.,  17  May,  1882,  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1823,  studie<l  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1829,  became  clerk  of
the  orphan's  court  of  Chester  county.  Pa.,  in  183.5,
prosecuting  attorney  for  Delaware  county  in  1839,
served  in  the  Pennsylvania  legislature  in  18G2-'4,
and  became  state  rejH)rter  in  1805.  He  published
"  Forms  of  Procedure  "  (Philadelphia,  1802),  and
"  Reports  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Pennsylvania  "
(32  vols.,  18e5-'82).

SMITH,  Peter,  merchant,  b.  in  Greenbush,
Rockland  co.,  N.  Y..  15  Nov.,  1708;  d.  in  Schenec-
tady, N.  Y.,  13  April,  1837.  His  ancestors  came
from  Holland.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  l)ecame  a
clerk  in  an  import ing-house  in  New  York  city,  and
afterward  he  was  apartner  of  John  Jacob  Astor  in
the  fur  business.  Tliey  Iwught  the  furs  of  Indians
in  the  northern  part  of  the  state,  and  Smith,  who
spoke  the  Indian  language,  established  a  trading-
post  on  what  is  known  as  the  Bleecker  projjerty  at
Utica.  When  the  partnership  was  dissolved,  and
Mr.  Ast^r  bought  real  estate  in  New  York  city.
Mr.  Smith  purehase<l  large  tracts  in  Oneida,  Che-
nango, Mauison,  and  other  counties.  In  some
cases  these  included  whole  townships,  and  the
total  amount  was  nearly  a  million  acres.  His
first  wife,  whom  he  marrie<l  in  1792,  was  Elizabeth,
daughter  of  Col.  James  Livingston.  His  manu-
script jounials,  still  in  existence,  contain  interest-
ing descriptions  of  his  journeys  amon^  the  In-
dians. In  his  later  years  he  was  deeply  mtereste<l
in  religion,  and  s{>ent  considerable  sums  for  the
distribution  of  tracts. — His  son.  Cierrit,  philan-
thropist, b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  6  March.  1797;  d.  in
New  York  city,  28  Dec.,  1874,  was  graduated  at
Hamilton  college  in  1818,  and  devoted  himself  to


^ie-uw%-^^^A«^»^^-''v^


the  care  of  his  father's  estate,  a  large  Part  of  which
was  given  to  him  when  he  attained  iiis  majority.
At  the  age  of  tifty-six  he  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted  to  the  bar.
He  was  ek-cted  to
congress  as  an  in-
de|>endent  candi-
date in  1852,
but  resigned  after
serving  through
Dtie  session.  Dur-
ing his  boyh<KMl
slavery  still  exist-
wl  in  the  state  of
New  York,  and
his  father  wax  a
slave-holder.  One
of  the  earliest
forms  of  the  phi-
lanthropy that
marked  his  long
life  appeared  in
his  opposition  to
the  institution  of
slavery, and his

friendship  for  the  oppressed  race.  He  acted  for
ten  years  with  the  American  colonization  society,
contributing  largely  to  its  funds,  until  he  be-
came convinced  that  it  was  merely  a  scheme  of
the  slave-holders  for  getting  the  free  colore<l  peo-
ple out  of  the  country.  Tnenceforth  he  gave  his
support  to  the  Anti-slavery  soc-iety,  not  only  writ-
ing for  the  cause  and  contributing  money,  but
taking  part  in  conventions,  and  personally  assist-
ing fugitives.  He  was  teni|>erate  in  all  the  dis-
cussion, holding  that  the  north  was  a  partner  in
the  guilt,  and  in  the  event  of  emancipation  with-
out war  should  bear  a  portion  of  the  ex|»ense :  but
the  attempt  to  force  slavery  upon  Kansas  con-
vinced him  that  the  day  for  peatreful  emanci|wtion
was  past,  and  he  then  a<Ivocate<l  whatever  measure
of  force  might  be  necessarj'.  He  gave  large  sums
of  money  to  send  free-soil  settlers  to  Kansas,  and
was  a  |H»rsonal  friend  of  John  Brown,  to  whom  he
hatl  given  a  farm  in  Ussex  county,  N.  Y.,  that  he
might  instruct  a  <"olony  of  colored  {)eople,  to  whom
Mr.  Smith  had  given  farms  in  the  same  neighlwr-
hood.  He  was  supposed  to  be  implicated  in  the
Harper's  Ferry  affair,  but  it  was  shown  that  he  had
only  given  (>ecuniary  aid  to  Brown  as  he  had  to
scores  of  ot Her  men,  and  so  far  as  he  knew  Brown's
plans  had  tried  to  dissuade  him  from  them.  Mr.
Smith  was  deeply  interestetl  in  the  cause  of  tem-

P -ranee,  and  organized  an  anti-<lramshop  j>arty  in
ebruary,  1842.  In  the  village  of  PeterlK)ro.  Madi-
son CO.,  where  he  had  his  home,  he  built  a  good
hotel,  and  gave  it  rent-free  to  a  tenant  w^ho  agreed
that  no  liquor  should  l)e  sold  there.  This  is  be-
lieved to  have  been  the  first  temperance  hotel  ever
established.  But  it  was  not  peciiniarilv  suceessfuL
He  hatl  lx»en  nominnte<l  for  pn'sident  by  an  indus-
trial congress  at  Philadelphia  in  1848,  and  by  the
land-reformers  in  1850,  but  declined.  In  1840,  and
again  in  1858,  he  was  nominatinl  for  governor  of
New  York.  The  last  nomination,  on  a  platform  of
abolition  and  prohibition,  he  accepteu,  and  can-
vassed the  state.  In  the  election  he  received  5,446
votes.  Among  the  other  reforms  in  which  he  was
intereste<l  were  those  relating  to  the  proj)erty-
rights  of  married  women  and  female  suffrage  and
abstention  from  tolwcco.  In  ri'ligion  he  was  origi-
nally a  Presbyterian,  but  became  very  lilieral  in  his
views,  and  built  a  non-sectarian  church  in  Peter-
boro,  in  which  he  often  occupied  the  pulpit  himself.
He  could  not  conceive  of  religion  as  anything  apart


684


SMITH


SMITH


fiom  the  affairs  of  daily  life,  and  in  one  of  his  pub-
lished letters  he  wrote :  "  No  man's  religion  is  let-
ter than  his  politics;  his  religion  is  pure  whose
politics  are  pure;  whilst  his  religion  is  rascally
whose  politics  are  rascally."  He  disbelieved  in  the
right  of  men  to  monojx)lize  land,  and  gave  awav
thousands  of  acres  of  that  which  he  hatl  inherited,
some  of  it  to  colleges  and  charitable  institutions,
and  some  in  the  form  of  small  farms  to  men  who
would  settle  upon  them.  He  also  gave  away  by
far  the  greater  part  of  his  income,  for  charitable

Surposes,  to  institutions  and  individuals.  In  the
nancial  crisis  of  1837  he  borrowed  of  John  Jacob
Astor  a  quarter  of  a  million  dollars,  on  his  verbal
agreement  to  give  Mr.  Astor  mortgages  to  that
amount  on  real  estate.  The  mortgages  were  exe-
cuted as  soon  as  Mr.  Smith  reached  his  home,  but
through  the  carelessness  of  a  clerk  were  not  de-
livered, and  Mr.  Astor  waited  six  months  before
inquiring  for  them.  Mr.  Smith  had  for  many
yeai-s  anticipated  that  the  system  of  slavery  would
be  brought  to  an  end  only  through  violence,  and
when  the  civil  war  began  he  hastened  to  the  sup-
port of  the  government  with  his  money  and  his
mfluence.  At  a  war-meeting  in  April,  1861,  he
made  a  speech  in  which  he  said :  "  The  end  of
American  slavery  is  at  hand.  The  first  gun  fired
at  Port  Sumter  announced  the  fact  that  the  last
fugitive  slave  had  been  returned  ....  The  armed
men  who  go  south  should  go  more  in  sorrow  than
in  anger.  The  sad  necessity  should  be  their  only
excuse  for  going.  They  must  still  love  the  south ;
we  must  all  still  love  her.  As  her  chiefs  shall,  one
after  another,  fall  into  our  hands,  let  us  be  re-
strained from  dealing  revengefully,  and  moved  to
deal  tenderly  with  tnem,  by  our  remembrance  of
the  large  share  which  the  north  has  had  in  blind-
ing them."  In  accordance  with  this  sentiment,  two
years  after  the  war,  he  united  with  Horace  Greeley
and  Cornelius  Vanderbilt  in  signing  the  bail-bond
of  Jefferson  Davis.  At  the  outset  he  offered  to
equip  a  regiment  of  colored  men,  if  the  govern-
ment would  accept  them.  Mr.  Smith  left  an  estate
of  about  f  1.000,000,  having  given  away  eight  times
that  amount  during  his  life.  He  wrote  a  great
deal  for  print,  most  of  which  appeared  in  the  form
of  pampnlets  and  broadsides,  printed  on  his  own
press  in  Peterboro.  His  publications  in  book-form
were  "  Speeches  in  Congress "  (1855) ;  "  Sermons
and  Speeches"  (1861);  "The  Religion  of  Reason"
(1864) ;  "  Speeches  and  Letters  ^'  (1865)  ;  "  The
Theologies "  (2d  ed.,  1866) ;  "  Nature  the  Base  of
a  Free  Theology"  (1867);  and  "Correspondence
with  Albert  Barnes  "  (1868).  His  authorized  biog-
raphy has  been  written  by  Octavius  B.  Frothing-
ham  (New  York,  1878).

SMITH,  Preston,  soldier,  b.  in  Giles  county,
Tenn.,  25  Dec,  1823 ;  d.  in  Georgia,  20  Sept.,  1863.
He  received  his  early  education  at  a  country  school,
and  at  Jackson  college,  Columbia,  Tenn.  He  stud-
ied law  in  Columbia,  and  after  practising  there  for
several  years  removed  to  Waynesboro',  Tenn.,  and
subsequently  to  Memphis.  He  became  colonel  of
the  154th  Tennessee  regiment  of  militia,  which  was
afterward  mustered  into  the  service  of  the  Confed-
eracy, and  he  was  promoted  to  brigadier-general,
27  Oct.,  1862.  He  was  severely  wounded  at  the  bat-
tle of  Shiloh,  and  commanded  his  brigade  under
Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  at  Richmond,  Ky.  He  was
killed,  with  nearly  all  his  staff,  by  a  sudden  volley
during  a  night  attack  at  Chickamauga,  Ga.

SMITH,  Richard,  journalist,  b.  in  the  south  of
Ireland,  30  Jan.,  182^.  His  father,  a  farmer  of
Scottish  ancestry,  died  when  Richard  was  seven-
teen years  old,  and  the  widow  and  her  son  emigrated


to  this  country  and  settled  in  1841  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio.  Richard  apprenticed  himself  to  a  carjienter
and  builder  until  he  could  secure  a  better  opening.
On  reaching  his  majority,  he  gained  employment
on  the  "  Price  Current,"  of  which  he  soon  became
proprietor,  and  greatly  improved  it,  making  it
virtually  a  new  publication.  He  accepted  also  the
agency  of  the  newly  organized  Associated  press,
and  was  the  first  man  in  Ohio  to  transmit  a  presi-
dential message  over  the  wires.  About  1854  he
purchased  an  interest  in  the  Cincinnati  "Gazette,"
the  oldest  daily  in  the  city,  which  was  then  in  a
languishing  condition  from  lack  of  proper  manage-
ment. Selling  the  "  Price  Current,"  he  concen-
trated all  his  energy  on  the  "  Gazette,"  which  be-
came prosperous  under  his  direction,  especially
during  the  civil  war.  But  in  1880  its  interests
and  those  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Commercial  "  indi-
cated the  financial  and  political  wisdom  of  their
union,  and  accordingly  tne  first  of  the  following
year  they  were  consolidated  under  the  name  of
the  "  Commercial  Gazette."  Richard  Smith  is  the
vice-president  of  the  new  company.  He  exercises
much  influence,  journalistic  and  political,  through-
out Ohio.  Though  he  is  often  jocularly  referred
to  as  "  Deacon,"  he  is  only  a  lay  member  of  the
Presbyterian  church.

SMITH,  Richard  Somers,  educator,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa,,  30  Oct.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Annapolis,
Md.,  23  Jan.,  1877.  He  was  gratluated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1834,  but  resigned  from
the  army  in  1836,  was  assistant  engineer  of  the
Philadelphia  and  Columbia  railroad  company  in
1836-'7,  of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal  in
1839-'40,  and  projected  several  other  important
railroads.  He  was  reappointed  in  the  U.  S.  army
in  the  latter  year  with  tne  rank  of  2d  lieutenant,
was  assistant  and  afterward  full  professor  of  draw-
ing at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1846-'52,  and
was  then  transferred  to  the  4th  artillery,  becom-
ing quartermaster  and  treasurer,  but  in  1856  he
again  resigned.  He  was  professor  of  mathematics,
engineering,  and  drawing  in  Brooklyn  collegiate
and  polytechnic  institute  in  1855-'9,  director  of
Cooper  institute.  New  York  city,  for  two  years,
was  reappointed  in  the  army  as  major  of  the  12th
U.  S.  infantry  in  1861,  and  served  as  mustering
and  disbursing  officer  in  Maryland  and  Wisconsin
in  1861-'2.  He  then  took  part  in  the  Rappahan-
nock campaign  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,
participating  in  the  battle  of  Chancellorsville,  Va.,
2-4  May,  1863.  He  resigned  in  the  same  month  to
become  president  of  Girard  college,  Pa.,  which
post  he  held  till  1868.  For  the  next  two  years  he
was  professor  of  engineering  in  the  Polytechnic
college  of  Pennsylvania,  and  from  1870  till  his
death  he  was  at  the  head  of  the  department  of
drawing  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy.  Columbia
gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1857.  He  pub-
lished a  "  Manual  of  Topographical  Drawing "
(Philadelphia,  1854),  and  a  work  on  "Linear  Per-
spective Drawing"  (1857).

SMITH,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Londonderry,
Ireland,  in  1723 ;  d.  in  Rockville,  Pa.,  15  Apnl,
1793.  His  father  emigrated  to  this  country  when
the  son  was  seven  years  of  age,  settling  in  Chester
county.  Pa.  Robert  received  a  classical  education
from  Rev.  Samuel  Blair  at  Fogg's  Manor  school,
Chester  county.  Pa.,  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1749,  and  from  1751  till  his  death  was  pastor  of
the  Presbyterian  church  in  Pequea.  Pa.,  a  part  of
the  time  supplying  the  church  at  Leacock.  Shortly
after  his  settlement  in  Pequea  he  founded  a  clas-
sical and  theological  seminary,  which  enjoyed  a
high  reputation,  and  was  one  of  the  jnost  popu-


SMITH


SMITH


680


lar  iirhor)U  in  Pennsylvnnin  and  Mnrvlnncl.  He
re<«eiv«l  tho  degree  of  I).  I>.  from  Princeton  in
1760,  WHM  an  nvenieer  of  that  college  from  \7T2
till  his  death,  and  in  ITU  I  was  second  mfMlcmtor
of  the  p'neral  Jifweinbly  of  the  Presbyterian  church
in  the  I'nite^l  States  In  174U  he  nmrri«*<I  Kliza-
beth,  sister  of  Kev.  Sjimuel  Hlair. — Their  son,
Sunael  Stanho|H>,  clcrcvman,  h.  in  Pe(]uea,  i'a.,
16 March,  1750;  d.  in Princeton,  N.  J.,  21 Aujr.,

1819,  was  gradual -
e<i  at  Princeton  in
176U,  became  an  as-
sistant in '  his  fa-
ther's 8C'ho<)l,  was
tutor  at  Princeton
in  1770-'3,  while
studying  theology
there,  and  in  1774
was  ordained  to
the  ministry  of
the  Presbyterian
church.  Hefalxired
as  a  missionary  in
western  Virginia
for  the  next  year,
became  first  presi-
dent of  Hampden
Sidney  college  in
1775,  and  held  office
y^  y^  ^  till  1779,  when he

/->  *-yZ  <:X-^^-/^<ir  '.^  accepted  the  chair
^--^a^*^V^Z>^^CP>rvu/Xr  of  Aioral  philoso-
phy at  Princeton.
At  that  date  the  college  was  in  a  deplorable  condi-
tion from  the  ravages  of  the  Revolution ;  the  stu-
dents were  dispersed  and  the  buildings  were  bunied.
'  Dr.  Smith  made  great  exertions  and  many  pecu-
niary sacrificres  to  restore  it  to  prosperity.  He  ac-
cepted in  17853  the  additional  chair  of  theology,
and  in  1786  the  office  of  vice-president  of  the  col-
lege. He  was  a  member  of  the  committee  to  draw
up  a  system  of  government  for  the  Presbyterian
church  in  1780.  and  in  1795  succt»eded  Dr.  John
Witherspoon  (one  of  whose  daughters  he  had  mar-
ried) as  president  of  the  college,  holding  office  till
1812.  Vale  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1783,
and  Harvanl  that  of  LL.  I),  in  1810.  As  a  preach-
er Dr.  Smith  was  |>opular  and  eloquent.  He
published  "  Essay  on  the  Causes  of  the  Variety  of
Complexion  and  Figure  of  the  Human  Species"
(Phila«lelphia,  1787);  "  Sermons"  (Newark,  1799);
"  Lectures  on  the  Evidences  of  Christian  Religion  "
(Philadelphia,  1809);  "  I^ectures  on  Moral  and
Political  Philosophy"  (2  vols.,  Trenton,  N.  J.,
1812);  and  "  Comprehensive  Views  of  Natural  and
Revealed  Religion  "  (New  Brunswick.  N.  J.,  1815).
Aft«»r  his  death  appeare<l  six  of  his  sermons  with  a
brief  memoir  (2  vols.,  Philmlelphia,  1821). — Another
son  of  Robert,  John  Blair,  clergvman,  b.  in
Pequea,  Pa.,  12  June,  1750;  d.  in  Phihulelphia.
Pa..  22  Aug..  1799,  was  gra4luated  at  Princeton  in
1773,  stu<lie«l  theology  under  his  brother,  Samuel
S.,  at  Hampden  Si«lney,  Va.,  an«l  in  1779  succeeiled
him  as  presitient  of  that  college.  He  soon  became
celebrated  for  his  pulpit  oratory.  Dr.  Addison
Alexander  says  of  him :  "  In  fierson  he  was  about
the  mid<lle  size,  his  hair  was  uncommonly  black,
divided  at  the  top  and  fell  on  each  side  of  his  face.
His largt! blue eye,  of  o[K«n expression,  was so

f>iercing  that  it  was  common  to  say,  *  Dr.  Smith
ooked  you  thnmgh.'"  He  was  call'wl  to  the  3*1
Presbyterian  church  of  Philadelphia  in  1791,  and
thence  to  the  presidency  of  Union  college  upon  its
foundation  in  1795,  biit  in  1799  n>turned  to  his
former  charge  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  died  of


the  epidemic  that  was  then  raging,  lie  puir
lished  "The  Enlargement  of  Christ's  Kingilom,"  a
sennon  (Alljanv.  N.  V..  17t»7). — John  Blair's  grand-
son. CharleH  VerrUHon,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  24  April.  1807;  d.  in  Savannah,  Tenn.,
25  April,  I8r>2,  was  the  son  of  Dr.  Samuel  Blair
Smith,  assistant  surgwai.  U.  .S.  army.  His  maternal
gnindfafher,  ElH'nezer  Ferguson,  of  Pennsylvania,
was  a  colonel  in  the  Continental  army. He  was

f^nuluated  at  the  U.  S.  militarv  academy  in  1826,
Nx-ame  2*1  lieutenant  in  the  2'1  artillery,  and  was
promote*!  1st  lieutenant,  :M  May,  18:i2,  and  captain,
«  July,  1838,  in  the  same  regiment.  He  s(>rved  at
the  military  academy  fnjm  1829  till  1842,  as  assist-
ant instructor  of  infantry  tactless  in  183^*81,  ad-
jutant in  18!il-'8,  and  a.s  commandant  of  cadets
an«l  instructor  of  infantry  tactics  till  1  Seiit.,  1842.
He  was  with  the  army  of  tien.  Zachary  Taylor  in
the  militarv  oc-cupation  of  Texas  in  1845- '0,  and
was  placed  in  command  of  fourcomi>anies  of  artil-
lery, acting  as  infantry,  which  throughout  the  war
that  followed  was  famous  as"Smitn's  light  bat-
talion." When  in  March,  1840,  Gen.  Taylor  crossed
Colorado  river,  the  |)assage  of  which,  it  was  be-
lieved, would  be  dispute*!  by  the  Mexicans,  this
battalion  forme*l  the  a«lvance.  He  was  present  at
I  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto  and  Ri>saca  de  la  Palma,
and  for  "gallant  and  distinguished  conduct"  in
these  two  affairs  he  received  the  brevet  of  major.
At  the  battle  of  Monterey,  Maj.  Smith  was  in  com-
mand of  the  storming  party  on  F'ederation  hill,
[  which,  in  the  words  of  Gen.  Worth,  was  "most
'  gallantly  carried."  For  his  conduct  in  the  several
!  conflicts  at  Monterey  he  received  the  brevet  of
lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  present  at  Vera  Cruz,
Cerro  Gordo,  San  Antonio,  and  Churubusco,  and
in  these  operations  he  commande*!  and  *lirected  his
light  battalion  with  characteristic  gallantry  and
ability.  For  his
conduct  in  the
iMttles  of  Con-
treras  and  Chu-
rubusco he  re-
ceived the  bre-
vet of  colonel,
20  Aug.,  1847.
He  was  present
at  the  storming
of  Chapulte()ec
and  the  assault
and  capture  of
the  city  of  Mexi-
co, and  was
again  honorably
mentioned  in
despatches.  In
1849-'51  he  was
a  member  of  a

boanl  of  officers  ^ ^  /^^ • /r  >^

to  devise  a  c*jm-  C .  c7T"<^^*-v.^-'^i

plete  system  of  ^

instruction for

siege,  garrison,  sea-coast,  and  mountain  artillery,
which  was  adopted,  10  May,  1851,  for  the  service
of  the  United  States.  He  was  promoted  major  of
the  1st  artillery.  25  Nov.,  18.54.  and  in  1855,  on  the
organization  of  the  new  10th  regiment  of  infant-
ry, he  was  made  its  first  lieutenant-colonel.  He
c«)mmand*Hl  the  Red  river  exptnlition  in  1856,  en-
gage*!  in  the  Utah  ex|>e<litioii  in  1857-'61,  ami  for
a  time  was  in  command  of  the  Defwrtment  of
Utah.  At  the  lM>ginning  of  the  disturlwnces  that
pn>ce*led  the  civil  war  he  was  niaced  in  charge
of  the  city  and  defiartment  of  Washington,  D.  u.
On  1  Aug.,  1861,  ho  was  appointed  brigadier-gen-


686


SMITH


SMITH


eral  of  volunteers,  and  ordered  to  Kentucky.  The
next  month  he  became  colonel  of  the  8d  U.  S.  in-
fantry, and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  National
forces  then  at  Paducah.  He  acquired  reputation
as  an  adroit  tactician  and  skilful  commander  in
the  operations  about  Fort  Henry  and  Fort  Donel-
son.  In  the  severe  fight  for  the  possession  of  Fort
Donelson  he  commanded  the  division  that  held  the
left  of  the  National  investing  lines,  and,  lemling
it  in  person,  he  stormed  and  captured  all  the  high
ground  on  the  Confederate  right  that  commanded
the  fort.  He  was  then  ordered  to  conduct  the  new
movement  up  Tennessee  river,  arrived  at  Savan-
nah, about  13  March,  with  a  large  fleet,  t(K)k  com-
mand of  that  city,  and  prepared  the  advance  upon
Shiloh.  On  22"  March,  1862,  he  was  promoted
major-general  of  volunteers,  but  the  exposure  to
which  he  had  been  already  subjected  aggravated  a
chronic  disease,  which  ended  his  life  soon  after  his
arrival  in  Savannah.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman
says  of  him  in  his  "  Memoirs  " :  "  He  was  adjutant
of  the  military  academy  during  the  early  part  of
my  career  there,  and  afterward  commandant  of  ca-
dets. He  was  a  very  handsome  and  soldierly  man,
of  great  experience,  and  at  the  battle  of  Donelson
had  acted  with  so  much  personal  bravery  that  to
him  many  attributed  the  success  of  the  assault."

SMITH,  Robert,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  the  county
of  Norfolk,  England,  25  June,  1732;  d.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  28  Oct.,  1801.  He  entered  Goreville  and
Caius  college,  Cambridge,  was  graduated  in  1753,
and  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  university.  He
was  ordained  deacon,  7  March,  1756,  by  the  bishop
of  Ely,  and  priest,  21  Dec,  1756,  by  the  same  bish-
op, lie  came  to  this  country  in  1757,  was  assistant
minister  of  St.  Philip's  church.  Charleston,  for  two
years,  and  became  rector  in  1759.  Though  he  ad-
hered to  the  crown  early  in  the  Revolution,  he  be-
came an  ardent  patriot,  and  at  one  time  joined  the
ranks  of  the  Continental  army  as  a  private.  On
the  capture  of  Charleston  by  the  British  in  1780,
Mr.  Smith  was  banished  to  Philadelphia.  For  a
brief  period  he  had  charge  of  St.  Paul's  parish.
Queen  Anne  county,  Md.,  but  he  returned  to
Charleston  in  1783  and  opened  an  academy,  which
was  chartered  in  1786  as  South  Carolina  college.
Of  this  institution  he  was  president  until  1798.
He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1789.  He  was  unanimously
elected  in  1795  to  be  the  first  bishop  of  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church  in  South  Carolina,  and
was  consecrated  in  Christ  church,  Philadelphia,
14  Sept.,  1795.  Bishop  Smith,  though  an  excellent
scholar  and  very  acceptable  preacher,  made  no
contributions  in  print  to  church  literature  or
otherwise.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest  members  of
the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.

SMITH,  Roswell,  publisher,  b.  in  Lebanon,
Conn.,  30  March,  1829.  He  was  educated  at  Brown,
in  1850  married  Miss  Ellsworth,  granddaughter  of
Chief-Justice  Oliver  Ellsworth,  studied  law,  and
for  nearly  twenty  years  practised  in  Lafayette,
Ind.  Mr.  Smith  came  in  1870  to  New  York  city,
where,  in  connection  with  Dr.  Josiah  G.  Holland
and  Charles  Scribner,  he  established  "  Scribner's
Monthly "  (now  the  "  Century  Magazine  ").  In
1873  he  began  the  publication  of  "  St.  Nicholas,"
a  magazine  for  children.  The  first  organization
was  under  the  firm-name  of  Scribner  and  Co.,
which  subsequently  became  the  Century  company,
with  Mr.  Smith  as  president.  Under  his  direction
these  magazines  have  enjoyed  great  popularity  and
an  extensive  circulation  on  botn  sides  of  the  Atlan-
tic. The  Century  company  is  engaged  in  the  pub-
lication of  miscellaneous  books,  and  an  elaborate


"  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language,"  under  the
editorship  of  Prof.  William  I).  Whitney.  It  will
com|)rise  five  octavo  volumes  and  about  6,(KX)  pages.

SMITH,  Russell,  artist,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scot-
land, 26  April,  1812.  He  was  originally  named
William  T.  Russell  Smith,  but  for  many  years
has  used  only  the  name  Russell.  In  1819  he  came
to  the  United  States  with  his  parents,  and  later
he  studied  painting  with  James  R.  Lambdin.  He
Ix'gan  to  devote  himself  to  scene-painting,  and
went  in  1834  to  Philadelphia,  where  ne  worked  at
the  Walnut  and  the  old  Chestnut  street  theatres
for  six  years.  After  his  marriage  he  abandoned
scene-  for  landscape-painting,  meeting  with  great
success.  He  became  noted  also  as  a  scientific
draughtsman,  being  employetl  in  that  capacity  by
Sir  Charles  Lyell  and  others,  and  also  in  the  geo-
logical surveys  of  Pennsylvania  and  Virginia.  In
1850  he  went  abroad,  and  after  his  return  to  Phila-
delphia be  painted  many  landscapes  until  1856.
At  that  time  the  Academy  of  music  was  building,
and  Smith  was  employed  to  paint  its  scenery.  The
handsome  landscape  drop-curtain  that  he  produced
brought  him  many  commissions  for  similar  work.
One  of  his  latest  productions  of  this  kind  is  the
curtain  for  the  Grand  opera-house,  Philadelphia.
Among  Mr.  Smith's  numerous  landscapes  are
"Chocorua  Peak"  and  "Cave  at  Chelton  Hills,"
which  was  at  the  Philadelphia  exhibition  of  1876.
He  is  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania  historical  so-
ciety and  the  Pennsylvania  academy  of  the  fine
arts,  where  he  has  contributed  regularly  to  the  ex-
hibitions for  the  past  fifty  years. — His  wife,  Mabt
P.,  and  his  daughter,  Mary,  were  artists  of  some
ability. — His  son,  Xanthns,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
26  Feb.,  18J39,  is  known  as  a  marine-  and  landscape-
painter.  He  served  during  the  civil  war  under
Admiral  Samuel  F.  DuPont,  and  has  painted  many
of  the  naval  engagements  of  the  war.

SMITH,  Samuel,  historian,  b.  in  Burlington,
N.  J.,  in  1720 ;  d.  there  in  1776.  He  was  educated
at  home,  early  took  part  in  local  politics,  was  a
member  of  the  council  and  the  assembly,  and  in
1768  was  commissioned,  with  his  brother  John
and  Charles  Read,  to  take  charge  of  the  seals  dur-
ing the  absence  of  Gov.  William  Franklin  in  Eng-
land, and  affix  his  name  to  official  documents.  He
was  subsequently  treasurer  of  West  Jersey.  Mr.
Smith's  valuable  manuscripts  were  used  by  Robert
Proud  in  his  "  History  of  Pennsylvania  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1797-8), and  he  published  a  "  History  of  New
Jersey  from  its  Settlement  to  1721  "  (1755).— His
brother,  John,  provincial  councillor,  b.  in  Burling-
ton, N.  J.,  20  March,  1722;  d.  there,  26  March,
1771,  engaged  in  the  West  Indian  trade  in  Phila-
delphia, and  was  so  successftd  in  business  that  he
occupied  one  of  the  finest  houses  in  the  city,  and
entertained  the  most  eminent  persons  of  the  time.
He  was  a  Quaker  in  religion,  but  did  much  to
ameliorate  the  severities  of  the  sect  by  founding
one  of  the  first  social  clubs  that  was  ever  formed
for  young  men  of  that  denomination.  He  organ-
ized the  Philadelphia  Contributionship,  which  was
one  of  the  first  fire  insurance  companies  in  this
country,  and  was  a  founder  of  the  Philadelphia
hospital.  He  served  in  the  Pennsylvania  assembly
in  1750-'l,  was  active  in  the  Friends'  councils,  and
occupied  many  offices  of  trust.  In  1748  he  mar-
ried Hannah,  daughter  of  Chief-Justice  James  Lo-
gan. He  returned  to  Burlington,  N.  J.,  about  this
time,  was  a  subscriber  in  1757  to  the  New  Jersey
association  for  helping  the  Indians,  the  next  year
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  governor's  council,
and,  with  his  brother  Samuel  and  Charles  Read,
was  a  keeper  of  the  seals  in  1768. In  1761  he  was


SMITH


SMITH


5B7


a  oommiminnrr  to  try  pimtM.  Munr  anecdotes
are  toM  of  him.  On  oiie  ticcjuiion,  his  health  lieinf;
impnirt'il,  he  wuii  disturbtMl  in  his  momin);  Hliiinlierx
by  a  bellman  K<Mng  aUxit  tho  !itrtH>Us  shotitini;  that
(}ov.  William  rranklin's  jMirk  nml  a  hiindnHl  (Iiht
wprp  to  l>e  mj1(1  that  day.  .Mr.  .Smith  out  his  hoiul
out  of  the  wiiulow  anil  said  to  the  bellman:  '*  I'ut
up  your  U'll  and  fjo  home:  1  will  buy  the  property
at  the  owner's  urioe."  llo  then  cKxwmI  the  win-
dow ami  re."*ume<i  his  interrupted  sU^-p. — Another
brother,  Richard,  member  of  the  Continental  con-
gress, b.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  22  Manh,  ITH.'i;  d.
near  Natchez.  Miss.,  in  1803,  was  carefnlly  e«lu-
eate<l.  and  devote  much  time  to  liternrv  pursuits.
Part  of  his  corresiHjndence  with  Dr.  ToLias  .Smol-
lett at  the  lK>ginning  of  the  llevolution  wa^*  pul>-
lisheil  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly."  Ho  was  chosen
to  the  Continental  congress  in  1774,  and  served
till  1776,  when  ho  resigned  on  account  of  the  fail-
ure of  his  health,  and  a  probable  reluctance  to
take  further  part  against  (tn^at  Britain.  He  died
while  on  a  journey  through  the  southern  states.
— .lohn's  grandson,  John  Jay,  librarian,  b.  in  Bur-
linjjton  county,  \.J.,  10  June,  179H;  d.  in  Philadel-

fihia.  Pa.  2H  Sept.,  1881,  was  etlucaltMl  at  home,  and
rom  1829  till  IHTA  was  librarian  of  the  Phila<lel-
phia  and  Loganian  libraries.  Heedite<l  the  ".Sat-
urday Bulletin"  in  1830-"2,  the  "  Daily  Express "
in  1832,  "  Littell's  Museum  "  for  one  year,  Walsh's
**  National  Gazette,"  and  Andrew  J.  Downing's
"  Horticulturist  "  in  18o.'>-'(i0.  He  superintended
more  than  100  volumes  that  do  not  bear  his  name,
edited  Walter  .Scott's  "  Ijife  of  Napoleon  "  (1827) ;
"  Celebratwl  Trials  "  (1835);  "  Animal  Magnetism :
Re{)ort  of  Dr.  Franklin  with  Additions'^  (1837) ;
"  Guide  to  Workers  in  Metals  and  Stones,"  with
Thomas  U.  Walter  (1846);  "  Designs  for  Monuments
and  .Mural  Tablets "  (New  York,  1846) ;  "  Letters
of  Dr.  Richard  Hill "  (1*54) ;  and  "  North  American
Sylva"(3  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1857);  and  was  the
author  of  "  Notes  for  a  History  of  the  Librar}'  Com-
pany of  Philadelphia  "(1831) ;  "  A  Summer's'  Jaunt
Across  the  Water  "  (1842);  and,  with  John  F".  Wat-
son, "  H  istorical  and  Literary  Curiosities'*  (1846).
— John  Jay's  son,  Lloyd  Pearnall,  librarian,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  6  Feb.,  1822  ;  d.  in  Germantown,  Pa,,
2  July,  1886,  was  graduated  at  Haverford  college.
Pa.,  in  18136,  Ix^came  hereditary  a.ssistant  and  treas-
urer in  the  Philadelphia  and  rx)ganian  library,  and
in  1851  succeeded  his  father  as  librarian.  lie  etl-
ited  "  Lippincott's  Magazine  "  in  18<>8-'70.  compiled
vol.  iii.  of  the  catalogue  of  books  belonging  to  the
Library  company  oi  Philadelphia,  incTudmg  the
index  to  the  first  three  volumes,  and,  besides
numerous  magazine  articles  and  pamphlets,  was
the  author  of  "  Report  to  the  Contributors  of  the
Pennsylvania  Relief  As.sociation  for  F^ast  Tennes-
see of  a  Commission  of  the  F^xecutive  Committee
sent  to  examine  that  Region  "(Philadelphia,  1864);
"  Remarks  on  the  Kxisting  Materials  for  forming  a
Just  FMimate  of  NajKileon  L"  (New  York,  18<»);
"  Remarks  on  the  Apology  for  Imuerial  Usuri)ation
contained  in  Napoleon's  *  Life  of  C«>sar '"  (1865) ;
"Address  delivere<l  at  Haverfonl  College  before  the
Alumni"  (Philadelphia  1869);  "Symbolism  and
Science"  (1885);  and  was  the  bibliographer  of  the
order  of  the  Cincinnati. — Samuel's  grandson,  Sam-
nel  Joseph,  i>o««t,  b.  in  Moorestown,  N.  J.,  in
1771  ;  d.  near  BuHington,  N.  J.,  14  Nov.,  1835,
was  litierally  educate<l,  and,  having  inherited  large
wealth,  lived  on  his  estate,  dividing  his  time  be-
tween his  farm,  literature,  and  public  benefactions.
Two  of  his  lyrics  are  in  "  Lyra  Sacra  Americana,"
and  his  "  .Miscellanies,"  with  a  memoir,  were  pub-
lished (Philadelphia,  1836>.


SMITH,  Hamarl. mldier, b.  in  IjanoMt«r,  Pa^  27
July,  1 752 ;  d.  in  Italt  imon-.  Md.,  22  April,  1888.  His
father.  John,  a  native  of  Stral)ane,  Ireland,  reroored
alMtut  1759  to  Baltimore,  where  he  wa«  for  manj
years  a  well-known  merclmnt.  In  1768  he  wanone
of  the  commissioners  to  raise  money  by  lottery  to
ere«-l  a  market-house  in  iijiltimore,  and  in  i7«J6
was  one  of  the  commissioners  to  lay  off  an  a<ldi-
tion  to  the  town.  t)n  14  Nov.,  1769,  he  was  chair-
man  of  a  meeting  of  the  merchants  to  pmhibit
the  importation  of  Kuro|H'an  gcKxls,  and  on  31
May,  1^74,  was  apf>ointed  a  memtier  of  the  Balti*
more  committee  of  corn*s|K>ndence.  In  1774  he
was  also  a|)[M>int(>d  one  of  the  justices  of  the  peace,
and  in  November  lK»came  one  of  a  committee  of
ol)servation  whose  powers  extendetl  to  the  general
police  and  lo<'al  government  of  Iteltimore  town
and  county,  and  to  the  raising  of  forty  comf»anies
of  "  minute-men."  The  Continental  congress  hav-
ing recommended  measures  for  procuring  arms  and
ammunition  from  abroad,  he  was  appointed  on  the
committee  for  that  purpose  from  Baltimore.  On
5  Aug.,  1776,  he  was  elei-ted  a  delegate  to  the  con-
vention that  was  calli»d  to  frame  the  first  state
constitution.  In  1781  he  was  elected  to  the  state
senate,  and  in  1786  was  re-elected.  Samuel,  son
of  John,  spent  five  years  in  his  father's  count-
ing-room in  acquiring  a  commercial  education,
and  sailed  for  Havre,  France,  in  1772,  as  super-
cargo of  one  of  his  father's  vessels.  He  travelled
extensively  in  Eurof>e,  and  returned  home  after
the  battle  of  Lexington.  He  offered  his  services
to  Maryland  and  was  apiwinted  in  1776  captain  of
the  6th  company  of  Col.  William  Smallwood's  regi-
ment of  the  Maryland  line.  In  April.  1776.  Capt.
James  Barron  intercepte<i  on  the  ('hesafwake  bay
a  treasonable  correspondence  between  Gov.  liobeit
Eden  (q.  v.)  and  Lord  George  Germaine,  and  Gen.
Charles  Lee,  who  commamled  the  department,  or-
dered Capt.  Smith  to  proceed  to  Annapolis,  seize
the  person  and  pa[x>rs  of  Gov.  Eden,  and  detain
him  until  the  wilt  of  congress  was  known.  Upon
his  arrival  at  Annapolis  the  council  of  safety  for-
bade the  arrest,  claiming  that  it  was  an  undue  as-
sumption of  authority.  His  regiment  did  eminent
service  at  the  battle  of  Long  ^land,  where  it  lost
one  third  of  its  men.  He  took  a  creditable  part  in
the  battles  of  Harlem  and  Whit«  Plains,  where  he
was  slightly  wounded,  and  in  the  harassing  retreat
through  >M»w  Jersey.  He  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  major,  10  Dec.,  1776,  and  in  1777  to  that
of  lieutenant<'olonel  of  the  4th  Maryland  regi-
ment, under  Col.  James  Carvill  Hall.  He  served
with  credit  at  the  attack  on  Staten  island  and  at
the  Brandywine.  and,  ujwn  the  ascent  of  the  Brit-
ish fleet  up  the  Delaware,  was  detached  by  Wash-
ington to  the  command  of  Fort  Mifflin.  In  this
naVced  and  expos^Kl  work  he  inaintaintHl  himself
under  a  continuetl  cannonade  from  26  .Sept.  till  11
Nov.,  when  he  was  so  severely  wounded  as  to  make
it  necessary  to  remove  him  to  the  Jersey  shore.
For  this  gallant  defence  congress  voted  him
thanks  and  a  sword.  When  he  was  not  entirely
recovered  from  the  effects  of  his  wound,  he  yet
took  part  in  the  hardshiiis  of  Valley  Forge.  He
took  an  active  part  in  the  battle  of  Monmouth.
Being  reduced,  after  a  service  of  three  years  and  a
half,  from  affluence  to  |)overty,  he  was  compelled
to  resign  his  commission,  but  continued  to  do  duty
as  colonel  of  the  Italtimore  militia  until  the  end
of  the  war.  In  July,  1779,  he  was  challenged  to
fight  a  duel  with  pistols  by  Col.  Eleazer  Oswald,
one  of  the  editors  of  the  Maryland  "Journal,"
publishe<l  at  Baltimore.  The  tmuble  grew  out  of
the  publication  in  the  "*  Journal  "  of  Gen.  Charles


688


SMITH


SMITH


Lee's  queries, "  political  and  military,"  which  re-
flected on  Gen.  Washington,  and  for  which  the
editors  were  mobbed.  By  the  advice  of  friends.
Col.  Smith  declined  the  challenge.  In  1783  he  was
appointed  one  of  the  port-wardens  of  Baltimore,
and  from  1790  to  1792  was  a  meml>er  of  the
house  of  delegates.  In  consequence  of  the  threat-
ened war  with  France  and  England  in  1794,  he  was
appointed  brigadier-general  of  the  militia  of  Bal-
timore, with  the  rank  of  major-general,  and  com-
manded the  quota  of  Maryland  troops  engaged  in
suppressing  the  whiskey  insurrection  in  Pennsyl-
vania. In  1793  he  was  elected  a  representative  in
congress,  holding  the  place  until  1803,  and  again
from  1816  till  1822.  He  was  a  member  of  the
U.  S.  senate  from  1803  to  1815,  and  from  1822  to
1833.  Under  President  JeCferson  he  served  with-
out compensation  a  short  time  in  1801,  as  secretary
of  the  navy,  though  declining  the  appointment.
He  was  a  brigadier-general  of  militia,  and  served
as  maior-general  of  the  state  troops  in  the  defence
of  Baltimore  in  the  war  of  1812.  He  was  one  of
the  originators  of  the  Bank  of  Maryland  in  1790,
and  one  of  the  incorporators  of  the  Library  com-
pany of  Baltimore  in  1797,  and  of  the  Reisters-
town  turnpike  company.  He  was  among  the  pro-
jectors of  the  Washington  monument  and  the  Bat-
tle monument  at  Baltimore.  In  August,  1835,  when
he  was  in  his  eighty-third  year,  a  committee  of  his
fellow-citizens  having  called  on  him  to  put  down  a
mob  that  had  possession  of  the  city,  he  at  once
consented  to  make  the  attempt,  was  successful,  and
elected  mayor  of  the  city,  serving  until  1838. — His
son,  John  Spear,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  about  1790 ;
d.  there,  17  Nov..  1866,  acted  as  volunteer  aide-
de-camp  to  his  father  in  the  defence  of  Baltimore
in  1812-'14.  While  a  young  man  he  prepared,
under  government  auspices,  some  volumes  of  valu-
able research  on  the  commercial  relations  of  the
United  States.  He  was  appointed  secretary  of  the
U.  S.  legation  at  London,  and  in  1811  was  left  in
charge  as  charge  d'affaires  by  William  Pinkney.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Internal  improvement
convention  of  Maryland  in  1825,  and  upon  the
formation  of  the  Maryland  historical  society  in
1844  was  made  its  first  president,  which  post  he
held  until  his  death.  He  was  at  one  time  judge
of  the  orphans'  court,  and  in  1833  was  a  presiden-
tial elector. — Robert,  statesman,  brother  of  Gen.
Samuel,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  in  November,  1757 ;  d.
in  Baltimore,  26  Nov.,  1842,  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1781,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Bran-
dywine  as  a  volunteer.  He  then  studied  law  and
practised  in  Baltimore.  In  1789  he  was  one  of  the
presidential  electors,  and  he  was  the  last  survivor
of  that  electoral  college.  In  1793  he  was  state
senator,  from  1796  till  1800  served  as  a  member  of
the  house  of  delegates,  and  from  1798  till  1801  sat
in  the  first  branch  of  the  city  council  ol'  Baltimore.
He  was  secretary  of  the  navy  from  26  Jan.,  1802,
till  1805,  U.  S.  attorney-general  from  March  till  De-
cember, 1805,  and  secretary  of  state  from  6  March,
1809,  till  25  Nov.,  1811.  On  23  Jan.,  1806,  he  was
appointed  chancellor  of  Maryland,  and  chief  judge
of  the  district  of  Baltimore,  but  he  declined.  He
resigned  the  office  of  secretary  of  state,  1  April,
1811,  and  was  offered  the  embassy  to  Russia,  which
he  declined.  He  was  president  of  an  auxiliary  of
the  American  Bible  society  in  1813,  president  of
the  Maryland  agricultural  society  in  1818,  and  in
1813  succeeded  Archbishop  John  Carroll  as  provost
of  the  University  of  Maryland.  He  was  the  author
of  an  "  Address  to  the  People  of  the  United
States  "  (1811).— His  son,  Samuel  W.,b.  near  Bal-
timore, 14  Aug.,  1800,  was  educated  at  Princeton.


He  served  in  the  city  council  of  Baltimore,  was
president  of  the  Baltimore  club  and  the  Marjiand
club,  a  director  in  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  rail-
road, and  a  trustee  of  the  Peabody  institute  and  of
Washington  university.

SMITH,  Samuel  Emerson,  jurist,  b.  in  HoUis,
N.  H.,  12  March,  1788;  d.  in  Wiscassett,  Me.,  4
March,  1860.  His  father,  Manasseh,  was  a  chap-
lain in  the  Revolution,  and  subsequently  a  lawyer
in  Wiscassett.  Samuel  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1808,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  Boston
bar,  settled  in  Wiscassett  in  1812,  and  was  in  the
legislature  in  1819-'20.  He  was  chief  justice  of
the  court  of  common  pleas  of  Maine  in  1821,  a
justice  of  the  state  court  of  common  pleas  in
1822-'30,  governor  in  1831-'4,  again  a  judge  of  com-
mon pleas  in  1835-'7,  and  a  commissioner  to  revise
the  statutes  of  Maine  in  the  latter  year.

SMITH,  Samuel  Francis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  21  Oct.,  1808.  He  attended  the
Boston  Latin-school  in  1820-'5,  and  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1829  and  at  Andover  theolo^caJ
seminary  in  1832.  He  was  ordained  to  the  ministry
of  the  Baptist  church  at  Waterville,  Me.,  in  1884,
occupied  pastorates  at  Waterville  in  1834-'42,  and
Newton,  Mass.,  in  1842-'54,  and  was  professor  of
modern  languages  in  Waterville  college  (now  Colby
university)  while  residing  in  that  city.  He  was
editor  of  "The  Christian  Review"  in  Boston  in
1842-8,  and  editor  of  the  various  publications  of
the  Baptist  missionary  union  in  1854-'69.  In
1875-6  and  1880-'2  he  visited  the  chief  missionary
stations  in  Europe  and  Asia.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  from  Waterville  college  in  1854.  Dr.
Smith  has  done  a  large  amount  of  literary  work,
mainly  in  the  line  of  hymnology,  his  most  noted
composition  being  the  national  hymn,  "  My  Coun-
try, Tis  of  Thee,  which  was  written  while  he  was
a  theological  student  and  first  sung  at  a  children's
celebration  in  the  Park  street  church,  Boston,  4
July,  1832.  The  missionary  hymn,  "  The  Morning
Light  is  Breaking,"  was  written  at  the  same  place
and  time.  He  translated  from  the  German  most
of  the  pieces  in  the  "Juvenile  Lyre"  (Boston,
1832),  and  from  the  "  Conversations  -  Lexicon  "
nearly  enough  articles  to  fill  an  entire  volume  of
the  "  Encyc-lopaedia  Americana  "  (1828-'32).  His
collections  of  original  hymns  and  poetry  and  poeti-
cal translations  have  been  published  under  tne  ti-
tles of  "  Lyric  Gems  "  (Boston,  184:S) :  "  The  Psalm-
ist," a  noted  Baptist  hymn-book  (1843) ;  and  "  Rock
of  Ages"  (1866  ;  new  ed.,  1877).  He  has  also  pub-
lished a  "Life  of  Rev.  Joseph  Grafton"  (1848);
"  Missionary  Sketches  "  (1879 ;  2d  ed.,  1883) ;  "  His^
tory  of  Newton,  Mass."  (1880) ;  "  Rambles  in  Mis-
sion-Fields "  (1884) ;  and  contributions  to  numer-
ous periodicals.  His  classmate,  Oliver  Wendell
Holmes,  in  his  reunion  poem  entitled  "  The  Boys,"
thus  refers  to  him :

"  And  there's  a  nice  youngster  of  excellent  pith ;
Fate  tried  to  conceal  him  by  naming  him  Smith  I
But  he  chanted  a  song  for  the  brave  and  the

free —
Just  read  on  his  medal,  '  My  country,  of  thee ! ' "
SMITH,  Sarah  Louisa  Hickman,  poet,  b.  in
Detroit,  Mich.,  30  June,  1811 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
12  Feb.,  1832.  She  wrote  verses  at  an  early  age,
was  liberally  educated  at  her  home  in  Newton,
Mass.,  and  in  1829  married  Samuel  Jenks  Smith,
of  Providence,  R.  I.  They  removed  to  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  in  the  same  year,  where  she  was  a  contributor
to  the  "  Gazette.  Her  verses  evince  a  graceful
fancy  and  poetic  'feeling,  and  her  stanzas  on
"  White  Roses  "  are  included  in  many  collections.
She  published  "  Poems  "  (Providence,  {l.  I.,  1829).


SMITH


SMITH


060


SMITH,  Seba,  jnumalUt,  h.  in  Ruckflold,  Me.,
14  S«»pt.,  1793;  d.  in  I'Htchi.jfiu-.  L.  I..  2«  July,
1868.  He  WM  graduatcHl  at  liowdoin  in  IHIH.  and
rabsequontlT  M;ttle<l  in  Portland,  Mi>.,  as  a  iour-
nalij^t,  whorv  ho  Hlitcd  tho  "  Kastcni  Arjfus, '  the
*■  Fiiinily  I{4H'order,"  and  tho  "I'urtlantl  Daily
Courier."  l>urini;  tho  administration  of  Presidont
Jai-k!<on  he  wrote  a  Ht^ios  of  humorous  ami  satiri-
cal U'tters  un<lor  the  ^)en-namu  of  "  .Major  Jack
Downing."  which  attAinod  wide  celebrity.  They
were  subse«juently  colh>cted  an«l  published  (Port-
land, 1883),  and  passed  throu|;h  several  editions.
He  nnnovod  to  New  York  city  in  1843,  where  he
continued  his  profession  of  journalism  until  shortly
before  his  death.  His  other  publications  include
"  Powhatan,"  a  metrical  romance  (New  York,
1841);  "New  Elements  of  (leometry," an  ingenious
but  iwradoxical  attempt  to  overturn  the  common
deflnitions  of  geometry  (18.'K)):  and  "Way  IX>wn
hjist,  or  Portraitures  of  Yankee  Life"  (1856). —
His  wife.  EHzabeth  Oakex  (Pbinck),  author,  b.  in
North  Yannoutli.  Me.,  12  Aug.,  1806,  was  e<lucated
in  her  native  town,  married  Mr.  Smith  early  in
life,  and  aidwl  him  in  the  editorship  of  several
papers.  For  thnns  years  she  was  in  charge  of  the
*' MaylQower,"  an  annual  published  in  Boston.
Mass.  She  removed  with  her  husband  to  New
York  citv  in  1842,  and  engaged  in  literary  pur-
suits. She  was  the  first  woman  in  this  country
that  ever  ap[>eared  as  a  public  lecturer.  She  also
preached  in  several  churches,  and  at  one  time
was  imstor  of  an  Independent  congregation  in
Cana-^tota,  Madison  co.,  N.  Y.  Her  books  include
"Riches  without  Wings"  (Boston,  1838);  "The
Sinless  Child"  (New  York,  1841);  "Stories  for
Children"  (Boston,  1847);  "Woman  and  her
Needs"  (1851);  "Hints  on  Dress  and  Beauty"
(1852) :  "  I^ld  Eagle,  or  the  Last  of  the  Rama-
paughs"  (Ix)ndon,  1867);  "The  Roman  Tribute,"
a  tragoily  (1850);  and  "Old  New  York,  or  Jacob
I^eislor."  a  tragedy  (1853).

HMITH,  Sidney,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Port  IIoiMj,  Upper  Canada,  16  Oct.,  1823.  His
grandfather,  Elias,  adhered  to  the  cause  of  the
crown  during  the  American  Revolution,  and,  re-
moving to  Canada,  founded  what  is  now  the  town
of  Port  Hope.  Sidney  was  educated  at  Cobourg
and  Port  Hope,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1844.  He  l)egan  practice  at  Cobourg,
in  \>VVi  was  elected  wanlen  of  the  united  counties
of  Northumberland  and  Durham,  in  1854  was
elected  to  the  legislative  assembly  for  the  west
riding  of  Northuml)erland,  and  was  twice  re-elected
for  this  constituency.  Till  1856  he  supported  the
coalition  of  which  Sir  Allan  MacNab  was  the  head,
but  he  then  went  into  opposition.  He  afterward
travelled  in  Germany  for  his  health,  and  on  2  Feb.,
1858,  was  ap|X)inted  postmaster-general  with  a  seat
in  the  cabinet,  which  office  he  held  till  the  resig-
nation of  the  goveniment  in  1862,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  period  of  the  ministerial  crisis  in  1858,
when  he  became  president  of  the  council  and
minister  of  agriculture.  From  1858  till  1862
Mr.  Smith  was  a  member  of  the  board  of  rail-
way commissioners,  and  in  1858  he  introduced
and  carrietl  through  fmrliament  the  consolidated
jurv  art  for  UpjH'r  Cantula,  which  is  still  the  law
witli  a  few  unim|M)rtant  chan^fes.  While  iK)stma«ter-
general  he  succee<lwl  in  fornung  arrangements  with
tho  Unite<l  States,  France,  Belgium,  and  Prussia
for  the  conveyance  of  mail  matter  across  the
Atlantic  in  Canadian  steamers,  and  through  Cana-
da on  the  Grand  Tnmk  railway.  In  1860  Mr.
Smith  seouriMi  the  alM^lition  of  Sunday  lalwr  in  the
poet-offices  in  Upper  Canada. In  1861  he  was


elected  to  the  legislative  council,  but  he  resigned
in  1863,  and  unsucccaafully  contested  Victoria  for
the  house  of  assembly.  In  1866  ho  was  at>|>oint-
o<l  ins|Mft«r  of  n-gistrv  officiw  for  Up|»er  Caiuula,
which  iMist  he  still  holiU.

SMITH,  Sidney  Irvlnr,  biologist,  b.  in  Nor-
way. Me.,  18  Feb.,  1843.  lie  was  graduated  at  the
Sheffield  scientific  s<?h(K)l  of  Yale  in  18<i7,  and  was
assistant  in  zoology  from  that  time  till  1876,
when  he  was  chostm  pnifetsor  of  comparative
anatomy.  He  had  charge  of  the  do«'t)>  water
dredging  that  was  carrietl  on  in  I^ake  .superior
bv  the  U.  S.  lake  survey  in  1871.  and  by  the
if.  .S.  coast  survey  in  the  region  of  St.  (Jeorge's
banks  in  1872.  Prof.  Smith  has  alsf>  lieen  associ-
ated in  the  biological  work  of  the  U.  S.  fish  com-
mission on  the  New  England  coa.st  since  1871.  He
is  a  member  of  various  s<-ientific  societies,  and  in
li884  was  elected  to  the  National  academy  of
sciences.  His  papers  have  been  published  in  the
"  Reports  of  the  IT.  S.  Fish  Commission,"  "  Rejjorts
of  Progress  of  the  Gefdogical  Survey  of  Canada,"
and  other  government  rejjorts,  an«l  he  has  also
contribute*!  memoirs  on  his  sfx-c-ialties  to  the  trans-
actions of  scientifl(!  s<x'ieties  of  which  he  is  a  mem-
ber, and  to  technical  jounmls.

SMITH,  Solomon  Franklin,  actor,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Chenango  eo.,  N.  Y.,  20  April,  1801 ;  d.  in
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  20  April,  1869.  After  sj^nding
three  years  as  a  clerk  in  Alliany,  N.  Y.,  he  was  ap-

Erenticed  to  a  printing  establishment  in  Ixniisville,
[y.  He  joined  Alexander  Drake's  dramatic  com-
pany in  1820,  withdrew  at  the  end  of  the  season,
studied  law  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  in  1822  be-
came the  editor  of  the  "  Indejx'ndent  Press,"  a
Jacksonian  Democratic  organ,  and  at  the  same  time
a  manager  of  the  Globe  theatre.  The  latter  enter-
prise prove<l  unsuccessful;  but  he  travelled  with
nis  company  the  next  year  and  j?ained  wide  repu-
tation as  a  low  comedian,  his  principal  roles  bemg
Mawworm  in  "The  Hyi)ocrite."  Sheepface  in  "The
Village  Lawyer,"  and  Hilly  I.4ickaday  in  "  .Sweet-
hearts and  Wives."  He  abandoned  theatrical  man-
agement and  the  stage  in  1853,  settled  as  a  lawyer
in  St.  Louis,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Missouri
state  convention  in  1861.  He  was  an  uncondi-
tional Union  man,  and  bore  an  active  part  in  form-
ing a  provisional  government  for  the  state.  He
publishe<l  "Theatrical  -\pprenticeship "  (Phila<lel-
phia.  Pa.,  1845);  "Theatrical  Journey  Work"
(1854);  and  an  "Autobiography"  (New  York,
1868). — His  son,  Marcus,  actor,  b.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  7  Jan.,  1829 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  11  Aug.,  1874,
made  his  dibui  in  New  Orleans  in  1849  as  Dig-
gory  in  "  Family  Jars."  He  then  connected  him-
self with  Wallack's  theatre.  New  York  city,  where
he  became  widely  |)opular.  sul)se<iuently  playinp  suc-
cessful star  engjiirements  in  the  princijml  cities  in
this  country.  He  visited  England  in  1869,  where
he  was  favorably  receivwl.  When  Edwin  Ii«H)th
opened  his  theatre  in  New  York  city  in  February,
1869,  Smith  became  his  manager  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  his  company  for  several  years.  His  last
public  appearance  was  in  Ix)ndon,  where  he  was
conni»ct«>d  with  St.  James's  theatre.

SMITH,  Stephen,  physician,  b.  in  Onondaga
county,  N.  Y.,  19  F'eb..  1823.  He  was  etiiuate<l  in
the  public  schools  and  at  Cortland  academy.
Homer,  N.  Y.,  and,  after  attending  lectures  at
Geneva  and  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  medical  college,  was
graduated  at  the  New  York  college  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  1850,  became  a  resident  pfiysician
at  Ilellevue  hospital,  and  afterwanl  settle*!  in  New
York  city.  He  Ixn-ame  an  attending  surgemi  to
Bellevue'in  1854,  was  professor  of  surgery  there  in


690


SMITH


SMITH


1861-5,  and  was  then  transferred  to  the  chair  of
anatomy.  Since  1874  he  has  been  professor  of
clinical  surgery  in  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  New  York.  He  became  joint
editor  with  Dr.  Samuel  S.  Purple  of  the  "New
York  Medical  Journal"  in  1853,  its  sole  editor  in
1857,  changed  it  into  a  weekly  and  published  it
under  the  name  of  the  "  Medical  Times,"  in  1860,
and  continued  in  its  charge  until  1863,  when  the
paper  was  discontinued.  He  was  among  the  first
to  propose  the  organization  of  Bellevue  medical
college,  and  was  a  member  of  its  faculty  for  ten
years,  and  it  was  mainly  due  to  his  efforts  that  the
Medical  journal  library  was  established.  He  made
a  thorough  examination  of  the  sanitary  condition
of  New  York  in  1865,  and  presented  to  the  legis-
lature an  official  report  of  his  investigations,  which
was  published  (New  York,  1865).  He  was  appoint-
ed by  the  governor  a  health  commissioner  in  1868,
and  reappointed  by  the  mayor  in  1870  and  in  1872,
was  chiefly  instrumental  in  founding  the  Ameri-
can health  association  in  that  year,  and  was  its
president  for  four  terms.  He  was  also  active  in
organizing  a  National  board  of  health,  of  which  he
was  appointed  a  member  by  the  president  in  1879.
In  1882-'8  he  was  state  commissioner  of  lunacy,
during  which  service  he  published  six  voluminous
reports  on  the  condition  of  the  insane,  and  of  the
institutions  for  their  cure.  Since  1880  he  has  been
a  member  of  the  State  board  of  charities.  He  has
tied  the  common  iliac  artery  for  aneurism,  and  was
the  second  in  this  country  to  perform  Symes's  am-
putation at  the  ankle-joint.  He  is  a  member  of
various  medical  societies,  and  has  published  "  Mono-
graph of  Seventy-five  Cases  of  Rupture  of  the  Uri-
nary Blatlder,"  which  was  highly  commended  in
this  country  and  abroad  (1851),  "  Hand-Book  of
Surgical  Operations "  (1863),  and  "  Principles  of
Operative  Surgery"  (1879).

SMITH,  Tlieophilns  Washington,  jurist,  b.
in  New  York  citv,  28  Sept.,  1784;  d.  in  Chicago,
111.,  6  May,  1846.  After  serving  in  the  U.  S.
navy,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  his  native
city,  11  Dec,  1805,  having  been  a  law-student  in
the  office  of  Aaron  Burr,  and  a  fellow-student  with
Washington  Irving.  On  2  April,  1806,  he  was
commissioned  notary  public  by  Gov.  Morgan
Lewis.  In  1816  he  visited  the  west  in  the  interest
of  his  father-in-law,  who  had  a  large  estate  in
Ohio,  and  proceeding  as  far  as  Edwardsville,  111.,
settled  there.  In  1823  he  was  elected  state  sena-
tor, introduced  and  supported  the  original  bill  for
the  construction  of  the  Illinois  and  Michigan  canal,
and  was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners.  In
1825  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of
the  state.  In  1836  he  removed  to  Cnicago,  and  in
April,  1841,  he  was  assigned  the  judgeship  in  the
7tn  circuit  of  the  state  in  addition  to  his  duties  as
judge  of  the  supreme  court.  Failing  health  com-
pelled him  to  resign  his  office,  26  Dec,  1842.

SMITH,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  10  March,  1702;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  25
May,  1795.  He  was  the  son  of  Thomas  Smith,  a
well-known  merchant  of  Boston,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1720.  After  leaving  college  he
at  once  entered  upon  theological  studies,  and  be-
gan to  preach  on  19  April,  1722.  In  June,  1725,
he  came  for  the  first  time  to  Falmouth  (now  Port-
land), then  the  extreme  settlement  in  Maine,  and
preached  for  several  months  to  the  great  satisfac-
tion of  the  people,  who  extended  to  him  a  call  to
become  their  pastor,  26  April,  1726.  This  he  did
not  accept  until  23  Jan.,  1727,  and  he  was  publicly
ordained  on  8  March  of  the  same  year.  His  salary
was  "  £70  money  the  first  year  besides  his  board. '


Mr.  Smith  continued  pastor  of  the  1st  church  in
Portland  more  than  sixty-eight  years,  and  officiated
in  part  of  the  services  till  within  two  years  of  his
death.  He  kept  an  historical  and  personal  diary
from  1720  till  1788,  a  greater  length  of  time  prob-
ably than  that  during  which  any  similar  record
has  been  kept  within  the  limits  of  the  state.  It
was  edited  by  the  Rev.  Samuel  Freeman  (Portland,
1821),  and  a  new  edition,  with  notes  and  a  memoir
by  William  Willis,  former  president  of  the  Maine
historical  society,  was  issuea  in  1849.

SMITH,  Thomas  Church  HaskeH,  soldier,  b.
in  Acushnet,  Mass.,  24  March,  1819.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1841,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  of  Cincinnati  in  1844,  engaged  in  the  es-
tablishment of  the  Morse  telegraph  system  in  the
west  and  south,  and  was  presioent  of  the  New
Orleans  and  Ohio  telegraph  company.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  became  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  1st  Ohio  cavalry,  served  under  G^en.
John  Pope  in  Virginia,  and  became  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers  in  September,  1862.  He  was
placed  in  command  of  the  district  of  Wisconsin
m  1863  to  quell  the  draft  riots,  became  inspector-
general  of  the  Department  of  the  Missouri  in  1864,
and  while  commanding  that  district  dealt  with  the
disturbances  that  arose  from  the  return  of  1,800
Confederate  soldiers  to  their  homes  after  the  sur-
render. He  carried  out  Gen.  Pope's  policy  of
withdrawing  government  troops  from  Missouri,
and  restored  the  state  without  delay  to  its  own
civil  control.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the  vol-
unteer service  in  1866,  and  in  1878  entered  the
regular  army  as  major  and  paymaster.  In  1883  he
was  retired.

SMITH,  Thomas  Kilbr,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  23  Sept.,  1820 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14  Dec,
1887.  His  lather,  George,  was  a  captain  in  the
East  Indian  trade  for  many  years,  but  removed  to
Ohio  about  1828,  and  settled  on  a  farm  in  Hamil-
ton county.  Thomas  was  graduated  at  Cincinnati
college  in  1837,  read  law  with  Salmon  P.  Chase,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845,  and  practised  till
1853,  when  he  became  bureau  and  special  agent  in
the  post-office  department  in  Washington,  D.  C.
He  was  U.  S.  marshal  for  the  southern  district  of
Ohio  in  1855-'6,  and  subsequently  deputy  clerk  of
Hamilton  county,  Ohio.  He  became  lieutenant-
colonel  in  the  54th  Ohio  infantry  in  September,
1861,  was  promoted  its  colonel  m  October,  and
commanded  the  regiment  at  Pittsburg  Landing,
the  advance  on  Corinth,  and  the  Vicksburg  cam-
paign. He  was  assigned  to  the  2d  brigade,  2d  divis-
ion of  the  15th  army  corps,  in  January,  1863,  was
on  a  court  of  inquiry,  and  on  staflf  duty  with  Gen.
Ulysses  S.  Grant  from  May  till  September,  1863,
and  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers in  August  of  that  year.  He  commanded
brigades  in  the  17th  army  corps,  and  led  a  division
of  artillery,  cavalry,  and  infantry  in  the  Red  river
expedition. His  special  duty  being  to  protect  the

fun-boats  when  the  main  body  of  the  army  at  Sa-
ine  cross  roads,  endeavoring  to  reach  Shrevejwrt.,
fell  back.  Gen.  Smith  was  left  with  2,500  men
to  protect  the  fleet  in  it^  withdrawal  down  the
river.  He  accoraplishe<l  the  t«sk  in  the  face  of
opposing  armies  on  both  banks  of  the  stream.
SuDsequently  he  commanded  the  3d  division  de-
tachment of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  and  then
had  charge  of  the  district  of  southern  Alabama
and  Florida  and  the  district  and  port  of  Mobile.
He  was  compelled  to  resign  field  duty  in  July,

1864,  on  account  of  the  failure  of  his  health,  was
brevetted major-general  of  volunteers,  5  Mareh,

1865,  and  in  1866  became  U.  S.  consul  a^  Panama


SMITH


SMITH


691


He  remorwl  to  TorresilHlfi,  Pa.,  In  1865,  and  rMulwl
there  until  his  death.  In  tho  itprinK  of  1HN7  ho  Imv
camo  onKaiTml  in  the  buxinewi  (Ie|»Hrtnient  of  the
"Star,"  New  York  city.  He  wa«  an  wlive  int'mlier
of  the  Ix\val  lof^ion,  nnd  waM  at  one  time  junior
vic-e-ooinmander  of  tin*  iVnuMvlvania  coniMmndcrv.

SMITH,  ThoniaK  IxM>hlan,  artist,  h.  in  (tlan-
BOW,  Scotland,  2  I>»v.,  IHIW;  «1.  in  New  York,  5
Nov.,  1884.  lie  came  to  the  United  States  at  an
early  agi».  and  was  for  a  time  the  pupil  of  (itH)rgi>
H.  Houghton  at  AUwny,  N.  Y.,  where  he  o|>ene<l  a
studio  in  1859.  Thnw  years  later  he  reraovwl  to
New  York,  and  in  18(J9  was  elet-tetl  an  amdciate  of
the  National  a«'a«lemy.  He  devoletl  himself  chiefly
to  lutinting  winter  st-tMies.  His"  lVs««rted  House  '
ana  "  Kvo  of  St.  A^'iifs"  wen>  at  the  Centennial  ex-
hibition at  Philadelphia  in  1870.

SMITH,  WHIiain,  jurist,  b.  in  Newport-Pag-
nell,  Buckinf^hamshire,  England,  8  Oct..  1697 :  d.
in  New  York  city,  22  Nov.,  1769.  His  father,
Thomas,  a  tallow-i-handler,  came  to  this  wjuntry
on  account  of  his  religious  opinions  in  1715,  ac-
companieil  bv  his  three  sons.  William  was  brought
up  as  a  Calvinist  and  a  republican,  whs  gmduated
at  Yale  in  1719,  servwl  as  tutor  there  for  Ave  years,
and  in  1?24  returned  to  New  York  city  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  His  eloriuence  and  address
soon  brought  him  into  notice,  out  in  1733  he  was
disbarred  on  account  of  his  partici^tation  as  coun-
sel in  a  lawsuit  against  Gov.  William  Cosby,  where
the  principle  that  was  involved  was  the  right  of
the  provincial  council  to  provide  a  salary  for  one
of  their  own  numl)er  as  acting  governor  during
the  interval  lH.'tween  the  death  of  one  royal  ap-
pointee and  the  arrival  of  another.  He  was  re-
stored in  1736,  and  his  son,  William  Smith,  the  his-
«torian,  rifites  as  an  instance  of  his  eloquence  that
by  his  consummate  art  in  telling  the  story  of  the
crucifixion  he  succeeded  in  inducing  the  New  York
assembly  to  reject  all  the  votes  of  the  Jewish  mem-
bers, and  so  to  establish  the  disputetl  election  of
his  client.  He  also  practised  extensively  in  Con-
necticut, and  in  1743-'4  was  counsel  for  that  col-
ony in  their  case  against  the  Mohegan  Indians.
He  was  appointed  attorney-general  and  advocate-
^•neral  by  Gov.  GtH>rge  Clinton  in  1751,  succeed-
ing Richard  Bradley,  and  served  one  year,  but  was
not  confirmed  by  the  n>yal  authorities.  He  became
a  member  of  the  governor's  council  in  1753,  and
held  office  till  1767,  when  he  was  succeeiletl  by  his
son,  William.  In  that  capacity  he  attended  the
congress  of  the  colonies  that  was  held  in  Albany,
N.  v.,  in  June,  1754,  and  was  the  member  from
New  York  f»f  the  committee  to  draft  the  plan  of
union,  which  he  earnestly  favorwl.  In  the  same
month  he  was  a  commissioner  to  fix  the  boundary-
lines  U'tween  New  York  and  Massachusetts.  He
declined  the  office  of  chief  justice  of  New  York
in  1760,  Ix'tame  the  associate  justice  of  the  same
court  in  17(W.  and  held  office  until  his  death.  The
"  New  York  (Jazette  "  of  the  next  week  descrilx^l
him  as  "  a  gentleman  of  great  erudition,  the  most
eloquent  speaker  in  the  province,  and  a  zealous
and  inflexible  friend  to  the  cause  of  religion  and
liberty."— His  son,  WiHiam,  historian,  b.  in  New
York  city,  25  June,  1728;  d.  in  Queltec,  Cana«la,  3
Nov.,  1793.  was  graduatinl  at  Yale  in  1745.  stu<lied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  liar  of  New  York  city,  and
soon  a(N{uired  an  extensive  practice.  He  was  an
elo<)uent  sjieaker,  and  manv  of  his  law  opinions
were  colle<'te<l  and  recortled  by  George  Chalmers
in  his  "Opinions  on  Interesting  Subjects  arising
from  .American  lnde|)endence"  (1784).  He  iNx-ame
chief  justice  of  the  provinces  of  New  York  in  1763,
succeeded  his  father  as  a  member  of  the  council


in  1767,  and  held  office  nominally  till  1788.  Dar-
ing the  Ki>volution  he  seems  to  have  beon  at  a  loai
as  to  which  cause  he  should  esiMjuse.  Gov.  Tnron
wrote  to  I^rd  George  Geriuaine,  24  Sept,  lt76,
that  "Smith  has  with-
drawn to  his  plantation
up  the  North  river,
and  has  not  ix-en  hejird
fn)m  for  five  months."
ft  is  proltable  he  n'al-
ly  joine<l  the  loyalisU
about  1778;  previ«»u8
to  that  yt^r  he  had
been  confined  on  pa-
role at  Livingston
Manor  on  the  Hudson.
But  as  he  was  in  {m>s-
session  of  hw  costly
furniture,  his  servants
and  his  family,  and
none  of  his  property
had  been  confiscated,  it
is  probable  that  the
Americans  did  not  con-
sider him  wholly  inimical  to  them.  When  he  final-
ly attached  himself  to  the  British  cause  the  Whigs
wrote  scurrilous  verses  on  his  apostasy,  and  called
him  the  weather-cock.  The  royalists  welcomed
him  with  honors,  although  his  motives  were  strong-
ly 8US|)ected.  He  went  to  England  in  1783  with
the  British  troops,  became  chief  justice  of  Canada
in  1786,  and  held  office  until  his  death.  He  was
an  upright  and  just  judge,  and,  among  the  minor
changes  that  he  instituted  in  the  courts,  established
the  office  of  constable,  whose  duties  before  his  ad-
ministration had  devolved  upon  the  soldiers.  He
was  intimate  with  many  eminent  English  statesmen.
He  published,  with  William  Livingston.  "  Revised
Ijaws  of  New  York,  1690-1762"  (New  York,  1762),
and  "  History  of  the  Province  of  New  York  from
its  Discovery  in  1732,"  of  which  Chancellor  James
Kent  says:  "  It  is  as  dry  as  onlinary  annals."  and
which  John  Neal  calls  *'  a  dull,  heavy,  and  circum-
stantial affair"  (Ix)ndon,  1793;  republished,  with
additions  bv  William  Smith,  the  third,  1814).— The
second  William's  son,  WHliam,  historian,  b.  in
New  York,  7  Feb.,  1769;  d.  in  Quel)ec,  Canada,
17  Dec.,  1847,  acconipanie<l  his  father  to  England
in  1783,  and  returned  with  him  to  Canada  in
1786,  meanwhile  attending  a  grammar-school  near
Kensington,  England.  He  oecame  successively
clerk  of  the  provincial  parliament,  ma&ter  in  chan-
cery, and  in  1814  secretary  of  state  for  the  colonies
and  a  memlx»r  of  the  executive  council.  He  pub-
lished a  "History  of  Canada  from  its  Discovery"
(2  vols.,  Quebet!,  1815). — Another  son  of  the  first
William,  Joshna  Rett,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1 71^(5;  d.  then*  in  1818,  was  eilucatetl  for  the
bar,  and  practise<l  with  success.  During  the  Revo-
lution he  was  a  Tory  in  politics,  and  in  lienedict
Arnold's  treason  in  1780  flgure<l  as  tiis  ttwl  or  ac-
complice. When  Andre  went  up  the  Hu«ls<m  river
to  meet  Arnold,  the  two  conspirators  ^tassed  the
night  of  22  Sept.  at  Smith's  house.  When  the  plot
was  complete  Andre  was  ready  to  return,  but,  for
some  reason  that  Smith  never  explained,  the  latter
refuseil  to  carry  him  on  boanl  the  "Vulture,"  but
ac-companied  him  by  land  to  a  pla(*e  of  supttosed
safety,  exchanging  cfwts  b»«fore  they  jMirte«i,  for
the  iH'tter  prot«H'tion  of  Andn''.  Smith  was  subse-
quently trie<l  by  a  military  court  for  his  connection
with  the  affair,  and  was  ac4|uitted,  but  taken  into
custo«ly  by  the  civil  authorities  and  committed  to
jail,  .\fter  several  months'  imprisonment  he  es-
caped in  woman's  dress  and  made  his  way  \o  New


692


SMITH


SMITH


y^SnJ^


York,  where  he  was  protected  bv  the  loyal  popula-
tion. He  went  to  England  at  the  close  of  the  war,
but  subsequently  returned  to  the  United  States.
He  published  "An  Authentic  Narrative  of  the
Causes  that  led  to  the  Death  of  Major  Andre,"  of
which  Jared  Sparks  says :  "  The  volume  is  not  wor-
thy of  the  least  credit  except  when  the  statements
are  corroborated  by  other  authorities"  (London,
1808:  New  York,  1809).

SMITH,  William,  clergyman,  b.  near  Aber-
deen, Scotland,  in  1727 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia.  Pa.,  14
May,  1803.  He  entered  the  college  in  his  native
city,  and  was  graduated  in  1747.  After  spending
several  years  in  teaching  he  embarked  for  this

country,  and  in
1752  was  invited
to  take  charge
of  the  seminary
in  Philadelphia,
which  subse-
quently became
the  University
ofPennsylvania.
He  went  to  Eng-
lajid  in  1753,  re-
ceived orders  in
the  Church  of
England,  and  on
his  return  the
next  year  en-
tered upon  his  ed-
ucational work.
He  revisited
England  in  1759,
received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.
from  the  University  of  Oxford,  and  was  honored
subsequently  with  the  same  degree  from  Aberdeen
college,  and  from  Trinity  college,  Dublin.  In  addi-
tion to  his  work  as  an  instructor.  Dr.  Smith  engaged
actively  in  missionary  duty  as  one  of  the  Propaga-
tion society's  workers  in  Pennsylvania  from  1766
till  the  opening  of  the  Revolution.  He  favored  the
American  view  of  the  differences  with  England,
and  delivered  a  sermon  in  June,  1775,  by  request
of  the  officers  of  Col.  Cadwallader's  battalion,  wnich
produced  a  sensation  both  here  and  in  the  mother
country.  Subsequently  he  lost  popularity  in  this
respect,  and  was  looked  on  as  giving  doubtful  sup-
port to  patriotic  measures,  the  charge  of  disloyalty
being  partially  owing  to  his  marriage  to  Rebecca,
daughter  of  Gov.  William  Moore.  The  charter  of
the  College  of  Philadelphia  was  taken  away  by  the
legislature  of  Pennsylvania  in  1779,  whereupon  Dr.
Smith  removed  to  Chestertown,  Md.,  and  became
rector  of  Chester  parish.  He  established  a  clas-
sical seminary,  which  was  chartered  as  a  college  by
the  general  assembly  of  Maryland  in  June,  1782.
It  was  named  Washington  college,  and  Dr.  Smith
became  its  president.  In  May,  1783,  a  convention
of  the  clergy  of  Maryland  was  held  for  organiza-
tion of  the  American  Protestant  Episcopal  church
in  that  state,  and  Dr.  Smith  was  chosen  president.
At  a  convention  in  June  of  the  same  year  he  was
elected  bishop  of  Maryland,  but,  as  the  election
was  not  approved  by  many,  and  the  general  con-
vention of  1786  refused  to  recommend  him  for
consecration,  he  was  not  elevated  to  the  episcopate.
He  was  several  times  clerical  delegate  to  the  general
convention,  and  was  uniformly  chosen  president  of
that  body.  He  was  appointed  in  1785  on  the  com-
mittee to  propose  alterations  in  the  liturgy,  which
resulted  in  wnat  is  known  in  ecclesiastical  litera-
ture as  the  "  Proposed  Book."  In  the  preparation
of  this  he  had  the  chief  part,  and  the  book  was  pub-


lished in  1786,  but  the  alterations  were  never  sanc-
tioned by  any  action  of  the  church.  In  1789  the
charter  was  restored  by  the  legislature  to  the  col-
lege in  Philadelphia,  and  Dr.  Smith,  on  being  in-
vited to  return,  resumed  his  office  as  provost.  He
spent  the  latter  years  of  his  life  at  his  residence  at
>alls  of  Schuylkill,  near  Philadelphia,  and  en-
gaged largely  in  secular  pursuits,  especially  land
speculations.  He  was  much  given  to  scientific  re-
search, was  a  man  of  more  than  ordinary  ability
and  broad  culture,  and  was  regarded  as  an  eloquent
and  effective  preacher.  Besides  separate  sermons
and  various  addresses  and  orations,  he  published  a
collection  of  "  Discourses  on  Public  Occasions "
(London,  1759;  2d  ed„  enlarged,  1763);  "Brief
Account  of  the  Province  of  Pennsylvania  "  (Lon-
don, 2d  ed.,  1755;  New  York,  1865);  a  series  of
eight  essays,  entitled  "  The  Hermit,"  in  the  "Amer-
ican Magazine,"  at  Philadelphia  (1757-8) ;  an  ac-
count of  "  Bouquet's  Expedition  against  the  West-
ern Indians  "  (1765 :  new  ed.,  with  preface  by  Fran-
cis Parkman,  Cincinnati,  1885) ;  and  an  edition  of
the  poems  of  Nathaniel  Evans,  with  a  memoir
(1772).  Shortly  before  his  death  he  made  a  collec-
tion of  his  printed  sermons,  addresses,  etc.,  for
publication.  Bishop  White  furnished  a  preface,
and  added  other  sermons  from  manuscripts  of  Dr.
Smith's,  which  were  published  in  two  vols.  (Phila-
delphia, 1803).  See  "  Life  and  Correspondence  of
Rev,  William  Smith,"  by  his  great-grandson,  Horace
Wemyss  Smith  (2  vols.,  1879).  Dr.  Smith's  vignette
is  from  the  portrait  painted  in  1800  by  Gilbert
Stuart.  His  daughter,  Mrs.  Blodget,  was  also
painted  by  the  same  artist. — His  son,  William
Moore,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  June,
1759 ;  d.  at  Ealls  of  Schuylkill,  Pa.,  12  March,  1821,
was  graduated  at  the  College  of  Philadelphia  in
1775,  studied  law,  and  attained  to  a  high  rank  in  his
profession.  He  was  appointed  an  agent  for  the
settlement  of  claims  that  were  provided  for  in  the
6th  article  of  John  Jay's  treaty,  and  visited  England
in  1803  to  close  his  commission,  after  which  he  re-
turned to  Pennsylvania  and  devoted  the  remainder
of  his  life  to  scholarly  pursuits.  His  publications  in-
clude several  political  pamphlets  and  essays,  and  a
volume  of  poems  (Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1784;  London,
1786).— William  Moore's  son,  William  Rudolnh,
politician,  b.  in  La  Trappe,  Montgomery  co..  Pa.,
31  Aug.,  1787;  d.  in  Quincy,  111.,  22  Aug.,  1868,
was  carefully  educated  by  his  grandfather.  Rev.
William  Smith,  until  1803,  when  he  accompanied
his  father  as  private  secretary  to  England,  studied
law  in  the  Middle  Temple,  and  on  his  return  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Philadelphia  in  1808.  He
removed  to  Huntingdon  county.  Pa.,  the  following
year,  became  deputy  attorney-general  for  Cambria
county  in  1811,  and  during  the  second  war  with
Great  Britain,  having  previously  been  major-gen-
eral of  state  militia,  was  appointed  colonel  of
the  42d  Pennsylvania  reserves.  He  commanded
this  regiment  in  support  of  the  movement  on
Canada  under  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  and  partici-
pated in  the  battle  of  Lundy's  Lane.  He  subse-
quently served  many  terms  in  both  branches  of  the
legislature,  and  in  1837  was  appointed,  with  Gov.
Henry  Dodge,  U.  S.  commissioner  to  treat  with  the
Chippewa  Indians  for  the  purchase  of  their  pineries,
a  large  part  of  the  territory  that  is  now  embraced
in  the  state  of  Minnesota.  After  successfully  nego-
tiating that  enterprise  he  settled  at  Mineral  Point,
Wis.,  where  he  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life.
He  was  adjutant-general  of  the  territory  of  Wis-
consin in  1839-'52,  and  district  attorney  of  Iowa
county  for  many  years,  presided  over  the  first
Democratic  convention  in  Wisconsin  in  1840,  and


SMITH


SMITH


698


WM  clerk  of  the  UrritoriHl  council  in  1846.  He
WM  a  member  of  the  C'onstitutionHl  convention  uf
that  year,  took  an  active  part  in  ita  proceeding
and  WHS  chairman  of  the  committee  on  militia.
Mr.  Smith  vas  chief  clerk  of  the  Htate  senate  in
ltM»-'50,  and  attomcy-ifencnil  in  lH58-'8.  For
many  years  he  wa;*  presiut-nt  of  the  Wi.sconsin  his-
torical'society.  He  published  "  Obstervjitious  on
Wisconsin  Territory  "  (I'lnlatlflphia,  \HiiH);  "  I)is-
cours*'  before  the  State  Historical  SK-iety  "  (Madi-
son, Wis.,  1850);  and  "  History  of  Wis<-<jnsin,"  com-
pih^l  by  direction  of  the  legislature  (1st  and  3d
vols.,  1854;  2d  and  4th  vols.,  18(M{).— Another  son
of  William  M(N)n<,  Richard  Penn,  author,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Ph..  Vi  March,  lim ;  d.  in  Falls  of
Schuylkill.  Pa.,  12  Auj;..  lHi')4,  evintrd  a  fondness
for  literary  pursuits  at  an  early  age,  and  con-
tribute<l  to  the  "  Union  "  a  scries  of  essays  entitleil
"The  Plagiary."  He  studied  law  under  William
Rawle,  the  elder,  was  admitteil  to  the  l)ar  in  1821,
succeetletl  William  Duane  as  editor  and  proprietor
of  the  '•  Aurora  "  in  1822,  and  published  it  for  five
years,  during  which  it  was  one  of  the  chief  journals
of  the  country.  He  resumed  practice  in  1827,  but
subsequently  devote<l  much  time  to  literary  pur-
suits, and  was  the  author  of  several  j)oems  and
many  plavs,  fifteen  of  which  were  produced  on  the
Philadelpliia  sta^,  and  in  Ijondon,  England,  in
most  instances  with  decided  success.  Of  these  the
best  known  are  the  tragedy  of  "Caius  Marius,"
written  for  Edwin  Forrest  and  acted  by  him  in
1831, and  the  farces  and  comedies  "  (^uite  ('orrect,"
"The  Disowned,"  "The  Deformcil,"  "  A  Wife  at  a
Venture," "The  Sentinels,""  William  Penn,"  "The
Water- VVitch,"  "  Is  She  a  Brigand*"  "  My  Uncle's
Wetlding,"  "The  Daughter,  "The  Actress  of
Padua,"  and  a  five-act  cTrama  entitled  the  "Vene-
tians." He  possessed  brilliant  social  qualities  and
s  trenchant  wit.  Besides  his  plays  he  wrote
"The  Forsaken,"  a  novel  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1831);  "  Life  of  David  Crockett"  (ISiiG) ;  "  Life  of
Martin  Van  Buren"  (1836);  and  many  tales.  A
selection  of  his  miscellanies,  with  his  memoir  by
Morton  McMichael.  was  collected  and  published  by
hLs  son,  Horace  Wemyss  Smith  (185(i),  and  his
"Complete  Works,  embodied  in  his  Life  and  Cor-
respondence" was  also  published  by  the  latter  au-
thor (4  vols.,  1888). — His  son,  Horace  Wemjrsa,
author,  b.  in  Philadelphia  county,  Pa.,  15  .\ug.,l825,
was  educated  in  the  Philadelphia  high-sch<K)l,  and
studied  dentistry,  but  never  pnictisc<l,  Ix^ng  early
inclineil  to  literary  pursuits.  He  entere<l  the  Na-
tional arruv  in  18(51,  but  soon  returned  to  journal-
ism, in  which  he  had  previously  engaged,  and  has
since  devoted  himself  to  literature.  He  collected
the  "  Miscellanies"  of  his  father  that  are  referred
to  al»ove,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Nuts  for  Future
Historians  to  Crack"  (Philadelphia,  1850);  "  York-
town  Orderlv-Book  "  (186.'}) ;  "  I.ife  of  Rev.  William
Smith  "  (2  vols.,  1880) ;  and  "  History  of  the  German-
town  Acatlemy"  (1882). — Another  son  of  Richard
Penn,  Richaril  Penn,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  9  Mav.  IMl :  d.  in  West  Brighton,  Staten
island,  N.  V.,  27  Nov..  1887,  was  educatinl  at  West
Chester  college.  Pa.  Immediately  after  leaving  col-
lege he  settled  in  Kansas,  and  successfully  engaged
in  business  there,  but  returned  to  Philadelphia  in
1860,  liecame  lieutenant  in  the  71st  I'ennsylvania
volunteers,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  colonel.  He
was  engaged  in  the  battles  of  Vorktown,  Fair  Oaks,
White  Oak  Swamp,  and  Malvern  Hill,  covered
the  retreat  at  second  Bull  Run,  was  wounded  at
AntieJam,  and  at  Gettysburg  <lid  good  service  by
bringing  guns  into  use  against  (ien.  George  E.
Pickett's  charge.  He  was  mustered  out  of  service
TOL,  v. — S8


in  1864,  and  engaged  in  businen  in  New  York
city.  On  3  July,  1887,  he  delivered  an  address  at
Gettysburg  on  the  unveiling  of  the  monument
erectetl  in  honor  of  Lieut.  Alonzo  H.  Cusbing  and
the  4th  U.  S.  artillery  by  the  71st  Pcnnsvlvania
volunteerK — Another  son  of  William,  Cnarlen,
lawyer,  b.  in  I'hilmlelphia,  Pa.,  4  Mur<h.  1765;  d.
there.  18  .March,  18;i6,  wasgraduatetl  at  Wushington
college,  Md.,  in  1783,  studied  law  with  his  brother,
William  M(K)re  .Smith,  and  was  admittitl  to  the
Philadelphia  bar  in  1786.  He  praclisc<l  in  Sunbury,
Pa.,  for  several  years,  was  a  «lelegate  to  the  State
constitutional  convention  in  1792,  M'ttled  in  I^n-
caster.  Pa.,  and  attaine<l  eminence  a.<t a  land  lawyer.
He  became  pn'sident  judge  in  1819  of  the  judicial
district  comiK)s«*d  of  the  counties  of  CumlxTland,
Franklin,  and  Adams,  and  in  1820  uf  the  newly
formed  district  court  of  Ijancaster  city  and  county.
His  later  life  was  spent  in  Philadelphia.  He  was
a  memlier  of  the  American  philos4tphical  socie-
ty, and  in  1819  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  the  University  of  Pennsylvjmia.  He  wa-s  ai»-
pointed  by  the  legislature  in  1810  to  revise  the
laws  of  the  state,  and  to  frame  a  compilation  of
them,  which  he  published  with  a  "Treatise  on  the
Land  I>awsof  IVnnsvlvaiiia"  (5  vols.,  Philadelphia,
181(>-'12).— William's  half-brother,  Thonia.H,  mem-
ber of  the  Continental  congress,  b.  near  Alx;rdecn,
Scotland,  in  1745;  d.  in  Phila<lelphia,  Pa.,  16  June,
1809,  emigrated  to  this  country  at  an  early  age,
became  deputy  surveyor  of  an  extensive  frontier
district  of  Pennsylvania,  and,  establishing  himself
in  Bedford  county,  became  prothonotary  clerk,
clerk  of  the  sessions,  and  recorder.  He  early  ioined
the  patriot  cause,  was  a  colonel  of  militia  during
the  Ilevolution,  and  a  member  of  the  State  consti-
tutional convention  in  1776,  serve<l  several  terms  in
the  legislature,  and  was  in  congress  in  1780-^.
He  became  judge  of  the  courts  of  the  counties  of
Cumberland,  Huntingdon,  Bedford,  and  Franklin,
in  1791,  and  from  1794  until  his  death  was  a  judge
of  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsvlvania.  He  was  a
devote<l  adherent  of  the  Fe<leral  party. — Thomas's
son,  (jeorge  WaHliington,  author,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  4  Aug.,  1800;  d.  there,  22  April,  1876,
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1818,  studied  law
under  Horace  Binney,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  Philadelphia  in  1823,  l)ut  did  not  practise,  and
spent  several  years  in  EurofHS  and  Asia  exploring
tne  antiquities  of  those  countries.  He  was  a  founder
of  the  Pennsylvania  historical  society,  for  many
years  one  of  its  councillors,  and  at  his  death  senior
vice-president.  Mr.  Smith  possessed  a  large  estate,
of  wnich  he  gave  liljerally  to  benevolent  objects.
He  was  a  member  of  the  vestrv  of  Christ  church,
Philadelphia,  for  more  than  thirty  years,  and  an-
nuallr  deposited  f5,(XK)  in  its  offertory  for  the
benedt  of  the  Episcopal  hospital.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  philosophical  Mx-iety  in
1840-'76.  IIepul)Iished  "  Facts  and  .\rguments  in
Favor  of  adopting  li^iilroads  in  Preference  to
Canals"  (Philadelphia,  1824);  "Defence  of  the
Pennsylvania  System  in  Favor  of  Solitary  Confine-
ment of  Prisoners"  (1829);  and  several  pamphlets
on  similar  sutiji-cts,  and  edited  Nicholas  Wood's
treatise  on  "  Railroads  "  (1832). — William's  nephew,
William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Al)erdeen.  Scotland,  in
1754:  d.  in  New  York  city.  6  April.  1821,  wa<<  edu-
cate<l  at  one  of  the  .Scotch  universities  (prol>ably
Aber<le«>n).  He  studied  for  the  ministrv.  and  was
ailmitt«Ml  to  orders  in  the  Church  of  England  alxiut
1780.  He  came  to  the  United  Slates  in  178.5.  was
minister  of  Stepnev  |>arish.  Md..  for  two  years,  then
became  rector  of  ^^t.  I'aul's  church,  Narragansett,
R.  I.,  for  a  year  and  a  half,  after  which  he  accepte<]


594


SMITH


SMITH


the  rectorship  of  Trinity  church,  Newport,  in  1790.
This  post  he  held  for  seven  years.  He  aided  in
organizing  the  Episcopal  church  in  Rhode  Island,
and  delivered  the  sermon  at  its  first  convention  in
November,  1790.  He  next  was  rector  of  St.  Paul's
church,  Norwalk,  Conn.,  in  1797-1800,  then  re-
moved to  New  York  city,  opened  a  grammar-school,
and  acquired  high  reputation  as  a  teacher.  In  1802
he  accepted  the  pnncipalship  of  the  Episcopal
academy,  Cheshire,  Conn.,  and  gave  instruction  to
candidates  for  orders  in  connection  with  his  other
duties.  In  1806  he  returned  to  New  York  city,
where  he  resumed  teaching  the  classics,  mostly  to
private  scholars,  lie  performed  clerical  duty  to
some  extent,  but  was  never  again  settled  in  any
parish.  Dr.  Smith  was  a  man  of  superior  ability
and  excellent  scholarship  and  culture,  possessing
ready  command  of  language,  but  he  lacked  good
judgment  and  skill  in  managing  youth  and  guiding
affairs.  His  ability  was  clearly  displayed  in  the
preparation  of  the  '•  Office  of  Induction  of  Ministers
mto  Parishes."  He  was  requested  by  the  convoca-
tion in  Connecticut  to  prepare  such  an  office,  which
was  approved  and  set  forth  with  slight  changes  by
the  general  convention  of  1804.  It  was  issued
again,  with  some  alterations,  in  1808 ;  the  title  was
changed  to  "An  Office  of  Institution  of  Ministers
into  Parishes  or  Churches,"  and  its  use  was  made
permissible.  Dr.  Smith  was  the  author  of  "  The
Keasonableness  of  setting  forth  the  Praises  of  God,
according  to  the  Use  of  the  Primitive  Church,  with
Historical  Views  of  Metre  Psalmody"  (New  York,
1814) ;  "  Essays  on  the  Christian  Ministry  "  (a  con-
troversial work  in  defence  of  episcopacy) ;  "  Chants
for  Public  Worship " ;  and  several  occasional  ser-
mons and  articles  in  magazines.

SMITH,  William,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1730;  d.  there,
27  March,  1814.  He  supported  the  patriot  cause,
was  a  delegate  to  the  Continental  congress  in
1777-'8,  served  in  the  1st  congress  in  1789-'91,
having  been  chosen  as  a  Federalist,  was  appointed
by  Gen.  Washington  auditor  of  the  treasury  in  July
of  the  latter  year,  served  three  months,  and  was  a
presidential  elector  in  1792,  casting  his  vote  for
George  Washington.

SMITH,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  North  Caro-
lina in  1762;  d.  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  10  June,  1840.
Nothing  is  known  of  his  ancestry.  He  emigrated  to
South  Carolina  when  he  was  very  young  and  poor,
but  obtained  means  to  procure  an  education,  and
in  1780  was  graduated  at  Mount  Zion  college,
Winnsborough,  S.  C.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1784,  served  in  the  legisla-
ture for  several  years  and  in  the  state  senate  in
1806-'8,  at  the  latter  date,  while  president  of  the
senate,  becoming  circuit  judge.  He  was  chosen  to
congress  as  a  Democrat  in  1796,  served  one  term,
returned  to  the  bench,  and  occupied  it  till  1816,
when  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the
vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  John  Taylor,
serving  in  1817-'23.  He  was  a  Unionist  candidate  for
re-election  in  1822,  but  was  defeated  by  Robert  Y.
Hayne.  He  was  then  chosen  to  the  state  house  of
representatives,  and  in  1825  led  the  party  that  re-
versed John  C.  Calhoun's  previous  policy  in  South
Carolina.  In  December,  1826,  ho  was  returned  to
the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  John
Gaillard.  He  was  defeated  in  the  next  canvass,  but
during  his  senatorial  service  was  twice  president
pro  tempore,  and  declined  the  appointment  of  judge
of  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States.  In
1829  he  received  the  seven  electoral  votes  of
Georgia  for  the  vice-presidency.  In  1831  he  signed
the  appeal  to  the  Union  party  of  South  Carolina,


served  a  third  term  in  the  state  senate,  but,  differing
in  politics  from  John  C.  Calhoun,  removed  to  Ala-
bama, that  he  might  not  reside  where  the  latter'a
policy  prevailed.  He  served  several  sessions  in
the  legislature  of  that  state,  and  declined  in  1836
the  appointment  of  justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme
court,  which  was  offered  him  by  President  Jack-
son. Having  bought  large  tracts  of  land  in  Louisi-
ana and  Alabama  during  his  first  term  in  the
U.  S.  senate,  he  accumulated  a  large  fortune,  built
a  costly  residence  in  Huntsville,  and  died  a  mill-
ionaire. He  was  an  able  though  tyrannical  judge,
an  implacable  opponent,  and  an  ardent  friend.  He
was  a  state-rights  advocate  of  the  strictest  sort,  but
opposed  nullification  as  a  new  doctrine,  a  protec-
tive tariff,  and  a  national  system  of  improvements.
SMITH,  William,  governor  of  Virginia,  b.  in
King  George  county,  Va.,  6  Sept.,  1796 ;  d.  in  War-
renton.  Va.,  18  May,  1887.  He  was  educated  at
classical  schools  in  Virginia  and  Connecticut,  be-
gan to  practise  law  in  Culpeper  county,  Va.,  in
1818,  ana  engaged  in  politics.  After  serving  the
Democratic  party  in  a  dozen  canvasses  as  a  politi-
cal speaker,  ne  was  chosen  state  senator  in  1830,
served  five  years,  and  in  1840  was  elected  to  con-
gress, but  was  defeated  in  the  next  canvass,  his
district  having  become  strongly  Whig.  He  then
removed  to  Fauquier  county,  where  in  December,
1845,  he  was  one  day  addressed  as  Governor  Smith.
He  then  heard  for  the  first  time  that,  without  con-
sulting him,  the  Virginia  legislature  had  chosen
him  governor  for  the  term  beginning  1  Jan.,  1846.
He  removed  to  California  in  1850,  was  president
of  the  first  Democratic  convention  that  was  held
in  that  state,  returned  to  Virginia  the  same  year,
and  in  1853-'61  was  a  member  of  congress,  during
which  service  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee
on  the  laws  of  public  printing.  In  June,  1861,  he
became  colonel  of  tne  49th  Virginia  infantry,
and  he  was  chosen  soon  afterward  to  the  Con-
federate congress,  but  he  resigned  in  1862  for
active  duty  in  the  field.  He  was  promoted  briga-
dier-general the  same  year,  and  severely  wounded
at  Antietam.  He  was  re-elected  governor  in  1863,
served  till  the  close  of  the  war,  and  subsequently
sat  for  one  term  in  the  state  house  of  delegates.
Although  he  was  never  a  student  of  statesmanship,
he  was  a  marvellously  adroit  politician,  and  few
members  of  the  Democratic  party  were  furnished
with  so  large  a  number  of  ingenious  pleas.  Asa  sol-
dier he  was  noted,  on  the  contrary,  for  valor  rather
thati  tactical  skill.  Throughout  his  long  career
he  was  a  familiar  figure  in  many  legislative  bodies,
and  his  eccentricities  of  habit  and  his  humor  en-
deared him  to  his  constituents.  In  early  manhood
he  established  a  line  of  post-coaches  through  Vir-
ginia, the  Carolinas,  and  Georgia,  on  which  he  con-
tracted to  carry  the  U.  S.  mail.  His  soubriquet
of  "Extra  Billy,"  which  clung  to  him  throughout
his  life,  grew  out  of  his  demands  for  extra  compen-
sation for  that  service.  —  His  cousin,  William
Waag'h,  educator,  b.  in  Warrenton,  Fauquier  co.,
Va.,  12  March,  1845,  was  educated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Virginia  and  at  Randolph  Macon  college,
entered  the  Confederate  service  at  seventeen  years
of  age,  fought  through  the  war  in  the  ranks,  twice
refusing  commissions,  and  was  wounded  at  the  bat-
tles of  5'air  Oaks  and  Gettysburg.  He  was  princi-
pal of  Bethel  academy  in  1871-'8,  when  he  liecame
professor  of  languages  in  Randolph  Macon,  held
office  till  1886,  and  since  that  time  has  been  presi-
dent of  that  college.  He  has  published  "  Outlines
of  Psychology"  (New  York,  1883),  and  "Chart  of
Comparative  Syntax  of  Latin,  Greek,  French,  Ger-
man, and  English  "  (1885).  ,


SMITH


SMITH


005


SMITH,  Winiam,  naval  offloor.  b.  in  Wash-
ington, Ky.,  »  .1(111..  IHCKJ;  d.  in  St.  Ixiuiit,  Mu..  1
May,  1873.  He  untvnil  the  U.  S.  navy  as  a  ini«l-
shipnum  in  18*^),  was  attached  to  the  "Sea-Gull,"
ana  served  in  Com.  David  I'ortur'H  squadmn
against  the  Weet  Indian  pinitvs.  IK*  U'caine  lieu-
tenant in  1881,co-o|>erati*<l  in  the  "  Vuiulalia"  with
the  arinv  in  M'veral  exiie<litic)n.s  apiin.sl  the  S'lni-
nole  Imiiuns  in  Florida  in  lHi{<'>-'7,  and  during  the
Mexican  war  lUvsistiMl  at  the  capture  of  Tiispan  and
Tobasco.  Me  U'caine  commander  in  IHTyl,  was  in
charire  of  the  "  Ijevant,"of  the  Hast  Indian  srjuad-
ron,  and  i>articipat<>d  in  the  capture  of  the  fiarrier
forts  at  Canton.  China,  in  185(5.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  in  the  frigatt^  "  Congress "  when  she
was  sunk  l»y  the  ".Merriinac."  U-caine  comnuKlore.
10  July.  180'J.  commandtnl  the  "  Waehusett  "  and

{run-lM»at^  ctvojierating  with  (ten.  George  B.  McCMel-
an's  army  in  that  year,  and  was  subsequently  in
command  of  the  Pensacola  naval  station  till  9  Jan.,

1865,  when  he  was  retiretl.
SMITH,  William  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in

Fredericksburg.  Va.,  2»  Nov.,  1802;  II.  in  Rich-
mond, Va..  1  March,  1870,  He  was  admitttni  to
the  Virginia  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episco-
pal church  in  1825,  Ix'came  agent  of  llandolph  Ma-
con college  in  18^W,  and  was  subse<|uently  pastor
of  Methodist  churches  in  Petersburg,  Richmond.
Norfolk,  and  Lynchburg.  Va.  He  was  a  memlwr
of  every  Methodist  general  conference  from  1832
till  1844,  of  the  Louisville,  Ky.,  convention,  at
which  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  was
organized  in  the  latter  year.  an<l  of  every  general
conference  of  that  boily  till  his  death.  In  184r>-*(56
he  was  president  of  liandolph  Macon  college,
and  during  his  occupation  of  that  ofUcc  he  also
ftlletl  the  chair  of  moral  science  there,  and  lectured
in  Virginia  and  North  Carolina.  He  was  trans-
ferred to  the  St.  Louis  conference  in  1866,  and  was
ap])ointed  by  the  general  conference  one  of  the
commissioners  on  the  part  of  the  southern  church
to  settle  the  property  question  with  the  Methodist
EJpiscojjal  church.  In  1869  he  became  president
of  Central  university.  Mo.  He  edited  the  "  Chris-
tian Advocate "  at  Richmond,  Va.,  for  several
years,  and  published  "  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy
of  Slavery,  a  defence  of  that  institution  as  it  ex-
isted in  the  southern  states  (Richmond,  Va.,  1860).
SMITH,  William  E.,  statesman,  b.  in  Scotland
in  1824.  lie  came  to  this  country  when  a  boy.
spent  his  youth  in  New  York  and  Michigan,  and
Anally  settled  at  Fox  liake,  Wis.,  where  he  engaged
in  business.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Legis-
lature in  1851  and  re-elected  in  1871.  when  he  was
made  s[»eaker  of  the  house.  Besides  holding  many
other  ofTices.  he  has  been  twice  elected  governor  of
Wisconsin,  in  1877  and  1879,  on  the  latter  occasion
receiving  the  largest  majority  that  was  ever  given
to  a  governor  in  that  state.  He  is  earnestly  en-
gagetl in  all  i>hilanthn>pic  and  Christian ent«'r-

S rises,  especially  those  connected  with  the  liaptist
enomination.  with  which  he  is  identified.
SMITH.  William  Ernest,  assistant  secretary
of  the  treasury,  b.  in  R<X'kl4>n.  111.,  8  June.  1852;
d.  in  Plattsburg,  N.  Y..  30  March,  1888.  He  was
graduated  at  liafayette  in  1872  with  the  degree  of
mining  engineer,  admitteil  to  the  l)ar  of  Platts-
burg.  N.  v..  in  1H75.  and  was  its  mayor  in  1877-'8.
He  was  in  the  legislature  in  1884,  and  l)ecame  a
leader  of  the  supfKirters  of  Samuel  J.  Tilden.  Dur-
ing this  .service  lie  inserte<l  in  the  supply  bill  what
is  known  as  the  "  P'reeilom  of  worship  clause."  by
which  an  apprr)[iriation  of  f  1.500  is  paid  to  I{4iman
Catholic  prif-sts  for  their  services  to  pristmers  in
the  three  }*arishes  where  the  New  York  state  pris-


^^^^t^..^


ons  are  situatinl.  He  was  chainnan  of  the  New
York  state  central  Denutcratic  committee  in  1S84,
anil  in  1885  was  ap[M)inted  by  President  ('leveland
assistant  secretary  of  the  treasury,  which  |n»t  he
held  till  1886,  when  he  resigned  to  lx>come  gen-
eral solicitor  to  the  St.  Paul,  Minnea|N)lis,  and
Manitolwi  railnxtd.  His  death  was  the  result  of
overwork  in  tlint  olllce.

SMITH.  William  Farrar.  soldier,  b.  in  St.  Al-
bans, Vt..  17  Feb.,  1824. He  was  gnwluate<I  at  the
U.  S.  military  a^-ademy  in  1845,  apiK)inted  to  the
corps  of  topographical  engineers,  an<l.  after  a  year's
S4*rvice  on  lake  survey  duty,  was  assistant  professor
of  mathematics
at West Point
in  1846-U He
was then en-
gaged in sur-
veys In Texas
for  the  Mexican
boundary  com-
mission, and  in
Floridatillia55,
when  he  return-
ed to his for-
mer duty  at  the
military acade-
my. In  1853  he
liecame  1st  lieu-
tenant of  topo-
graphical  engi-
neers. He  was
Elace<i  on  light-
ouse  construc-
tion service  in  1856,  became  cai>tain  of  topographi-
cal engineers.  1  July,  1859.  and  was  engineer  secre-
tary of  the  light-house  l»oard  from  that  year  till
April,  1861. After  serving  on  mu.stering  duty  in
New  York  for  one  month,  he  was  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler  in  June  and  July,  1861,
at  Fort  >lonroe,  Va.,  became  colonel  of  the  Jld  Ver-
mont volunteers  in  the  latter  month,  and  was  en-
gaged in  the  defences  of  Washington,  D,  C. He
became  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  13  Aug.,
particifMited  in  the  Virginia  peninsula  campaign,
and  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel.  U.  S.  army,
for  gallant  and  meritorious  service  at  the  battle
of  V^f  hite  Oak  Swamp.  IW  June.  1862. He  l)ecame
major-general  of  volunteers.  4  July.  1862.  and  led
his  division at South Mountain and  Antietam,
receiving the brevet  of  colonel,  U.  S.  army,  17
Sept.,  1862.  for  the  latter  battle. He  was  a.ssigncd
to  the  command  of  the  6th  corps,  and  engaged
at  the  battle  of Fredericksburg,  Va.,  in Decem-
ber, was  transferred to the  9th  corps  in  Febni-
ary,  1863,  and  became  major  in  the  corps  of  en-
gineers on  3  March. The  next  day  his  appoint-
ment of  major-general  of  volunteers,  not  naving
lK»en  confirmed  by  the  senate.  exi>in'd  by  constitu-
tional limitation,  and  ho  resume<i  his  rank  of  brig-
adier-general in  the  volunteer  service. He  was  in
command  of  a  division  of  the  De|)artment  of  the
Sus4)uchanna  in  June  and  July,  1863,  became  chief
engineer  of  the  Department  of  the  Cuml)erland  in
Octolx'r,  and  of  the  military  division  of  the  Missis-
sippi in  Noveml)er,  186J1. He  was  engaginl  in  op-
erations alN^ut  ChattamMiga,  Tenn.,  iMirtici|)ating
in  the  battle  of  Missionary  Ridge, lie  rendered
im|K)rtant services  in  c«rrving  out  the Brown's
ferry  movement,  which  ma<le  it  p<issible  not  only
to  maintain  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  at  Chat-
tanooga, but  to  bring  Sherman  and Hooker  to
its  a.ssistance. In  his  report  to  the  joint  commit-
tee of  congress  on  the  conduct  of  the  war.  Gen.
George  H.  Thomas  said:  "To  Brig.-Gen.  W.  F.


696


SMITH


SMITH


Smith  should  be  accorded  great  praise  for  the  in-
genuity which  conceived,  and  the  ability  which
executed,  the  movement  at  Brown's  ferry.  When
the  bridge  was  thrown  at  Brown's  ferry,  on  the
morning  of  the  27th  Oct.,  1863,  the  surprise  was  as
great  to  the  army  within  Chattanooga  as  it  was  to
the  array  besieging  it  from  without."  The  house
committee  on  military  affairs,  in  April,  1865,  unani-
mously agreed  to  a  report  that  "as  a  subordinate,
Gen.  William  F.  Smith  had  saved  the  Army  of
the  Cumberland  from  capture,  and  afterward  di-
rected it  to  victory."  He  was  confirmed  as  major-
general  of  volunteers  in  March,  1864,  and  in  May
assigned  to  the  18th  corps,  which  he  commanded
at  Cold  Harbor  and  at  Petersburg  till  July,  when
he  was  placed  on  special  duty.  On  13  March,
1865,  he  received  the  brevets  of  brigadier-general,
U.  S.  army,  for  "gallant  and  meritorious  services
at  the  battle  of  Chattanooga,  Tenn.,"  and  that  of
major-general  for  services  in  the  field  during  the
civil  war.  He  resigned  his  volunteer  commission
in  1865,  and  that  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  1867.  He
became  president  of  the  International  telegraph
company  in  1865,  police  commissioner  of  New
York  city  in  1875,  and  subsequently  president  of
the  board.  Since  1881  he  has  been  a  civil  engineer.
He  was  known  in  the  army  as  "  Baldy  "  Smith.

SMITH,  William  Hehry,  journalist,  b.  in  Co-
lumbia county,  N.  Y.,  1  Dec,  1833.  In  1836  his
parents  emigrated  to  Ohio,  where  he  had  the  best
educational  advantages  that  the  state  then  afforded.
He  was  tutor  in  a  western  college,  and  then  assist-
ant editor  of  a  weekly  paper  in  Cincinnati,  of  which,
at  the  age  of  twenty-two,  he  became  editor,  doing
also  editorial  work  on  the  "  Literary  Review.
At  the  opening  of  the  civil  war  he  was  on  the  edi-
torial staff  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Gazette,"  and  dur-
ing the  war  he  took  an  active  part  in  raising  troops
and  forwarding  sanitary  supplies,  and  in  political
work  for  strengthening  the  government.  He  was
largely  instrumental  in  bringing  Gov.  John  Brough
to  the  front  as  the  candidate  of  the  united  Republi-
cans and  War  Democrats;  artd  at  Brough's  elec-
tion, in  1863,  he  became  the  latter's  private  secretary.
The  next  year  he  was  elected  secretary  of  state  of
Ohio,  and  he  was  re-elected  in  1866.  He  retired  from
public  ofTice  to  establish  the  "  Evening  Chronicle  "
at  Cinciimati,  but,  his  health  giving  way,  he  was
forced  to  withdraw  from  all  active  work.  In  1870
he  took  charge  of  the  affairs  of  the  Western  asso-
ciated press,  with  headquarters  at  Chicago.  In
1877  he  was  appointed  by  President  Hayes  collect-
or of  the  port  at  that  city,  and  was  instrumental
in  bringing  about  important  reforms  in  customs
methods  in  harmony  with  the  civil-service  policy
of  the  administration.  In  January,  1883,  he  effect-
ed the  union  of  the  New  York  associated  press  with
the  Western  associated  press,  and  became  general
manager  of  the  consolidated  association.  Mr.
Smith  is  a  student  of  historical  subjects.  He  is
author  of  "  The  St.  Clair  Papers  "  (2  vols.,  Cincin-
nati, 1882),  a  biography  of  Charles  Hammond,  and
many  contributions  to  American  periodicals.  He
has  partly  completed  (1888)  a  "  Political  History  of
the  United  States."  By  his  investigations  in  the
British  museum  he  has  brought  to  light  many  un-
published letters  of  Washington  to  Col.  Henry
Bouf|uet,  and  has  shown  that  those  that  were  fiub-
lishod  by  Jared  Sparks  were  not  given  correctly.

SMITH,  WiUiam  Loughton,  diplomatist,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1758;  d.  there  in  1812.  He
was  educated  in  England,  and  in  Geneva,  Switzer-
land, studied  law  in  the  Middle  Temple,  and  re-
turned to  Charleston  in  1783,  after  an  absence  of
thirteen  years. He  was  twice  chosen  to  the  legis-


lature, and  was  one  of  the  governor's  council.  In
1788  he  was  elected  to  the  first  congrejss,  and  his
was  the  first  contested  election  case  before  that
body,  his  opponent  being  Dr.  David  Ramsay,  the
historian.  Mr.  Smith  was  sustained  with  only
one  negative  vote.  He  was  an  able  and  frequent
debater,  advocating,  among  other  measures,  a  com-
mercial treaty  with  England  instead  of  Prance.
When  Jay's  treaty  was  before  the  senate,  he  was
burnt  in  effigy  in  Charleston,  in  the  outburst  of
public  feeling  against  it.  He  became  charge  d'af-
faires to  Portugal  in  1797.  In  1800  he  was  trans-
ferred to  the  Spanish  mission,  which  he  held  till
1801.  He  supported  the  administrations  of  Wash-
ington and  Adams,  but  was  a  vehement  opponent
of  Jefferson,  against  whose  pretensions  to  the
presidency  he  published  a  pamphlet.  His  other
works  include  "  Speeches  in  the  House  of  Repre-
sentatives of  the  United  States "  (London,  1794);
"  Address  to  his  Constituents  "  (1794) ;  "  Fourth-
of-July  Oration "  (1796) ;  "  Comparative  View  of
the  Constitution  of  the  States"  (Philadelphia,
1796);  and  several  essays,  published  under  the  sig-
nature of  "  Phocion  "  as  "  American  Arguments  for
British  Rights  "  (London,  1806).

smith;  William  Nathan  Harrell,  jurist,  b.
in  Murfreesborough,  N.  C,  24  Sept.,  1812;  d.  in
Raleigh,  N.  C,  14  Nov.,  1889.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1834,  studied  at  the  law  department
there,  was  admitted  to  practice  in  his  native  state
in  1840,  and  took  high  rank  at  the  bar.  He  served
in  the  legislature  in  1840,  and  in  the  state  senate
in  1848,  in  which  year  he  was  chosen  solicitor  for
the  1st  judicial  circuit,  and  held  office  for  two
terms  of  eight  years.  He  was  defeated  as  a  Whig
candidate  for  congress  in  1856,  returned  to  the  leg-
islature, was  chosen  to  congress  in  1858.  and  served
one  term.  He  declared  himself  for  secession  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war,  was  a  member  of  the
Confederate  congress  in  1861-5,  and  of  the  North
Carolina  legislature  in  the  latter  year.  During  the
administration  of  President  Johnson  he  aided  in  the
reconstruction  of  the  state  according  to  the  policy
that  he  suggested.  He  practised  his  profession  in
Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1870-'2,  returned  to  North  Caro-
lina in  the  latter  year,  and  settled  in  Raleigh.  He
was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  state  supreme
court,  succeeding  Richmond  W.  Pearson  in  1878,
and  continued  to  serve  by  re-election  after  that  date.

SMITH,  William  Ru-ssell,  congressman,  b.  in
Tuscaloosa,  Ala.,  8  Aug.,  1813.  He  was  educated
at  the  University  of  Alabama,  but  was  not  gradu-
ated, and  began  the  practice  of  law  in  Greensbor-
ough,  Ala.  He  served  in  the  Creek  war  in  1836.as
a  captain  of  volunteer  infantry,  removed  to  Tusca-
loosa in  1838,  founded  the  "  Monitor  "  in  that  city,
and  was  mayor  in  1839.  He  was  a  circuit  judge
and  major-general  of  state  militia  in  1850-'l,  and
in  the  former  year  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a
Whig,  serving  by  re-election  till  1857.  During  his
last  term  in  that  office  he  delivered  a  notable
speech  in  denunciation  of  Louis  Kossuth.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Alabama  convention  in  1861,  op-
posed secession,  but  after  the  opening  of  hostilities
sat  in  the  Confederate^ congress  till  1865.  He  was
president  of  the  University  of  Alabama  for  several
years  after  the  war,  but  resigned  to  devote  himself
to  his  profession  and  to  literary  pursuits.  He  has
published  "  The  Alabama  Justice  "  (New  York,
1841);  "The  Uses  of  Solitude,"  a  poem  (Albany,
N.  Y.,  1860) ;  "  As  it  Is,"  a  novel  (Tuscaloosa,  1860) ;
"  Condensetl  Alabama  Reports  "  (1862) ;  and  several
poems  and  legal  pamphlets.

SMITH,  William  Sooy,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Tarlton,  Ohio,  22  July,  1830. He  was  graduated


SMITH


SMITHSON


597


at  Ohio  univ(<n*ity  in  1840,  and  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary at'atlfmy  in  1858.  Ilu  n-jiifiriM'd  in  1854  ami
becatnp  a'^Kixtant  to  Lieut.-Col.  Samvn  I).  Graham,
of  the  U.  S.  to|M>^rH|ihi('al  t-npinwrn,  thon  in  charj^
of  the  frovcmnicnt  iniprovi'muntM  in  tho  ervtil  lak(>H.
In  1855  he  wttlf«l  in  HiitTulo,  N.  Y.,  ana  was  prin-
cipal of  a  hieh-M-h(K)l.  In  IH.'iT  he  mtuU'  the  fin<t
Burvcvs  for  tno  international  liridffo  at-msH  N'iag-
ara  river,  and  wax  ein{)Ioye«l  hy  tne  «-ily  of  Buf-
falo as  an  ex|H>rt  to  examine  the  bridf^e  i)lans  that
were  sul)niitt<><l.  Mo  was  then  eleetecl  enpini-er
and  8<H'n»tary  of  tho  Tn'nton  hx-omotive-works,
N.  .1.,  whieh  was  at  that  time  the  chief  iron-hridp'
manufacturinf;  company  in  this  country,  and  he
oontinutnl  so  until  IHOl.  While  serving  in  this
<*apaeity  he  was  sent  to  Culw  by  the  com|>anv.  and
he  also  constructed  an  iron  brid^je  at^ross  J^avan-
nah  river,  where  he  introduced  inij>rov«>nu'nts  in
sinkin;;  cylinders  pneiiniatically.  The  iM-^inninK
of  tlie  civil  war  stop|H»d  this  work,  and  he  was  a[>-
pointe<l  lieutenant-colonel  of  Ohio  volunteers  and
assi^nied  to  duty  as  assistant  adjutant-general  at
Camp  Denison.  On  20  June,  1861,  he  was  com-
missioned colonel  of  the  13th  Ohio  regiment  and
partici[>ate4l  in  the  West  Virginia  campaigns,
after  which  he  joine«l  the  Army  of  the  Ohio,  and
was  present  at  Shiloh  and  I'erryville.  He  was
pnnnoted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  15
April,  18(52.  and  commandinl  successively  the  2d
and  4th  divisions  of  the  Army  of  the  Oliio  until
late  in  184J2,  after  which  he  joine<l  the  army  un-
der Gen.  Grant  and  took  part  in  the  Vicksburg
campaign  as  commander  of  the  1st  division  of  the
10th  corps.  Sul>se<juently  he  was  made  chief  of
cavalry  of  the  Department  of  the  Tenness<Hs  and  as
such  was  attiM-hed  to  the  staffs  of  (ien.  Grant  and
Gen.  William  T.  Sherman  until,  owing  to  impaired
health,  he  resigned  in  September,  1864.  Ketum-
ing  to  his  profession,  he  built  tho  Waugoshanee
light-house  at  the  western  entrance  of  the  Straits
of  Mackinaw,  where  in  1807  he  sank  the  first  pneu-
matic caisson.  He  aided  in  opening  the  harlwr  of
Green  Hav,  Wis.,  and  has  licen  largely  engaged  in
building  bridges.  He  built  the  first  great  ail-
steel  brulge  in  tho  world,  across  Missouri  river  at
Ola-sgow,  Mo.,  and  was  concerned  in  the  construc-
tion of  the  Omaha  and  the  I^eaven worth  bridges,
as  well  as  many  others,  including  that  over  Mis-
s<mri  river  at  I'lattsmouth,  Neb.  Gen.  Smith  has
.S4'rved  on  numerous  engineering  commissions,  Ijoth
for  the  government  and  for  private  coqwrations.
He  is  a  memljer  of  the  American  society  of  civil
engineers,  and  was  president  of  the  Civil  engineers'
club  of  the  northwest  in  1880.  His  writings  have
been  c-onfintHl  to  reiK)rts  and  professional  pa|X'rs,

SMITH,  William  St(>i>hens,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  citv  in  1755;  d.  in  L<'banon.  N.  Y.,  10  June,
1816.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1774,
studied  law,  but  entered  the  Kevolutionary  army  as
aide  to  Gen.  John  Sullivan,  was  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  18th  Massachusetts  regiment  from  Novem-
l»er,  1778,  till  March,  1779,  and  received  several
wounds  while  holding  this  command.  He  subs«»-
quently  serve<l  for  a  short  time  on  liaron  Steulx>n's
staff,  and  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Washington
from  1781  til!  the  close  of  the  war.  He  marrie<l
the  only  daughter  of  John  Adam.s.  and  in  1785  ac-
com|>ani(>d  him  im  his  mission  to  Kngland  as  sec-
H'tary  of  legation.  He  was  ap|)oint«d  by  Gen.
Wasliington  marshal  of  the  district  of  New  York
in  178y,  an<l  afterward  surveyor  of  the  iM)rt  of
New  York,  for  three  years  was  a  member  of  the  as-
sembly, an<l  sat  in  concress  in  181!i-'15.  He  be-
came secretan'  of  the  New  York  state  society  of
the  Cincinnati  in  1790,  and  its  president  in  liin.


SMITH.  Wortlilnirton,e4luc«tor,  b.  in  Hadley.
Mam.,  in  1795;  <1.  in  .St.  AIImiih,  Vt.,  18  Feb.,  1M56.
He  was  graduate<l  at  Williams  in  INIO,  studied
at  Andover  theological  seminary,  and  was  licensed
to  pn>ach  in  1810.  He  was  pastor  of  a  Congregs-
tional  church  in  SU  Albans.  Vt..  from  18^  till
1849.  and  frr)m  1840  until  his  death  pre.<(ident  of
the  University  of  Vermont,  which  gave  him  the
degree  of  I).  I),  in  1845.  He  published  "Sermon
on  Popular  Instruction"  (St.  Allwns,  Vt..  1846).
anil  "  Inaugural  Discourse  "  (1840),  His  "Select
Sermons"  were  e<lite<l,  with  a  memoir,  by  the  Her.
Joseph  Torrejr  (Andover,  1801).

SMITH.  Zarhariah  Frederirk,  author,  b.  in
Henry  countv,  Ky.,  7  Jan..  1827.  He  was  jmrtially
educate<l  at  liacon  collegt»,  Ky.,  engagwl  in  farm-
ing, and  during  the  civil  war  was  president  of
Henry  college,  Newcastle,  Ky.  He  serve<l  four
years  as  su|H>rintendcnt  of  public  instruction  for
Kentucky,  was  the  originator  and  for  four  years
president  of  the  Cumberland  and  Ohio  railroad
company,  became  interested  in  the  cfinstruction  of
railroails  in  Texas,  and  was  four  years  manager  for
a  department  of  the  publishing-House  of  I).  Apple-
ton  and  Co.,  of  New  York.  He  was  a  founder,  and
for  twelve  years  i)resident,  of  the  Kentucky  Chris-
tian eilucation  six-ietv.  He  has  imblished  a  "His-
tory of  Kentucky"'  (Louisville.  Kv.,  1880).

SMITH  IKI^^AKKI,  Antonio,  Smth  Ameri-
can artist,  b.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  1K32;  d.  there,
24  May,  1877.  He  was  educated  in  the  National
institute,  and  in  1849  entered  the  academy  of  ttaint-
ing  in  the  University  of  Chili.  He  s«'rvea  as  a
conscnpt  in  185Ji-'7.  but  returnetl  afterward  to
his  art,  and  in  1858  was  employed  as  a  carica-
turist on  the  "Correo  Literario."  In  1859  he  went
to  Europe  and  studied  in  Florence  under  Charles
Marco.  On  his  return  to  Chili  in  1806  he  ojwned
a  studio,  devoted  himself  to  landscape-jminting,
and  s<x>n  acquired  fame  as  an  artist,  obtaining  the

irrand  premium  in  the  national  exposition  of  1872.
:lis  nrinciiml  pictures  are  "  The  Valley  of  Santi-
ago,' "A  M(X)nlight  Nieht,"  "A  \Vaterfall,"
"  Woo<l  Scenery  in  the  Mountains,"  "  A  Sunset
in  tho  Andes,'  "Surrounding  of  a  Mountain-
Lake,"  and  "  Mist  on  the  Sea-.Shore."

SMITHSON,  James  philanthropist,  b.  in  Eng-
land alxMit  1754 ;  d.  in  Genoa,  Italy,  27  June,  1829.
He  was  a  natural
son  of  Sir  Hugh
Smithson,  the  first
Duke  of  Northum-
Ixrland,  and  Mrs.
Klizaix^th  Macie,
heiress  of  the  Hun-
gerfords,  of  Stud-
ley,  and  niece  to
Charles.  Duke  of
Somerset.  Forsome
time  he  bore  the
name  James  Lewis
(or  Ij<iuis)  Macie,
but  after  1701  he
change<l  it  toJames
Smithstm.  He  was
graduated  at  Ox-
fonl in  1786.  and

had  the  reputation j^^^,^^^^  dsf^tJ^^^
of  excel  ling  allot  h- ^^
er resident inem-

liers  of  the  university  in  the  knowledp>  of  chem-
istry. In  1787,  as  "a  gentleman  well  versed  in
various  branches  of  natural  philosophy  and  par-
ticularly in  chvmistry  and  mineralogy,"  he  wm
recommended  for  election  to  the  Royal  society.


.^i§^


598


SMITHSON


SMYBERT


of  which  body  in  later  years  he  was  a  vice-presi-
dent. His  first  paper,  presented  to  the  society  in
1791,  was  "  An  Account  of  some  Chemical  KxjKjri-
ments  on  Tabasheer,"  and  was  followed  from  that
time  until  1817  with  eight  other  memoirs  treating
for  the  most  part  of  chemical  analyses  of  various
substances,  principally  minerals.  He  lived  chiefly
abroad,  engaged  in  extensive  tours  in  various  parts
of  Europe,  making  minute  observations  wherever
he  went  on  the  climate,  physical  features,  and
geological  structure  of  the  locality  visited,  the
characteristics  of  its  minerals,  the  methods  em-
ployed in  mining  or  smelting  ores,  and  in  all  kinds
of  manufactures.  Desirous  of  bringing  to  the
practical  test  of  actual  experiment  everything  that
came  to  his  notice,  he  fitted  up  and  carried  with
him  a  portable  laboratory.  He  collected  also  a
cabinet  of  minerals,  composed  of  thousands  of
minute  specimens,  including  all  the  rarest  gems,
so  that  immediate  comnarison  could  be  made  of  a
novel  or  undeterminea  specimen  with  an  accu-
rately arranged  and  labelled  collection.  Among
the  minerals  that  he  examined  was  a  carbonate  of
zinc  that  he  discovered  among  some  ores  from
Somersetshire  and  Derbyshire,  England,  that  was
named  Smithsonite  in  his  honor  by  the  great  French
mineralogist,  Beudant.  From  1819  till  his  death
his  scientific  memoirs  were  contributed  to  Thom-
son's "  Annals  of  Philosophy."  Besides  his  con-
nection with  the  Royal  society,  he  was  long  a  mem-
ber of  the  French  institute.  He  died  in  Genoa,
where  he  had  been  residing  temporarily,  and  a
monument  was  erected  to  his  memory  in  the  Prot-
estant cemetery.  His  illegitimate  birth  seems
to  have  induced  a  strong  desire  for  posthumous
fame,  although  his  scientific  reputation  was  of  the
best,  and  at  one  time  he  writes :  "  The  best  blood
of  England  flows  in  my  veins;  on  my  fathers
side  I  am  a  Northumberland,  on  my  mother's  I  am
related  to  kings :  but  it  avails  me  not.  My  name
shall  live  in  the  memory  of  man  when  the  titles  of


the  Northumberlands  and  the  Percys  are  extinct
and  forgotten."  In  order  to  carry  out  his  ambi-
tion he  bequeathed  his  property,  about  £120,000,
to  his  nephew,  Henry  James  Hungerford,  for  his
life,  and  after  his  decease,  to  his  surviving  chil-
dren, but  in  the  event  of  his  dying  without  a
child  or  children,  then  the  whole  of  the  property
was  "  left  to  the  United  States  for  the  purpose  of
founding  an  institution  at  Washington  to  be
called  the  Smithsonian  institution  for  the  increase
and  diffusion  of  knowledge  among  men."  By  the
death  of  his  nephew  in  1835  without  heirs,  the
property  devolved  upon  the  United  States,  and  on
1  Sept.,  1838,  after  a  suit  in  chancerv,  there  was
paid  into  the  U.  S.  treasury  f 508,3 18.40.  The  dis-
position of  the  bequest  was  for  several  years  before


congress,  but  in  August,  1846,  the  Smithsonian  in-
stitution wjks  founded,  and  an  tict  of  congress  was
passed  direc-ting  the  formation  of  a  library,  a  mu-
seum (for  which  it  granted  the  collections  belong-
ing to  the  United  States),  and  a  gallery  of  art,
while  it  left  to  the  regents  the  power  of  adopting^
such  other  parts  of  an  organization  as  they  may
deem  best  suited  to  promote  the  objects  of  the  be-
quest. Joseph  Henry  was  chosen  its  executive
ofiicer,  and  under  his  wise  matiagement  the  insti-
tution has  developed  until  it  has  grown  to  be  one
of  the  most  important  scientific  centres  of  the
world.  A  portion  of  the  institution,  of  which  the
comer-stone  was  laid  1  May,  1847,  is  seen  in  the
accompanying  illustration.  On  24  Jan.,  1865,  a
part  of  it  was  destroyed  by  fire.  See  "  The  Scien-
tific Writings  of  James  bmithson  "  (Washington,
1879);  "The  Smithsonian  Institution  :  Documents
relative  to  its  Origin  and  History,"  by  William  J.
Rhees  (1879);  and  "Smithson  and  his  Bequest,"
by  William  J.  Rhees  (1880).

SMOCK,  John  Conover,  geologist,  b.  in  Holm-
del,  N.  J.,  21  Sept.,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at
Rutgers  in  1862,  and  was  tutor  in  chemistry  at
that  institution  in  1865-'7.  In  1867  he  became  pro-
fessor-elect of  mining  and  metallurgy,  and  he  held
full  possession  of  the  chair  in  187i-'8o.  Mean-
while he  studied  at  the  Berg-Akadeniie  and  at  the
university  of  Berlin  in  1869-'70,  and  he  was  assistant
on  the  geological  survey  of  New  Jersey  in  1864-'85,
except  during  1869-70.  Prof.  Smock  was  ap-
pointed assistant-in-charge  of  the  New  York  state
museum  in  1885,  which  place  he  now  (1888)  holds.
The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Lafayette  in  1882.  He  was  a  manager  of  the
American  institute  of  mining  engineers  in  1875-'7.
Prof.  Smock  is  the  author  of  numerous  papers  that
have  been  contributed  to  the  transactions  of  so-
cieties of  which  he  is  a  member,  and  was  associated
with  Prof.  George  H.  Cook  in  the  preparation  of
the  annual  reports  of  the  geological  survey  of
New  Jersey  for  the  years  1871-84,  and  also  in  the
separate  volumes  on  the  "  Geology  of  New  Jersey  "
(Newark,  1868)  and  the  "  Report  on  Clay  Deposits"
(1878).  He  has  recently  issued,  from  the  New  York
state  museum  of  natural  history.  Bulletin  No.  3,
"  On  Building-Stones  in  New  York  "  (Albany,  1888).

SMYBERT,  or  SMIBERT,  John,  artist,  b.  in
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  about  1684;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1751.  He  had  some  elementary  irjstruc-
tion  in  Edinburgh,  and  subsequently  studied  in
Sir  James  Thornnill's  academy  in  London.  Then
followed  a  three  years'  sojourn  in  Italy,  where  he
was  commissioned  by  the  grand-duke  of  Tuscany
to  paint  the  portraits  of  some  Siberian  Tartars.
After  his  return  to  London,  Bishop  Berkeley  en-
gaged him  as  professor  of  the  fine  arts  in  his
projected  college  in  Bermuda,  and  he  accompanied
Berkeley  to  this  country,  arriving  at  Newj)ort  in
1729.  The  Bermuda  project  proving  a  failure,
Smybert  went  to  Boston,  where  he  established
himself  as  a  portrait-painter,  and  married  in  1730.
Gulian  0.  Verplanek  said  of  him:  "Smybert  was
not  an  artist  of  the  first  rank,  for  the  arts  were
then  at  a  very  low  ebb  in  JIngland,  but  the  best
portraits  which  we  have  of  the  eminent  magis-
trates and  divines  of  New  England  and  New  York
who  lived  between  1725  and  1751  are  from  his
pencil."  His  most  important  work  is  the  painting
of  Bishop  Berkeley  and  his  family,  executed  in
1731,  and  presented  to  Yale  college 'in  1808.  Other
portraits  from  his  hand,  including  those  of  Jona-
than Edwards.  Judge  Edmund  Quincy,  Gov.  John
Endicott,  and  Peter  Faneuil,  are  in  the  possession
of  the  Boston  museum  of  fine  arts,  Ihe  Massachu-


8MYTII


SMYTH


«ett«  historioal  Hocicty.  tin*  New  Knf^lfinr)  historir-
gvnoaloffical  iwi^ictv,  hiuI  Ikiwdoin  (Hillop*,  an<l  in
variouH  private  coflwthjns.  The  iJerkeley  Rroup
iii  mid  to  have  Iteen  sketched  at  xoa  diiriiif;  the
V(>yaj^>  fmin  Kn^laiul,  althou^^h  the  c\uU\  in  the
arms  of  its  mother  must  have  Ik-i-ii  add*-*!  iat^T,  an
it  wa8  Ixim  in  America.  This  wa.s  the  first  {taint-
ing of  mnro  than  a  sin^fie  fh;i)re  that  was  executed
in  this  country.  Ilonwe  \Val|M»le,  in  his  "  Anecr-
dotcsof  Painting"  (St rawU'rry  Mill.  17«2-71). calls
Smyticrt  "  a  silent  and  tuiHlcst  man,  who  abhomnl
the  firifiue  of  some  of  his  profession,  atiil  was  en-
chant«>d  with  a  plan  that  ho  thouffht  pronrisinl  him
tntniiuillity  and  an  honest  sul>sist<-n<t«  in  a  liealth-
ful  elysian  cliinHte."  WiiI|m)1('  and  (teorjfe  Vertue
siK'Ue*!  the  name  SmilnTt.  His  works  are  said  to
have  had  much  influence  on  C/onlcy,  Trumbull,  and
Allst^n. The  last  has  spoken  of  the  instruction  he

faineil  from  a  copy  after  Vandyke,  bv  Smylwrt. —
lis  son,  Nathaniel,  b.  in  Iioston,30  Jan.,  1734;  d.
there,  H  Nov.,  175<5,  showed  j;reaf  talent  for  |M)rtrait-
ure.  Judjre  ('ranch,  of  yuiney,  Mh-ss.,  wrote  of  him:
"  HjuI  his  life  iMH-n  spare<l,  he  would  probably  have
lKH«n  in  his  day  what  Copley  and  West  have  since
Ihh'u — the  honor  of  .\merica  in  imitative  art."  His
{jortniit  of  John  Lovell  is  owiumI  by  Harvard.

SMYTH,  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.  on  the  island
of  llathlin,  Ireland,  in  nO.*);  d.  in  Washington,
I>.  (\,  2fi  -\pril,  1830.  He  came  to  this  country  in
1775,  settled  in  Hotetourt  county,  Va.,  and,  after
ref-eivinp  an  academic  education,  studied  law,  wiis
admitted  to  the  bar  in  17sy,  and  bejran  to  practise
in  Abinedon,  but  remove<l  to  Wythe  county  in
1  r92.  1*  or  many  years  he  wa.s  a  member  of  the
Virjfinia  house  of  representatives,  and  he  was  ap-
{Mtinted  by  Pn»sident  Jeffers<m,  on  8  July,  ISCW,
colonel  of  a  U.  S.  rifle  regiment,  which  he  com-
manded in  the  southwest  until  1811,  when  he  was
ordered  to  Washington  to  prepare  a  system  of  [
dis<-ipline  for  the  army.  On  0  July,  1812,  he  was
appointe<l  insjH'Ctor-pcneral.  and  onleretl  to  the  |
Canadian  fn)ntier,  where  he  failed  in  an  invasion  j
of  Canada,  was  removed  from  the  army,  and  re-  ,
sume<l  his  profession.  He  was  made  a  member  of
the  Virginia  Ixiard  of  public  works,  served  in  the  |
house  of  representatives,  and  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  1  Dec.,  1817,  till
3  March,  1825,  and  again  from  3  Dec,  1827,  till
17  April,  18;30.  Gen.  Smyth  was  the  author  of
"Kcgulations  for  (he  Infantry"  (Philadelphia,
1812)  and  "An  Explanation  of  the  A|>ocalypse,  or
Revelation  of  St.  John"  (Washington,  1825).

SMYTH,  Andrew  Woods,  physician,  b.  near
liondonderry,  Ireland.  15  Feb.,  1833. He  settletl  |
in New  Orleans in 1849,  wjus graduate<l at the  !
medical  flepartment  of  the  University  of  Louisi-
ana in  1858.  and  was  house-surgeon  of  the  Charity
hospital  in  New  Orleans  from  18.58  till  1878. Here  '
he  |)erformed,  on  15  May,  1804,  the  first  and  only
recorded  ojieration  of  tying  successfully  the  arteria  [
innominata  for  snliclavian  aneurism. All  pr«>vious
attempts  had  faileil, and  his  success  was  attributixl
to  ligating,  where  sec<m«lary  h«;morrhage  had  o*,--  j
currtHl,  the  vertebral  artery,  which  j)revente<I  re-  i
gurgitaiit  ha>morrhage. Dr.  Valentine  Mott.  who
wa«  the  first  t«  [K-rform  this  ojieration  in  New  York,  i
in  1818,  and  who  never  doubttnl  its  ultimate  suc-
it^ss.  said  that  Dr.  Smyth's  ojieration  ha<l  afforde<I
him  more  cons4)latiim  than  all  others  of  a  similar
nature. He  also  made  the  first  sm-cessful  re<luc-
tion  of  a  ilislocation  of  the  femur  of  over  nine  '
months'  duration,  in  18<Ml,  and  jx-rformed  the  o|h  ,
eration  of  extiqtation  of  the  kidney  in  1879,  then  i
almost  unknown  to  the  profession  (nephrotomy),  ;
and  in 1885  that  of nephorrhaphy,  attaching  a  i


floating  kidney  to  thn  wound  to  rrtain  the  organ
in  place  inst4-a4l  of  extiniation.  From  1863  till
lN7i  hu  was  a  mcniiN>r  of  the  board  of  health  of
I^Miisiana,  and  in  IKN|-'5  was  miperintendent  of
the  r.  S.  mint  in  New  Orleans,  and  now  (1888)  prao-
tiseo  his  profi>ssion  in  that  citv.  Dr.  Smyth  han
publishcnl  a  brochure  on  the  "C<»llaterBl  Circulation
m  Aneurism"  (New  Orieans,  187«:  2<i  ed.,  1877).
and  a  t>a[>er  on  "The  Structure  and  Function  of
the  Kidney,"  giving  original  viewn  on  the  anatom-
ical and  physiologi<-al  construction  and  action  of
the  Malpighian  Ixxlies,  contending  that  a  cf>mmu-
nication  U'twwii  the  interior  of  the  ca(>sule  of  theeo
iMxlies  iind  the  uriniferous  tubules  could  not  exist,
and  that  excretion  in  the  organ  is  carrie«l  on  liy
systolic  pressun^  and  dia'ittdic  relaxation,  which  are
correlative,  and  effwted  by  constriction  of  the
efferent  arten'  of  the  glomerule.

SMYTH,  Clement.  It  C.  bishop  b.  in  Finlea,
County  Clare,  lrt>lan«l,  24  Jan.,  IHIO;  d.  in  Dubuque,
I«>wa,  27  S«'pt.,  18(15.  He  nM-eivcnl  his  early  eiluca-
tion  in  his  native  village  and  in  a  college  in  Lim-
erick, and  afterward  was  graduate«l  at  Dublin
university.  He  then  entere<l  a  convent  of  the  Pree-
entation  order  in  Voughal,  and  sul»sef|uentlv  be-
came aTrappist  in  the  monastery  of  Mount  Melferay.
Waterford.  He  established  a  college  in  connection
with  the  monastery,  which  is  still  one  of  the  chief
educational  institutions  in  Ireland.  Having  com-
pleted his  ecclesiastical  studies,  he  was  ordained  a
f)riest  in  1844.  He  was  st-nt  by  his  brethren  at  the
lead  of  a  Ixxly  of  Trappists  to  s<^ilicit  alms  in  the
United  States  during  tne  Irish  famine,  and  also  to
select  a  suitable  {>lace  for  a  Trappist  monastery.
He  landeil  in  New  York  in  the  spring  of  1849,  and
travelleil  extensively  through  the  country,  finally
reaching  Dubuque.  Here  he  was  offered  by  Bishop
Ix)ras  a  grant  of  land  in  Dubuque  county,  Iowa,
which  he  increasc<l  by  purchase  to  more  than  1.600
acres.  By  good  management  and  the  manual  labor
of  himself  and  his  companions,  he  brought  this
farm  into  a  state  of  great  pnxluctiveness,  and  then
founded  on  it  the  monastery  of  New  Melleray,  of
which  he  was  electeil  prior.  He  built  a  church
for  the  congregation  that  he  hatl  organizetl  in  the
neighborhootl,  and  established  a  fre<>  scIkhiI,  which
was  largely  attended  by  children  of  every  denomi-
nation, llaving  increased  the  numU>r  of  his
monks  to  forty-seven,  and  placed  the  different  in-
stitutions he  had  founde<l  on  a  Iwsis  of  gn-at  pros-
t)erity,  he  set  out  for  St.  Paul  in  1856.  In  the  fol-
lowing year  he  was  ap[)ointed  coadjutor  to  Bishop
lioras,  of  Dubuque,  and  he  was  cons«-rate<l  on  8
May,  with  the  title  of  Bishop  of  Thanasis  i>i  oar-
tibiis.  He  succeede«l  t«>  the  bishopric  in  Febru-
ary, 1858.  He  at  once  essaye<l  to  nnish  the  cathe-
•Iriil,  which  hat!  l)een  begun  some  time  In^fore,  and
s<K)n  hatl  it  ready  for  service. He  visite<l  everj-

^>art  of  the  dio<'ese,  and  made  successful  efforts  to
umish  priests  and  churches  for  the  congn«gations
that  were  springing  up  in  every  part  of  Iowa.
Ihiring  his  episcopate  tne  numlvr  of  chun-hes  in-
creased from  50  to  84,  with  8  chajicls  and  20  sta-
tions, the  numlier  of  priests  from  37  to  (Ki,  and  that
of  Roman  Catholics  from  45,(X>0  to  over  90.000.
The  .Sisters  of  Charity  largely  increas«'d  the  num-
lier of  their  institutions,  and  the  Society  of  St.
Vincent  de  Paid  wa«  t»stablished  in  every  parish.

SMYTH,  John  Ferdinand  !>..  British  soldier,
livetl  in  the  eighte«-nth  century.  He  came  to  Vir-
ginia, and,  after  travelling  in  the  west  and  S4»uth.
s«'ttle<l  in  .Maryland,  where  he  cultivate*!  a  farm
for  s<'veral  years.  During  a  visit  to  the  nuis  of
Col.  Aniln-w  Ix-wis  in  Virginia  he  joineil  the  troope
that  were  ordentl  <iut  by  (Jov.  Dunmons  ar.d  ae-


600


SMYTH


SNEAD


companicd  Maj.  Thomas  Lewis  to  the  Kanawha,
participating  in  the  action  against  the  Indians  in
which  Maj.  Lewis  was  killed.  On  his  return  he
found  Maryland  agitated  by  the  beginning  of  the
Revolution.  He  supported  the  British  government
so  earnestly  that  nis  house  was  surrounded  by
armed  troops,  which  threatened  his  capture.  Es-
caping twice,  ho  fled  to  Virginia,  hiding  in  the
Dismal  Swamp,  passed  the  guards  at  Suffolk,  and
enlisted  in  the  Queen's  royal  regiment  in  Norfolk.
The  officers  were  seized  by  a  company  of  riflemen
at  Hagerstown  and  taken  to  Frederick.  Md.  Smyth
escaped,  and  travelled  across  the  Alleghanies,  but
was  recaptured  and  imprisoned  in  Pliiladelphia,
and  afterward  in  Baltimore.  Escaping  again,  he
gained  with  difficulty  a  British  ship  off  Ca})e  May,
N.  J.,  and  visited  New  York  and  New  England.
Subsequently  he  published  "  A  Tour  in  the  United
States  of  America "  (2  vols.,  London  and  Dublin,
1784;  in  French,  Paris,  1791).  John  Randolph
of  Roanoke  said :  "  This  book,  although  replete  with
falsehood  and  calumny,  contains  the  truest  picture
of  the  state  of  society  and  manners  in  Virginia
(such  as  it  was  half  a  century  ago)  extant."

SMYTH,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Belfast,
Ireland,  14  July,  1808:  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  20
Aug.,  1873.  He  was  educated  in  Belfast  and  Lon-
don, and  in  1830  came  with  his  parents  to  New
York.  He  entered  Princeton  theological  seminary
in  the  same  year,  was  ordained  in  1831,  and  from
1832  until  his  death  was  pastor  of  the  2d  Presby-
terian church  of  Charleston,  S.  C.  Princeton  gave
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1843.  lie  collected  a
valuable  theological  library  of  about  12,000  vol-
umes, and  was  the  author  of  a  large  number  of
books,  among  which  are  "  Lectures  on  the  Prclati-
cal  Doctrine  of  Apostolic  Succession "  (Boston,
1840) ;  "  Ecclesiastical  Catechism  of  the  Presby-
terian Church  "  (1841);  "  Presbytery  and  not  Prel-
acy the  Scriptural  and  Primitive  Polity"  (1843;
Glasgow,  1844) ;  "  History,  etc.,  of  the  Westminster
Assembly"  (New  York,  1844);  "Calvin  and  his
Enemies"  (Philadelphia,  1844);  "  Prelatical  Rite
of  Confirmation  Examined "  (New  York,  1845) ;
"  The  Name,  Nature,  and  Functions  of  Ruling  Eld-
ers" (1845);  "Union  to  Christ  and  His  Church"
(Edinburgh,  184(5);  "The  Unity  of  the  Human
llaces  proved  to  Ix)  the  Doctrine  of  Scripture,
Reason,  and  Science"  (New  York,  1850;  Edin-
burgh, 1851) ;  "  Nature  and  Claims  of  Young
Men's  Christian  Associations  "  (Philadelphia,  1857) ;
"Faith  the  Principle  of  Missions"  (1857);  "Why
Do  I  Live  "  (1857) ;  "  Well  in  the  Valley  "  (1857) ;
and  "Obedience,  the  Life  of  Missions"  (i860).

SMYTH,  Thomas  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland;
d.  in  Petersburg,  Va.,  9  April,  1865.  In  his  youth
he  emigrated  to  this  country,  settling  in  Wilming-
ton, Del.,  where  he  engaged  in  coach-making.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  a  com-
pany in  Wilmington  and  joined  a  three  months'
regiment  in  Philadelphia,  serving  in  the  Shenan-
doah valley.  On  his  return  he  was  made  major  of
a  Delaware  regiment,  rose  to  the  ranks  of  lieuten-
ant-colonel and  colonel,  and  commanded  a  brigade,
winning  a  high  reputation  for  braverv  and  skill.
For  gallant  conduct  at  Cold  Harbor,  Va.,  he  was
appointed  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  volunteers,  on  1
Oct.,  1864.  lie  was  mortally  wounded  by  a  sharp-
shooter near  F'armville,  Va.,  on  6  April,  1865.

SMYTH,  William,  educator,  b.  in  Pittston,
Kennebec  co..  Me.,  in  1797 ;  d.  in  Brunswick,  Me.,
8  April,  1868.  During  the  last  year  of  the  Revo-
lutionary war  he  served  as  quartermaster-sergeant,
and  he  afterward  taught  a  school  at  VVisca&set.  He
was  grmluated  at  Bowdoin  in  1822,  studied  theol-


ogy at  Andover,  and  in  1825  was  made  adjunct
professor  of  mathematics  at  Bowdoin,  being  ap-
pointed in  1828  to  the  full  chair,  which  he  held
until  his  death.  In  1845  he  became  adjunct  pro-
fessor of  natural  philosophy.  He  was  the  author
of  numerous  valuable  text-books,  which  had  an  ex-
tensive sale.  The^  include  "  Elements  of  Algebra  "
(Brunswick,  Me.,  183J3);  "Elementary  Algebra  for
Schools"  (1850);  "Treatise  on  Algebra^'  (1852):
"  Trigonometry,  Surveying,  and  Navigation "
(1855);  "Elements of  Analytical  Geometry" (1855);
"Elements  of  the  Differential  and  Integral  Cal-
culus" (1856;  2d  ed.,  1859);  and  "Lectures  on
Modem  History,"  edited  by  Jared  Sparks  (Boston,
1849). — His  son,  E&^bert  Collin,  clergyman,  b.  in
Brunswick,  Me.,  24  Aug.,  1829,  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1848  and  at  Bangor  theological  serai-
nary  in  1853.  He  was  professor  of  rhetoric  at
Bowdoin  in  1854-'6,  and  of  natural  and  revealed
religion  from  1856  till  1863,  since  which  time  he
has  been  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  at  An-
dover theological  seminary.  Since  1878  he  has  been
also  president  of  the  faculty.  Bowdoin  gave  hira
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1866,  and  Harvard  the  same
in  1886.  He  has  edited  the  "Andover  Review"
since  its  foundation  in  1884,  and,  in  addition  to
pamphlet  sermons  and  a  lecture  on  the  "  Value  of
the  Study  of  Church  History  in  Ministerial  Edu-
cation "  (1874),  has  published,  with  Prof.  William  L.
Ropes,  a  translation  of  Gerhard  Uhlhorn's  "  Conflict
of  Christianity  and  Heathenism  "(New  York,  1879).
— Another  son,  Samuel  Phillips  Newman,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Brunswick,  Me.,  25  June,  1843,  was
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1863,  and  began  to  study
theology  at  Bangor.  He  then  taught  in  the  naval
academy  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  entered  the  military
service  as  1st  lieutenant  of  a  Maine  regiment,  be-
came acting  quartermaster,  and  commanded  his
company  in  the  advance  on  the  Weldon  railroad,
Va.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  resumed  his  theo-
logical studies,  and  after  graduation  at  Andover
in  1867  was  pastor  of  a  mission  chapel  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.  He  was  pastor  of  the  1st  Congrega-
tional church  in  Bangor,  Me.,  in  1870-'5,  and  of
the  1st  Presbyterian  church  in  Quincy,  111.,  in
1876-'82.  Since  1882  he  has  had  charge  of  the  1st
Congregational  church  in  New  Haven,  Conn.  The
University  of  the  city  of  New  York  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1881,  and  elected  him  professor
of  intellectual  and  moral  philosophy,  which  chair
he  declined.  He  is  the  author  of  "The  Religious
Feeling,  a  Study  for  Faith"  (New  York,  1877);
"Old  Faiths  in  'New  Light"  (1879);  "The  Ortho-
dox Theology  of  To- Day  "  (1881);  and  a  volume  at
sermons  entitled  "  The  Reality  of  Faith  "  (1884).

SMYTHE,  Sir  James  Carmichael,  bart..  Brit-
ish soldier,  b.  in  Scotland  about  1775:  d.  in  British
Guiana,  4  March,  1838.  His  father,  James  Car-
michael Smythe,  M.  D.,  was  physician  extraordi-
nary to  George  III.  The  son  entered  the  British
army,  served  in  Canada  in  1812-'15,  and  became  a
major-general  in  1825.  He  was  made  a  baronet  in
1821,  and  was  governor  of  British  Guiana  from
June,  1833,  till  his  death.  He  prepared  for  the
private  use  of  the  Dukp  of  Wellington  "A  Precis
of  the  Wars  in  Canada  from  1755  till  the  Treaty  of
Ghent  in  1814"  (London,  1826).

SNEAD,  Thomas  Lowndes,  stildier,  b.  in  Hen-
rico county,  Va.,  10  Jan.,  1828;  d.  in  New  York  city,
17  Oct.,  1890.  He  was  graduated  at  Richmond  and
at  the  University  of  Virginia,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  removed  to  St.  Louis,  where  he  was  editor
and  proprietor  of  the  "  Bulletin  "  in  1860-'l.  He
was  aide-de-camp  of  Gov  Claiborne  F.  Jackson,
and  adjutant- general  of  the  Missouri  state  guard


SNRKD


SNKTHKN


601


in  1801.  And  M  MMh  wm  in  the  battles  of  Rnone-
ville,  CnrthaKP,  WllsonV  Cret'k,  and  Ix>xinirton.
He  was  i-oniini-winuwl  from  Mi^nouri  t<»  iu>p)tiate
a  military  convention  with  the  ronfe<lcmt«'  htatw
in  (k'tnlMT,  18(11,  beoaineM8i«tAnta(liutant-((cnoral
in  the  I'onfwlfnite  WTOT.  aerved  with  Prire  in  Ar-
kannas,  Mis.Hi>tiri,  and  MiiwittHinpi.  and  was  elected
to  the  Confwlorato  coniifress  bv  MiHJtonri  noldiem
in  May.  1H«M.  He  removed  to  "New  V<»rk  in  IHftIS,
was  Hiann^'lMf;  tnlitor  of  the  "Daily  Xowh"  in
IMd-VH.  and  wa.**  admitttni  to  the  Iwr  of  New  York
in  IHrtO.  He  h»i.s  publishtvl  the  first  volume  of  a
pn)jec't«'<l  history  of  the  war  in  the  trans-Missis-
sippi deiHirtmen't,  entitled  "The  Fight  for  Mis-
souri" (New  York.  1886).

SNKEIK  John  I^uis  Taylor,  jurist,  b.  in  Ra-
leiph.  N,  ("..  12  May.  1X20.  lie  was  edu(ate<l  at
Oxford  male  acmleiny.  N.  ('..  removed  to  Tennes-
see, bi'came  a  meml)er  of  the  legislature  in  1845.
and  WHS  captain  of  a  Teniiess«-e  com|>any  in  the
Mexican  war  in  184ft-'7.  He  was  attorney-peneral
of  the  Memphis  judicial  district  in  IHAl.  attorney-
general  of  the  state  of  Tennessee  in  ISTil-'J).  and  in
1801  was  commissioned  brigailier-general  of  the
provisional  army  of  the  state  of  Tennessee.  He
was  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court  in  1870-'8.
and  of  the  court  of  arbitration  in  1K7J).  presidential
elector  on  the  Hancock  ticket  in  1  HMO.  and  judne
of  the  state  court  of  referees  in  188Ji-'4.  In  18H8
he  was  chosen  presi«lent  of  the  Memphis  school  of
law.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Reports  of  the  Supreme
Court  of  Tennessee,  18.'>4-'1>"  (Nashville).

SNELU  Thonia.H,  clergvman.  b.  in  Cumming-
ton.  Mass.,  21  Nov.,  1774:  d.  in  North  HnK)kfield.
Mass.,  4  May.  18t52.  After  jmuluation  at  Dart-
mouth in  17".i."»  he  taught  in  Haverhill  for  a  year.
Vas  licensed  to  preach  by  the  Tolland  a-xsoi-ialion
on  3  Oct..  WJ-i,  and  was  ordained  |>astor  of  the  2d
C-ongrepat ional  church.  North  Hrot)kfleld,  Mass.,
on  27  June,  1708,  holding  this  charge  until  his
death.  Amherst  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1828.  Twenty-four  of  his  discourses  were  pub-
lishetl,  among  which  were  ".*v>rmons  on  the  Com-
pletion of  the  40th  Year  of  his  Ministry,"  with  a
brief  history  of  the  town  (Brookfleld,  Ih/W):  ".Scr-
m<»n  on  the  Completion  of  the  50th  Year  of  his
Onlination"  (1848);  "Discourse,  containing  an
Historical  Sketch  of  North  Brookfleld"  (1850):
and  "  Historical  Sketch  of  the  1st  Congregational
Chunh,  North  Brookfleld  "  (18.V2).

8NELLINU,  JoHiah,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  17H2;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,  20  Aug..
1821).  He  joine<l  a  rifle  company  at  the  first  call
for  tr<K»ps  for  the  war  with  Tecumsi-h,  was  a|>-
pointetl  lieutenant  in  the  4th  infantrv  in  1808.  lie-
came  a  captain  in  June,  1809,  served  with  credit
at  Tippe<-anoe,  7  Nov.,  1811,  and  wjis  brevet  ted
major  for  services  at  Brownstown.  9  Aug.,  1812.
He  Un-ame  assistant  insfiector-general  on  25  A^iril,

1813,  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  4th  rifles  on  21  Feb.,

1814,  inspector-general  with  the  rank  of  colonel,
12  -\pril,  1814,  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  0th  infant-
rj'  in  1815.  and  colonel  of  the  5th  infantry  on  1
Jime,  1M19.  Ho  particijiateil  in  the  l)attles  of
Lun«iy's  I^ne.  Chipjwwa,  and  Fort  Krie,  and  on
his  mJinh  to  Detroit  was  captunnl  by  a  force  of
British  and  Indians  that  was  su{K>rior  to  his  own.
He  esc-a|»<'«l,  with  the  loss  of  three  or  four  men,  to
Fort  Shelby,  Detroit,  where  he  l»ecamo  lx'troth(>d
to  Abi;^ail,  (laughter  of  Col.  Thomas  Hunt.  On
the  night  that  had  l»een  aj»ixnnte<l  for  his  mar-
riage he  was  s«>nt  by  Uen.  >N  illiam  Hull  with  an
inadequate  <letachment  to  check  the  landing  of  the
British  at  Spring  Well.  On  leaving  the  fort,  he
said  to  Uen.  Hull :  "  If  I  drive  the  Hedcoata  back.


majr  I  return  an<l  tie  married  t"  Oen.  Hull  gmre
his  coniH'iit.  and  the  wc<l<ling  took  place  on  the
same  evening.  At  the  surmndpr  of  iVtrrtit  he  r»-
fumnl  to  raise  the
white  flag.  He  wan
taken  as  a  pris-
oner to  Montreal,
and  while  Ix-ing
marche<i  through
the  streets  was  or-
dertnl  by  a  British
offlcer  to  take  ofT
his  hat  to  Nelson's
monument.  This
he  refused  to  do  in
spite  of  the  efforts
of  the  soldiers  to
remove  it.  and  final-
ly (Jen.  Isaac  Bro<-k
ordered  them  to
"  respect  the scru-

rlesof  a  braveman."
le  was  ap|>ointed
colonel  of  the  5th
infantry  on  1  June,
1819.  was  onlere<l  to  Council  Bluffs.  Mo.,  and
thenc*'  t«>  the  <-«mfluence  of  the  Mississippi  and  the
Minnesiit»  rivers.  The  location  of  the  fort  was  re-
moved to  the  pres«'nt  site  of  Fort  Snelling.  which
he  completed  in  1824,  after  succe<'<ling  to  the  com-
mand. He  gave  it  the  nam«'  of  Fort  St.  Anthony,
which  waschangwl  by  (Jen.  Winfield  Scott  in  honor
of  iUs  builder  and  comman<ler.  Maj.  Snelling  al-
ways carrie<l  the  sword  of  Charles  Carroll  of  Carroll-
ton,  which  hml  lieen  prest-nted  to  him.  He  was  a
witness  against  Gen.  William  Hull  at  the  latter's
trial,  and  wrote  "  Hemarks  on  (Jen.  William  Hull's
Memoirs  of  the  Campaign  of  the  Northwestern
Army.  1M12"  (Detroit.  1»25).— His  son,  WHliaiu
Joseph,  jcmrnalist.  b.  in  It<»ston,  Ma.ss.,  20  Dec..
1804:  d.  in  Chelsi^a.  .Ma.ss..  24  iK-c,  1H48,  was  edu-
cate«l  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  Ixt-ame  a  fur-
trapper  in  Missouri,  and  sul»se<juently  was  em-
f)loyed  at  the  (Jalena  lead-mines.  About  1828  he
Kjcame  connected  with  s«»veral  journals,  and  for  a
few  years  In-fore  his  death  he  was  etiitor  of  the  Bos-
ton "  Ilendtl."  He  contributwl  to  peri<Mlicals,  and
published  "The  Polar  Regions  of  the  Western  Con-
tinent Kxplori'd  "  (Ik)ston,  18JJ1),  and  "Truth,  a
New- Year's  Gift  for  Scribblers:  a  Satirical  Poem'*'
(181^2).  He  wrote  for  William  Apes,  the  Peauod
Intlian  preacher,  a  small  l)ook  on  "  Inditin  Nullifi-
cation" (lf<{5). — -\nother  son.  Henry  Hunt,  edi-
tor, b.  in  Plattsburg.  N.  Y..  8  Nov..  1H17.  was  taken
by  his  father  t<»  Ci>uncil  Bluffs.  Mo,,  in  infancy,
and  in  early  life  suffered  many  hardship.s.  He  was
educatcnl  at  a  military  academy  in  Georgetown,
D.  C,  and  in  Detroit,  after  which  he  enten-d  busi-
ness, and  for  a  time  was  librarian  of  the  New  York
Ivceum.  Owing  to  imiiaired  health,  he  removed  to
the  country.  an<l  settling  in  Cornwall.  N.  Y.,  in
1871,  publisliiMl  and  e«lile*l  until  1K87  the  "Reflec-
tor of  Cornwall,"  which  he  r(*lin<)uishe<l  owing  to
blindness.  He  «leyot«Ml  much  time  to  photography,
and  edit<Hi  "The  Photographic  Art  Journal  '  in
New  York  in  1851-'3,  and  from  1^^  till  1800  the
"  Photographic  and  Fine  Art  Journal."  He  is  the
author  of  '•  Hist«>ry  and  Practice  of  Photography"
(New  York.  1849).  anil  has  also  published  a  "  Dic-
tionarv  of  the  Photographic  Art (185^}).

SNETHEN,  MrholaH,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fresh
Pond  (now  tJlen  Cove).  Ixmg  Islaiul.  N.  Y.,  15
Nov.,  1709:  d.  in  Princeton.  Ind..  30  May,  1845.
His  routh  was  spent  on  the  farm  of  his  father,
Barak,  who  had  served  in  the  British  army  at  the


602


SNIDER


SNOWDEN


capture  of  Montreal  in  1760.  The  son  entered  the
itinerant  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  1794,  travelled  and  preached  for  four
years  in  New  P^ngland  and  the  south,  and  actively
favored  the  limitation  of  the  episcopal  prerogative.
Ills  plan  for  a  delegated  general  conference  was
adopted  in  1808.  lie  also  advocated  a  preachers'
anti-slavery  tract  society,  and  was  active  against  the
future  admission  of  any  slave-holder  into  the
church.  Afterward  he  travelled  as  private  secre-
tary to  Bishop  Francis  Asbury,  who  called  Mr.
Snethen  his  "silver  trumpet."  In  1804-'6  he  was
stationed  in  New  York,  whence  he  removed  to  his
farm  in  Frederick  county,  Md.  By  his  marriage
he  became  the  holder  of  slaves,  whom  he  emanci-
pated as  soon  as  the  law  would  permit.  From
1809  till  1814  he  was  again  an  itinerant.  While
he  was  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  he  was  elected  chap-
lain to  the  U.  S.  house  of  representatives.  He  was
the  first  to  introduce  camp-meetings  into  New
York  and  Maryland,  and  was  a  lejider  of  a  large
meeting  on  Wye  river,  Md.,  in  1809.  In  1821  he
began  to  write  in  favor  of  lay  representation.  The
refusal  of  this  right  by  the  general  conference  in
1828,  and  the  expulsion  from  the  church  of  many
of  its  advocates,  led  to  the  formation  of  the  Meth-
odist Protestant  church,  in  which  he  bore  an  active
part,  and  in  connection  with  which  he  travelled
»nd  preached  after  his  removal  to  Indiana  in  1829,
till  snortly  before  his  death.  He  died  on  his  way
to  become  president  of  the  Snethen  school  for
young  clergymen  in  Iowa  City.  Mr.  Snethen  be-
came an  editor  with  the  Rev.  Asa  Shinn  of  the
"Methodist  Protestant"  in  1834,  contributed  to
periodicals,  and  published  "  Lectures  on  Preach-
nig  the  Gospel "  (1822) ;  "  Essays  on  Lay  Represen-
tation" (1835);  and  "Lectures  on  Biblicsil  Sub-
jects" (1836).  His  son,  Worthington,  edited  a
volume  of  his  sermons  (1846).

SNIDER,  Denton  Jaques,  author,  b.  in  Mt.
Gilead,  Ohio,  9  Jan.,  1841.  After  graduation  at
Oberlin  in  1862,  he  engaged  in  teaching,  and  is  now
(1888)  a  lecturer  on  general  literature.  He  is  the
author  of  "  A  System  of  Shakespeare's  Dramas "
(St.  Louis,  1877) ;' "  Delphic  Days  "  (1880) ;  "  A  Walk
in  Hellas  "  (Boston,  1882) ;  "  Agamemnon's  Daugh-
ter" (1885);  "Epigrammatic  Voyage"  (1886);
"Commentary  on  Goethe's  'Faust'"  (1886);  and
"  Commentary  on  Shakespeare's  Tragedies  "  (1887).

SNODdJRASS,  William  Davis,  clergyman,  b.
in  West  Hanover,  Pa.,  30  June,  1796 ;  d.  in  Goshen,
N.  Y.,  28  May,  1885.  He  was  the  son  of  the  Rev.
Benjamin  Snodgrass,  who  from  1784  until  his
death  in  1846  was  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  West  Hanover.  After  graduation  at
Washington  college.  Pa.,  in  1815,  and  at  Prince-
ton theological  seminary  in  1818,  he  held  Presby-
terian pastorates  in  the  south  till  1823,  when  he
was  called  to  New  York  city.  From  1834  till  1844
he  was  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in  Troy,
N.  Y.,  after  which  he  established  the  Fifteenth
street  church  in  New  York  city,  serving  as  its
pastor  in  1846-9.  From  1849  until  his  death  he
was  pastor  in  Goshen,  N,  Y.  In  1830  he  became
a  director  of  Princeton  theological  seminary,  and
he  was  president  of  its  board  of  trustees  in  1868.
Columbia  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1830.
He  published  a  discourse  on  the  death  of  Rev.
John  M.  Mason  (New  York,  1830) ;  "  Perfectionism,
Lectures  on  Apostolic  Succession  "  (1844) ;  and  sev-
eral other  discourses.

SNOW,  Caleb  Hopkins,  physician,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  1  April,  1796;  d.  there.  6  July,  1835.
He  was  the  son  of  Prince  Snow,  who  for  several
years  was  deputy-sherifif  of  Suffolk  county. After


graduation  at  Brown  in  1813  he  was  librarian
there  in  1814-'18,  received  his  medical  degree  from
that  university  in  1821,  and  acquired  a  large  prac-
tice in  his  native  city.  He  was  the  author  of  a
"  History  of  Boston,  with  Some  Account  of  its
Environs"  (Boston,  1825),  and  a  "Geography  of
Boston  and  Adjacent  Towns"  (1830).

SNOW,  Marshall  Solomon,  educator,  b.  in
Hyannis,  Mass.,  17  Aug.,  1842.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1865,  in  1865-'6  was  sub-master  of
high-schools  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  in  1866-'7  prin-
cipal of  a  high-school  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  in
1867-"8  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  University
of  Nashville,  in  1868-'70  professor  of  Latin  and
principal  of  Montgomery  Bell  academy  in  that
university,  in  1870-'4  professor  of  belles-lettres  in
Washington  university,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  since
1874  has  occupied  the  chair  of  history  in  that  in-
stitution. He  was  appointed  registrar  in  1871,
dean  of  the  faculty  in  1877,  and  since  January,
1887,  has  been  acting  chancellor  of  the  university.
Besides  articles  upon  historical  subjects,  he  has  pub-
lished an  excellent  monograph  upon  the  "  City  Gov-
ernment of  St.  Louis  "  in  the  5th  series  of  "Johns
Hopkins  Universitv  Studies"  (Baltimore,  1887).

SNOW,  William  Dunham,  lawyer,  b.  in  Web-
ster, Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  2  Feb.,  1832.  He  set-
tled in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  where  he  published  "  The
Tribune"  in  1852-'4.  Afterward  he  removed  to
Arkansas,  was  a  member  of  the  Constitutionid  con-
vention in  1863  that  made  Arkansas  a  free  state,
and  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  in  1864  under  the
proclamation  of  President  Johnson,  but  was  not
admitted  to  a  seat.  He  was  largely  instrumental
in  raising  a  brigade  of  Arkansas  troops  for  the
U.  S.  armv  in  1865,  and  declined  the  commission
of  brigadier-general.  Since  his  graduation  at
Columljia  law-school  in  1876  he  hiis  practised  in
New  York  city  and  in  the  Federal  courts.  He
has  invented  a  successful  carburettor,  a  gas-regu-
lator, a  thermostatic  apparatus  for  the  mainte-
nance of  equal  heat  for  furnaces  and  steam  apparsr
tus,  and  a  system  for  fsic-simile  telegraphy.  Mr.
Snow  is  the  author  of  several  anti-slavery  poems,
and  has  contributed  to  magazines.

SNOW,  William  Parker,  English  explorer,  b.
in  Poole,  England,  29  Nov.,  1817.  In  1861  Capt
Snow  endeavored  to  enlist  interest  in  behalf  of  an
expedition  to  search  for  the  companions  of  Sir
Jonn  Franklin.  He  has  published  "  Vovage  of  the
'  Prince  Albert'  in  Searcn  of  Sir  John  t'ranklin,  a
Narrative  of  Every-Day  Life  in  the  Arctic  Seas"
(London,  1851):  "A  Two- Years'  Cruise  off  Terra
del  Fuego,  the  Falkland  Islands,  and  the  Seaboard
of  Patagonia"  (2  vols.,  1857);  "Catalogue  of  the
Arctic  Collection  in  the  British  Museum  "  (1858);
"The  Patagonian  Missionary  Society"  (1858);
"British  Columbia  Emigration,"  etc  (1858);  and
"Southern  Generals"  (New  York,  1866).

SNOWDEN,  James  Ross,  numismatist,  b.  in
Chester,  Delaware  co..  Pa.,  in  1810:  d.  in  Hulme-
ville,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  21  March,  1878.  His  great-
grandfather, Nathanael  Fitz  Randolph,  served  in
the  Revolutionary  war,  being  known  as  "  Fight-
ing Nat,"  and  was  presented  with  a  sworfl  by  the
legislature  of  New  Jersey.  He  also  started  the  first
subscription  paper  for  Princeton  college,  and  gave
the  ground  upon  which  Nassau  hall,  the  first  etli-
fice  of  that  college,  was  built.  This  received  its
name  in  honor  of  William  III.,  of  the  "  illustrioQS
house  of  Nassau."  It  has  been  twice  burned  down.
His  father.  Rev,  Nathanael  Randolph  Snowden,
was  curator  of  Dickinson  college  from  1794  till
1827,  where  the  son  was  educated.  Subsequently
he  studied  law,  and,  settling  in  Friyiklin,  Pa.,  was


SNYDER


SOJOURN KR  TRUTri


608


made  di'puty  »ltornfy-jfrnenil,cU«tpd  to  the  lejrii*-
lature,  nnd  servoil  tm  HiN'akcr  in  \H42-'4.  Ho  wan
nlMtf  trfn-Hurt-r  from  IH^.')  till  IK47,  tnMt'*infr  «»f  th«
I'.  S.  mint  from  1847  till  IH-Vl,  itiid  itn  director
from  IHTWi  (ill  18(M.  In  addition  to  numerouii  a<l-
dn>s!M>!<  and  iwmphlet.H  on  niimi!tmalii*!«  and  cur-
rvncy,  m'Vimi  nnnual  mint  r«<|H>rts,  and  contrilm-
tions  to  joiirnnls,  he  i>ul*li!<ho<l  "  iH^JwriplionH  of
Coin  in  thf  l\  S.  Mint"  iI'hil»Ml.'!|.hia,  IHtlO);
"  I>o«crii>tion  of  the  Mf<lnl!«  of  \Vii.shinjfton,  of
National  and  Misoellaneoii!*  Mcduls,  iind  of  other
()l»j«fl«  of  Inlon-st  in  the  Museum  <»f  the  Mint,
with  liiogmpiiical  Notiecu  of  the  DirwtorH  from
ITJhJ  to  1851  "(1861);  "The  Mint  at  Philwlelphia *'
(1H»1);  "Thei  Coins  of  the  liii)h',  iind  its  Monev
Terms  "  (1804);  and  "The  Cornphinter  Memorial  *'
(Harrisl)urg.  1867);  and  contrihultHl  articles  on  the
coin  of  the  I'nitiMl  Stal«'s  to  the  National  almanac
of  1873.  and  articles  on  numismatics  to  iiouvier's
"Law  Dictionary  "(12th  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1868).
— liis  nephew,  Arrhibald  Loudon,  h.  in  Cum-
berland county.  I'a..  11  Au>r..  18;{7,  after  gnuhiation
at  Jeffersjon  collejje  in  18-'»H  was  ma<le  regist^^r  of
the  I'.  S.  mint  on  7  May.  1857,  became  chief  coiner
on  1  Oct..  180(1.  and  in  1877-'9  was  |K>st  master  of
Philadelphia.  In  1871)- '85  he  was  su|)erintendent
of  the  mint,  and  in  1878  he  decline<l  the  ofllw  of
ffeneral  director  of  all  the  mints  in  the  Unite«l
States,  lie  ha.s  ma<io  improvements  and  inventions
relating;  to  coining-machinery,  and  has  written  ar-
ticles on  subjects  relating  to  coinage,  the  great  seal
of  the  Unit<Ml  Statw,  and  other  subjects.  Mr.
Snowden  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  of
Pennsylvania  volunteers  in  1861,  and  was  sul>sc-
queruly  elected  captain  of  the  1st  city  troop  of
Philadelphia,  which  is  the  oldest  military  organi-
zaticm  in  the  I'nitcd  States.  It  was  the  bo«ly-
gtianl  of  Gen.  Washington  during  the  Revolution,
and  l)ore  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  battles  of  Tren-
ton, Princeton,  and  the  Brandywine.  He  has  been
identifle<l  with  railroads,  insurance  companies,  and
other  business  interests.

SNYOKR,  Christopher, called  "the  first  martyr
of  the  Revolution."  b.  about  1755;  d.  in  lioston.
Ma.ss.,  2iJ  Feb..  1770.  During  the  excitement  in
1770  on  the  subject  of  non-im|>ortation  a  few
merchants  continued  to  sell  articles  that  ha«l  been
prosi-ril)e<l,  and  one,  Theonhilus  Lillie,  incurnxl
such  displeasure  that,  in  oriier  to  mark  his  shop  as
one  to  l>e  shunntnl,  a  mob,  cronsisting  chiefly  of
half-grown  l>oys.  erected  near  his  door  a  wtxxlen
heiwl  on  a  tall  |Mile,  ujHin  which  were  written  the
names  of  the  other  imjMirters.  and  a  hand  [Kjinting
to  Lillie's  shop  was  als<i  attached.  One  of  his
friends.  Elx'uezer  Richanlson.  attempted  to  remove
this  figure,  but  was  pelted  and  ilriven  into  Ijillic's
house  by  the  mob.  Greatly  exa.sj)erate<l.  he  ap-
pearetl  with  a  musket  and  fired  a  random  shot
mto  the  cmwd.  which  mortally  wounded  a  young
lad,  ('hristopher  Snyder,  the  son  of  a  |K>or  widow.
Snyder  die<l  on  that  evening,  and  his  murder  pn>-
ducetl  a  sensation  throughout  the  country.  His
funeral,  on  the  '26th,  was  the  occasion  of  a  solemn
nageant.  A  prcK-ession  of  500  children  walke<l  U'-
lore  the  bier,  and  the  coffin  was  taken  to  Lilvrty
tree,  where  an  lisscmblage  of  nearly  1,500  persons
had  gathere<l.  The  Wlls  of  the  city  and  of  neigh-
Itoring  towns  were  tolle<l.  The  newspapers  were
fllltMl  with  accounts  of  thestork'and  of  the  funeral,
and  Christopher  .Snyiler  was  called  the  first  mar-
tyr in  the  cause  of  American  litierty.  The  moli
seize^l  Richanl.son  and  an  associate  name<l  Wilmot
and  t<K»k  them  to  Faneuil  hall,  where  they  wen-
examine<l  and  c«>mmitted  for  trial.  Richanlson
was  declared  guilty  of  murder, but  LieuU-Gov.


Thomaa Hutchinson refuiwd to  »ign his  de«th>
warrant,  and after  two years'  imjiriitonment he
WM  lianloncd  by  the  king.
SNYUER.  Simon,  irovcnior  of  IVunnylvanijik,
I  b.  in  Ijancatiter,  I'a.,  5  Nov.,  1759;  d.  near'  Srlinit-
!  grove. Pa.,  «  No*-.,  1819. His  father.  Anthony,
,  a  mechanic,  pmigrate«i  to  Pennsylvania  in 1758.
'  After  his  death  m  1774  the  son  apprenticiv]  him-
I  nolt  to  a  tanner  in  York,  Pa.,  and  emphiyeii  bin
leisure  in  stuily. In  1784  he  nMuoviMl  to'.Selimi-
.  grove,  o[)ene<l  a  store,  Ijocame  the  owner  of  a  mill,
^  and  was  justice  of  the  (leace  for  twelve  vears. He
'  was  a  memU'r  of  the  convention  that  f^rame<i  the
I  constitution  of 1790, and  in 1797  waci  elected  a
I  member  of  the  hous<>  of  repres«>ntatiyes.  of  which
I  he  wa.s  chosen  8|x*aker  in  1802,  M'rving  in  this  ca-
pacity for  six  »ucces.sive  terms. With  him  origi-
!  natou  the  "hundn^l-dollar  a<-t,"  which  embo«lied
the arbitration princinle and providtnl for the
trial  of  cnuses  where  tiie  amount  in  question  was
less  than  one  hundred  dollars. In 1N08  he  was
made  governor  of  Pennsylvania  and  served  three
terms. Upon  his  retirement  in  1817  he  was  elected
to  the  state  senate,  and  die<I  while  a  memljer  of
that  IxkIv. Snvder  county.  Pa.,  was  namnl  for  him.
SOISSONS,' Charles  de Bourbon.  (  ount  de,
viceroy  of New  France,  b,  in France  in 15<}5:  d.
there.'l Nov.,  1612. The death of Henry  IV.
weakenwl Champlain's chances of successfully
colonizing  New  France,  and,  by  the  advice  of  I)e
Monts,  he  sought  a  pmtector  in  the  person  of  the
Count  de  Soissons,  who  accepted  the  pro|»osal  to
IxK'omo  the  "  father  of  New  France,"  obtained  fr«>ra
the  queen  rt'gent  the  authority  necessary  to  pre-
serve and  mlvanc-e  all  that  had  l)een  already  dime,
and  appointe<l  Champlain  his  lieutenant  with  un-
restricted power. In his  commission  to  Champ-
lain  he  styles  hims«>lf  "lieutenant-general  of  New
France."  but  he  dic<l  sf)on  after  issuing  it.

SOJOURNER  TRUTH,  Iwtunr.  b.  in  Ulster
county.  N.  Y..  aUiut  1775;  d.  in  liattle  Creek.
Mich.,  26  Nov.,  188;i.  Her  piirents  wen»  owne<I
by  Col.  Charles  Ardinburgh.  of  Ulster  county,  and
she  was  sold  at  the  age  of  ten  to  John  J.  Dumr>nt.
Though  she  was  emanci[>ated  by  the  a<'t  of  New
York  which  set  at  lilH>rty  in  1817  all  slaves  over
the  age  of  forty,  she  doj-s  not  api>ear  to  have  ob-
taine^l  her  free<iom  until  1827,  wlien  she  escaped
and  went  to  New  York  city.  Sui»soquently  she
liv<<d  in  Northampton.  Mas.*.,  and  in  1851  liegan  to
lecture  in  western  New  York.  a<'<'omi»anitHl  br
(teorge  Thomps<in.  of  Kngland,  and  other  AIk»1i-
tionists.  making  her  iHwhjuarters  in  R4K>hester,
N.  Y.  Sul»siHiuently  she  t ravel le<l  in  various  f>arts
of  the  Unite*!  States,  lecturing  on  [xtlitics.  tem-
peranct;,  and  women's  rights,  and  for  the  welfare
of  her  race.  She  could  neither  n>a<l  nor  write,  Imt,
l)eing  nearly  six  f««et  in  height  and  {wissessing  a
deep  and  powerful  voice,  she  provtnl  an  effective
Iwturer.  She  carrie<i  with  her  a  lKH)k  that  she
calleil  "The  Ikx>k  of  Life."  containing  the  auto-
graphs of  many  distinguishe<l  jn-rsons  that  were
identifie<l  with  the  anti-slavery  movement.  Her
name  was  Isaliella,  but  she  called  herself  "So-
journer," claiming  to  have  heanl  this  name  whis-
nenni  to  her  fn)m  the  Ijonl.  She  addeil  the  apjvl-
lati<m  of  "Truth"  to  signify  that  she  should
preach  nothing  but  truth  to  all  men.  .She  spent
much  time  in  Washingt«in.  D.  C.,  durint;  the  civil
war,  and  {McssiMi  her  last  years  in  little  Creek,
Mich.,  where  a  small  monument  was  erectetl  near
her  grave,  by  sul)s<-ription.  See  "  Narrative  of
Sojourner  Tnith.  drawn  from  her  •  Il<K»k  of  Life,*
with  .Memorial  Chanter,"  by  MrK  Francis  W.  Ti-
tus (liattle  Creek,  1884).


604


SOLANA


SOLIS  Y RIVADENEYRA


SOLANA,  Alonso  de  (so-lah'-nah),  Spanish  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Solana,  Toledo,  about  1530;  d.  in
Merida,  Yucatan,  in  l(RX).  He  studied  in  Sala-
manca, and  was  graduated  in  law,  but  resolved  to
enter  the  church,  and  united  with  the  Franciscans
in  Toledo.  Afterward  he  retired  to  the  convent  of
Salceda,  but  in  15(50  he  came  with  Diego  Landa
(q.  V.)  to  Yucatan,  where  he  soon  became  active  in
tne  conversion  of  the  Maya  Indians.  He  was
much  loved  by  the  natives,  and  several  times  re-
fused dignities  that  were  offered  him  to  remain
with  his  flock.  lie  wrote  "  Diccionario  Maya  y
Espafiol,"  *'  Serraones  en  Lengua  Maya,"  and  *'  No-
ticias  sagradas  y  prof  anas  de  las  AntigQediwles  y
Conversion  de  los  Indios  de  Yucatan,"  the  manu-
scripts of  which  were  in  the  Franciscan  convent  of
Merida,  but  have  been  lost.

SOLANO,  Jnan,  Peruvian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Spain  about  1504;  d.  in  Rome.  Italy,  in  1580.  He
became  a  member  of  the  Dominican  order  and  en-
tered the  convent  of  Salamanca.  He  was  nomi-
nated for  the  bishopric  of  Cuzco,  Peru,  by  Charles
V.  in  1543,  and  consecrated  in  February,  1544,  but
found  it  impossible  to  enter  Cuzco  after  his  arrival,
as  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  who  had  just  revolted,  held
that  city.  Solano  joined  the  royal  army,  and  was
present  at  the  defeat  of  Huarmas,  20  Oct.,  1547,
where  he  escaped  only  by  the  swiftness  of  his
horse.  After  this  defeat  Solano  joined  Pedro  de
la  Gasca  (q.  v.),  accompanied  him  in  his  march
against  Pizarro,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of
Sacsahuana,  9  April.  1548,  in  which  the  insurgents
were  defeated.  He  was  now  enabled  to  exercise
pastoral  functions  in  Cuzco,  and  showed  much  zeal
m  defending  the  rights  of  the  Indians,  jis  well  as
in  converting  them  to  Christianity.  As  the  num-
ber of  sick  and  poor  among  them  had  largely
increased  in  consequence  of  the  civil  war,  he  in-
sisted on  the  conquerors'  expending  part  of  their
spoils  in  relieving  the  prevailing  distress.  With
the  money  that  he  thus  obtained  he  built  a  hos-
pital in  1552,  the  first  of  the  kind  in  Peru.  He
then  endeavored  to  recall  to  habits  of  order  the  old
8j)anish  veterans,  whose  excesses  and  turbulence
interfered  with  his  plans  for  the  benefit  of  the  In-
dians. Not  succeeding  in  his  efforts,  he  deter-
mined on  a  voyage  to  Spain  to  implore  the  aid  of
the  sovereign  in  reducing  these  adventurers  to
obedience.  He  also  wished  to  obtain  a  division  of
his  diocese,  which  he  considered  too  large  for  the
care  of  a  single  bishop.  After  arriving  in  Spain  he
laid  the  reasons  for  his  journey  before  the  court
and  the  council  of  the  Indies,  but  met  with  no
success.  He  then  went  to  Rome  with  the  object
of  interesting  Pone  Pius  IV.  in  the  matter.  There
too  he  failed,  and,  resigning  his  bishopric  in  1561,
he  retired  into  the  Dominican  convent  of  St.
Marv,  where  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life.

SOLAR,  Mercedes  Marin  de,  Chilian  poet,  b.
in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  1804 ;  d.  there,  21  Dec,  1866.
She  was  a  daughter  of  Jose  Gaspar  Marin  and
Luisa  Recabarren,  and  showed  from  her  youth  a
decided  talent  for  poetry.  Her  literary  reputation
was  first  established  by  a  poem  on  the  death  of
Gen.  Portales,  which  was  published  in  1837  in  "  El
Araucano."  Soon  her  poems  were  widely  known,
and  she  and  Salvador  Sanfuentes  {q.  v.)  may  be
called  the  first  Chilian  poets  after  the  establish-
ment of  independence.  She  contributed  several
poems  to  the  papers,  of  which  the  best  are  "  Ple-
garia"  and  "Al  pie  de  la  Cruz."  and  published
"  Canto  Funebre  a  la  muerte  del  General  Portales  "
{Santiago,  1837);  a  biography  of  her  father  (1845) ;
and  "  Canto  d  la  Patria "  (1857).  A  collection  of
her  poems  was  published  in  a  volume  (Santiago,


1874).  See  her  "  Life,"  by  M.  L.  AmunAtegui  (1867).
— Her  children,  Amelia  de  CLARoand  Enrique  in-
herited her  |M)etic  talent.  The  latter,  b.  in  Santiago
in  1844,  studied  in  the  Jesuit  college,  and  in  1870
was  elected  to  congress  for  the  departments  of
liancagua  and  Curico.  He  has  published  poems  in
**  El  Independiente,"  "  Estrella  ae  Chile,"  *'  lievista
de  Santiago  " ;  "  Poesias  Liricas  "  (Santiago,  1867),
and  "  Levendas  y  Tradiciones"  (1868).

SOLChA(xA,  Miguel  (s<jle-tchah  -gah),  Mexican
clergyman,  b.  in  Queretaro  in  1674;  u.  in  Durango
in  1718.  He  entered  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  16^,
and,  after  finishing  his  studies,  was  sent  as  profes-
sor of  theology  to  the  College  of  Durango.  When
Gen.  Gregorio  Mendiolawas  sent  in  1715  to  subdue
the  Indians  of  the  Nayarit  mountains,  between
New  Biscay  and  New  Galicia,  Bishop  Tapiz  ap-
pointed Solchaga  spiritual  director  of  the  expedi-
tion, and  as  such  the  latter  brought  it  about  that
the  cacique  Tonatiuh,  of  Nayarit,  went  in  1718  to
Mexico  to  make  a  treaty  witH  the  viceroy.  But  on
account  of  sickness  Solchaga  returned  in  the  same
vear  to  Durango,  where  death  overtook  him  before
he  could  publish  his  description  of  the  expedition.
It  was  afterward  printed  in  Spain  under  the  title
"  Carta  Relacion  de  la  entrada  de  la  Expedici6n
EspaiTiola  en  el  Nayarit"  (Barcelona,  1754).

SOLEY,  James' Rn.ssell,  author,  b.  in  Roxbury,
Mass.,  1  Oct.,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1870,  became  assistant  professor  of  English  in
the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1871,  and  in  1873  was
placed  at  the  head  of  the  department  of  English
studies,  history,  and  law,  where  he  remained  nine
years.  In  1876  he  was  commissioned  a  professor
in  the  U.  S.  navy,  and  in  1878  he  was  on  special
duty  at  the  Paris  exposition.  He  also  examined  the
systems  of  education  in  European  naval  colleges,
and  on  his  return  made  an  extensive  report.  In
1882  he  was  transferred  to  Washington,  where  he
collected  and  arranged  the  navy  department  li-
brary, and  since  1883  he  has  superintended  the
fublication  of  the  naval  records  of  the  civil  war.
le  has  been  lecturer  on  international  law  at  the
Naval  war  college  at  Newport  since  1885,  and  has
also  delivered  courses  before  the  Lowell  institute,
Boston,  on  "  American  Naval  History  "  (1885)  and
"European  Neutrality  during  the  Civil  War"
(1888).  Prof.  Soley  has  published  "  History  of  the
Naval  Academy  "  (Washington,  1876) ;  "  Foreign
Systems  of  Naval  Education,"  the  report  men-
tioned above  (1880) ;  "  The  Blockade  and  the  Cruis-
ers "(New  York,  1883);  "The  Rescue  of  Greely,"
with  Com.  Winfield  S.  Schley  (1885) ;  and  "The
Boys  of  1812  "  (Boston,  1887).  He  has  edited  the
"  Autobiography  of  Commodore  Morris  "  (Annapo-
lis, 1880),  and  contributed  to  the  "  Battles  and  Lead-
ers of  the  Civil  War,"  and  to  Justin  Winsor's  "  Nar-
rative and  Critical  Historv  of  America."

SOLIS  Y  RIYADENEYRA,  Antonio  de,
Spanish  author,  b.  in  Alcala  de  Ilenares.  18  July,
1610 ;  d.  in  Madrid,  19  April,  1686.  He  studied  the'*
humanities  in  Alcala  and  jurisprudence  at  Sala-
manca, and  at  the  age  of  seventeen  wrote  a  comedy
in  verse,  which  was  soon  followed  by  others.  In
1640  he  became  private  secretary  of  Duarte  de
Toledo,  Count  de  Oropesa,  president  of  the  council
of  Castile,  and  in  1654  he  was  appointed  one  of
the  secretaries  of  King  Philip  IV.  and  chief  clerk
of  the  secretary  of  state,  which  office  he  held  till
1666.  when  he  became  historiograf)her  of  the  Indies.
In  the  following  year  he  entered  the  Society  of
Jesus,  but  retained  his  office  and  devoted  all  his
time  to  the  comnosition  of  his  great  historical
work.  He  publisned  the  comedies  "  Amor  y  Obli-
gacion  "  (Madrid,  1627) ;  "  Un  bobo  «hace  ciento  "


SOLOItZANO  Y PERKIUA


80MRRVILLB


605


(1080):  "Amor  al  umi''(1083):  "Im  OiUnilla  de  ;
Matlri.l"  (1«JM);  and  "  Kuridicc  y  Orfi^"(lW2).
Some  authorities  consider  liim  to  In>  the  author  of
**(iil  HIh.h  de  San li liana,"  and  look  upon  I.ie  Sap-
aa  oidy  its  translator.  He  also  wrote  "  I*oui<ia.s
Ha);rudas  y  profanaa"  (1674),  but  his  chief  fame
de|H-nd.s  on  his"  Ilistoriade  la ConquiHta,  |K>t)laci<'in
y  pn)j;n's<i  «le  la  America  S»ptenlrional  "  (Mjulrid,
1(184  ;  many  Hul>s<M|Uont  e<litions),  which  was  trans-
latetl  into  I'^n-nch  (Paris,  1601),  into  Italian  (Flor-  j
once,  lUiMM.  and  into  Kny^lish  (London,  1724).

SOI^)K/ANO  Y  PKKKIKA,  Juandf>(so.|or-
thah -no),  S|>anisli  author,  l>.  in  Madrid,  IJO  Nov.,  i
1575;  d.  there  in  10.')4.  lie  studied  in  the  L'lu-
versity  of  .Salumanoa,  and  was  afterwarti  profi>ssor
of  Itoman  and  conwnon  law  in  the  same  university.
In  1609  he  was  HpjN)inte4l  by  Philip  III.  ju«lp'  of
the  audiencia  of  Linwi,  where  he  orpinizetl  the  tri-
bunals, introduced  improvements  m  the  adminis-
tration, and  promoted  the  working  of  the  mercury-
mines  »>f  HuHncnveli<'a,  In  1627  he  retunuHl  to
Spain,  and  was  successivelv  meml)erof  the  tnvisury
board,  of  the  council  of  the  Indies,  and  of  the  su-  I
premo  council  of  Castile.  He  wmte  several  valu-
able iuridical  works,  of  which  the  princi[>al  one  is
"  De  Indiaruin  jure  disjmtatione  "  (Madrid,  16-'»:}). '

S4).HEKI{Y,  Horatio  (iates,  jreneulo^fist,  b.  in  ,
Newbiirvi>ort,  Mass.,  24  Dec.,  1805;  d.  in  London,
Kujjlnnd,  14  Nov.,  1H?2.  His  ancestor,  .\nfhony,
came  from  England  to  Newbury,  Ma.ss.,  in  1639.  ;
lie  receivwl  a  public-schcKil  c<lucation  in  his  na-
tive town,  studied  art  in  IJoston,  and  luul  a  studio
in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  for  several  years,  but  in  1832
returned  to  IJoston,  when'  he  was  a  fancy  painter
and  japanner.  After  1H45  he  n'sidetl  chiefly  in
Ix>ntion  as  a  professional  genealogist,  and  was  the
first  American  to  devote  himself  exclusively  to
such  work.  He  became  verv  skilful,  and  many
families  in  this  country  availed  themselves  of  his
services  in  tracing  their  English  ancestry.  Mr.
Somerby  was  on  confidential  terms  with  George
PealKKly,  and  became  secretary  to  the  board  of
trustees  of  the  Penb^nly  fund.  He  was  a  member
of  the  New  England  historic-genealogical  s<K'iety,  to
whose  publicati<»ns  ho  contributed  valuable  i)a|>ors,
and  a  large  quantity  of  his  unpublishe«l  material  is
in  possession  of  the^Iassachusetts  historical  scwietv,
with  which  ho  had  been  connected  binco  1859.  He
was  the  originator  of  systematic  re*>earch  for  the
puriv)se  of  connwting  New  England  families  with
their  ancestors  in  Great  Britain.  —  His  brother.
Frederic  Thomas,  author,  b.  in  NewburviK)rt,  4
Jan.,  1S14;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  18  Jan'..  1871.
wa-s  e<lucatt'd  in  his  native  place,  and  Ix-came  an
ornamental  p^iinter.  He  was  for  many  years  a
corresix)n«loMt  of  the  Boston  "  Post'  and  the
"Spirit  of  the  Times,"  and  published,  under  the
name  of  "  Cymon,"  "  Hits  and  Diushes,  or  a  Medley
of  Sketches  and  Scraps  touching  People  and
Things  ••  (Itoston,  18.52).

SOMERS,  Richard,  naval  officer,  b.  on  Soraers
piint,  (treat  Egg  harbf)r,  N.  J.,  in  1778;  d.  near
rri|»oli,  Africa,  4  .Sfi>t.,  1804.  His  grandfather
emigrated  from  England  alxiut  17!M)  and  settled
at  Somers  iK)int,  and  his  father  was  colonel  of
militia,  judge  of  the  county  court,  and  an  active
Whig  in  the  Revolution.  The  son  entered  the
navy  as  midshipman,  JJO  April,  1798,  after  some
exrM'rience  at  .sea  in  small  coasting  vessels.  He
saiWl  from  Phila<lelphia  in  the  frigate  "United
StAtc8"  in  July,  1798.  to  ('a[>e  CVmI  and  along  the
ooAst  to  the  N\''est  Indies  in  M'«rch  of  French  cruis-
ers during  that  brief  war  with  France.  He  was
commissioner!  lieutenant,  21  May,  1799,  sailed  in
the  "  United  States  "  with  the  embassy  to  France


on  8  Nov.,  1709,  and  in  1801  again  went  to  France
an  Ist  lieut4*nant  of  the  iiloop  "  litwton,"  with
Chancellor  Livingston  on  iMNinl  an  pawMMigur.  He
was  apiM)inted  t4>  command  the  M-hooner  "  Nau-
tilus," niunl  out  to  form  a  {wrt  of  Preble's  squadron
in  the  war  with  Tri[N»li,  and  he  was  the  first  to
arrive  at  (iibniltar.  He  iiarticijiated  in  the  block-
luU'  and  o|)enitions  at  Tri|ioli  in  lH03-'4.  In  the
first  attiu-k  he  comman«li<d  a  division  of  gun-boata,
and  at  one  time  fought  five  TriiM)lit«n  vessels  at
close  (juarterH.  On  7  Aug.,  1804,  he  led  the  1st
division  of  thnn;  gun-lM>ats  in  the  second  attack,
and  successfully  ic>ught  su|)erior  forc««»  for  three
hours.  He  was  promote<l  commander,  16  Feb.,
1804,  and  wiis  conspicuous  for  his  ability  in  the
attiuks  on  28  Aug.  and  3  Sept..  1804.  As'the sea-
son for  oiM*nitions  drew  to  a  close  he  protMiscd  to
destroy  the  Triptilitan  fleet  bv  fitting  tne  "  In-
tnM>id"  as  a  lH>ml>-vess«'l  t4>  explode  in  their  mi<lst
ana  cause  a  panic.  AI>out  15,000  {xtunds  of  {Mjwdcr
and  200  loade<i  shells  were  stowtnl  in  the  "  In-
trepid" and  arranged  with  a  slow-match  to  ex-
rhnle  after  the  crew  should  have  esca{icd.  Lieut,
lenry  Watlsworth,  Midshipman  Isnud,  and  ten
men  voluntarily  acconij»anie«l  Somers  in  the  night
of  4  Sept.,  1W)4,  toward  the  inner  harlxir,  con-
voyetl  by  the  brig  "Siren."  The  enemy  ^ighte<l
the  "  Intn'i»id  "  and  o|H'n<'d  fire  ujkhi  ht-r  as  she
approa<-he«l.  and  when  5(X)  yards  from  her  destina-
tion she  suddenly  blew  ui>,  and  all  on  board  ner-
ishe<l.  No  damage  was  done  to  the  enemy.  The
cause  of  the  premature  explosion  was  never  ascer-
tained, and  none  of  the  binlies  of  the  unfortunate
crew  were  found.  The  report  was  heard  for  inilea,
but  it  ha<lno  effect  except  sul>MHjuentIy  toc«)nvince
the  foe  that  Americans  were  ready  to  undertake
the  most  perilous  measures  to  accomplish  their  ob-
ject. Other  events  had  prepare<l  tliem  to  dread
the  American  navy,  and,  since  this  was  the  last
hostile  ojH'ration,  It  doubtless  wa.s  (totent  in  the
negotiations  by  which  the  Tri|>olitans  accetled  to
the  terms  demanded  by  the  Americans.  Congress
piu«!sed  a  resolution  of  condolence  with  the  friends
t)f  those  who  j)erished,  and  several  ships  of  the
navy  have  Immmi  named  after  .S<iniers.

SOMERVILLE,  .\Iexander,  Canadian  journal-
ist, b.  in  Springfit'ld,  Ha»ldingtonshire,  Scotland.
15  March,  1811;  d.  in  Toronto.  Canada,  17  June,
1885.  He  was  educatetl  in  the  jwrish  school,  en-
tered the  army,  and  served  for  several  years  in  the
Scots  greys.  Ho  was  with  his  regiment  at  Bir-
mingham, England,  in  18:^2.  at  the  time  of  the
first  reform-bill  agitation,  and  for  some  act  of  sut)-
iK)se<l  insulK)rdination  was  sentenced  to  receive  200
lashes  on  the  liare  back,  half  of  which  were  in-
flicted. The  whole  matter,  which  has  licen  de-
m-HIkhI  by  him  in  his  "  Diligent  Life  "  (Montreal,
18<30),  was  made  the  subject  of  discussion  in  par-
liament at  the  time,  and  resulttnl  in  mitigating
the  injustice  and  severity  of  military  dis<iiiline.
During  18;i5-'7  Mr.  Somerville  servetl  in  a  High-
land regiment  in  Spain.  an«l  wnm  afterwarti  he  Tett
the  service.  Fmin  18:i8  till  1858  he  wrote  for  sev-
eral of  the  chief  British  newsfwpers,  under  the
{ten-name  of  "  Whistler  at  the  Plough."  his  graphic
descriptive  sketches  attracting  attention.  In  1858
he  came  to  Canada,  and  fr<»m  that  time  till  his
death  was  engngt^l  in  jounialism.  He  e<lited  the
"Canadian  IllustraltHi  News."  and  among  other
works  wrote  "  .\utobiography  of  a  Workman"
(I^milon.  1849);  "HLstorv  of  the  Fiscal  Svstein  "
(Liver|»o«d,  1850);  "The  \VhistIer  at  the  Plough"
(Manchester.  1852);  " The  Conservative  .Scienre  of
Nations"  (Montreal,  18(}0):  and  "A  Narrative  of
the  Fenian  Invasion  of  1866"  (Toronto,  1867X


606


SOMERVILLB


SONTAG


SONERYILLE,  William  Clarke,  author,  b.  in
St.  Mary's  county,  Md.,  25  March,  1790 ;  d.  in
Auxerre,  France,  5  Jan.,  1826.  In  early  life  he
took  part  in  the  struggle  of  the  South  American
states  for  independence,  attaining  the  rank  of
major,  and  receiving  a  grant  of  three  square  leagues
of  land  from  the  Venezuelan  government  for  his  ser-
vices. He  travelled  in  Europe  in  1817-'18,  and  on
his  return  to  this  country  took  an  active  part  in
politics  as  a  Whig  and  a  personal  friend  of  John
Quincy  Adams.  lie  purchased  Stratford  House,
the  former  seat  of  uen.  Henry  Lee  (see  Lee,
Richard),  and  lived  with  great  elegance.  Mr.
Somerville  was  appointed  minister  to  Sweden  by
John  Quincy  Adams,  and  sailed  on  the  ship  that
carried  Lafayette  to  Europe  after  his  visit  to  this
country,  but  he  died  shortly  afterward,  and,  in  ac-
cordance with  his  own  wishes,  was  buried  at  La
Grange,  Lafayette's  residence.  He  provided  in  his
will  for  the  ultimate  emancipation  of  all  bis  slaves.
Mr.  Somerville  possessed  varied  accomplishments,
and  was  striking  in  personal  appearance.  At  the
time  of  his  death  he  was  engaged  to  be  married  to
Cora,  daughter  of  Edward  Livingston.  He  was
the  author  of  "  Letters  from  Paris  on  the  Causes
and  Consequences  of  the  French  Revolution"
(Baltimore,  1822);  "Extracts  of  a  Letter  on  the
Mode  of  choosing  the  President "  (1825) ;  and  sev-
eral poetical  pieces.

SOMMERS,  Cliarles  George,  clergyman,  b.  in
London,  England,  4  March,  1793 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  19  Dec.  1868.  His  father  Was  a  Norwegian,
ani  the  early  part  of  the  son's  life  was  spent  in
Denmark,  where,  after  attending  school,  he  entered
a  mercantile  house  at  Elsinore.  He  came  to  this
country  in  1808,  and  in  1811  entered  the  employ
of  John  Jacob  Astor,  for  whom  he  went  to  Canada
on  a  difficult  mission  during  the  war  of  1812,  but
he  abandoned  business  soon  afterward  for  the  Bap-
tist ministry.  After  a  six  years'  pastorate  in  Troy,
N.  Y.,  he  was  called  to  the  charge  of  the  South
Baptist  church  in  New  York  city,  where  he  re-
mained till  his  retirement  in  1856.  He  was  an  ac-
tive worker  in  connection  with  the  tract  and  Bible
societies,  and  a  founder  of  the  American  Baptist
home  mission  society.  In  1852  he  received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  from  Madison  university.  Dr.  Som-
mers  published  numerous  controversial  articles  in
defence  of  Baptist  doctrines,  edited  a  volume  of
"Psalms  and  Hymns"  (Philadelphia,  1835)  and
"The  Baptist  Library"  (3  vols.,  Prattsville,  N.  Y.,
1843),  ana  was  the  author  of  a  "  Memoir  of  John
Stanford,  D.  D.,  with  Selections  from  his  Corre-
spondence" (New  York,  1835).

SONNINI  DE  MANONCOURT,  Charles  Nico-
las Sigisbert,  French  traveller,  b.  in  Luneville,
France,  1  Feb.,  1751 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  9  May,
1812.  Although,  from  deference  to  his  father's
wishes,  he  studied  law,  his  fondness  for  natural
history  and  his  passion  for  travel  led  him  to  enter
the  navy  in  1772,  shortly  after  he  had  been  called
to  the  bar  at  Nancy.  He  went  to  Cayenne  in  1773,
and  soon  acquired  reputation  for  his  daring  jour-
neys into  the  interior.  The  government  employed
him  several  times  in  expeditions  that  were  of  the
greatest  advantage  to  the  colony.  In  1774  he
traversed  Guiana  in  its  entire  breadth  as  far  as
Peru.  In  another  expedition  he  discovered,  after
wandering  through  immense  marshes,  a  water
route  through  which  he  reached  the  Gabrielle
mountain.  He  made  a  valuable  collection  of  rare
birds,  which  he  presented  to  the  Paris  cabinet  of
natural  history.  An  attack  of  fever  obliged  him
to  return  to  France,  and  he  selected  Montbard  as
his  residence,  near  the  home  of  Button,  by  whose


direction  he  described  twenty-six  species  of  Ameri-
can birds,  comprising  those  belonging  to  the  gal-
linaceous order,  and  the  water-fowl.  He  after-
ward served  in  the  French  navy,  travelled  exten-
sively in  Asia  and  Africa,  and  wrote  numerous
books  of  travel  and  agriculture  and  natural  his-
tory, among  others  "Ilistoire  naturelle  des  rep-
tiles" (4  vols.,  Paris,  1802-'26),  and  "  Ilistoire  na-
turelle des  poissons  et  des  cetaces  "  (14  vols.,  1804).
See  "  filoge  historique  de  Sonnini,"  by  Ars^ne
Thiebaud  de  Berneaud  (1812).

SONNTAG,  George,  soldier,  b,  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1786;  d.  in  Odessa,  Russia,  23  March,  1841.
His  father,  William  Louis  Sonntag,  a  French
officer,  came  to  this  country  during  the  Revolu-
tion, and  at  its  close  established  a  mercantile  house
in  Philadelphia.  The  son  went  to  Russia  in  1815,
entered  the  military  service,  and  with  the  allied
army  entered  Paris.  He  became  a  general  in  the
Russian  army  and  an  admiral  in  the  navy.

SONNTAG,  William  Lonis,  painter,  b.  near
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  2  March,  1822.  His  youth  was  passed
in  Cincinnati,  and  there  he  began  to  practise  art
as  a  profession  in  1848.  Six  years  later  he  settled
permanently  in  New  York.  During  1853-'4, 185.'>-'7,
and  1861  he  was  abroad,  spending  most  of  the  time
in  Italy.  He  has  devoted  himself  to  the  delinea-
tion of  American  landscape,  strongly  idealized.
His  principal  works  are  "  View  on  Licking  River,
Ky."  (1846);  four  pictures  on  the  "Progress  of
Civilization,"  illustrating  William  CuUen  Bryant's
poem  (1848) ;  "  Spirit  of  Solitude  "  (1851) ;  "  Evan-
geline "  (1852) ;  "A  Dream  of  Italy"  (1860);  "A
Morning  in  the  Alleghanies"  (1865);  "Sunset  in
the  Wilderness  " ;  "  Spirit  of  the  Alleghanies  "  ;
and  "  Fog  rising  oflE  Mount  Adams  "  (alwut  1885).
He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National  acade-
my in  1860,  and  an  academician  the  following  year,
and  is  also  a  member  of  the  Water-color  society
and  the  Artists'  fund  society.

SONTAG,  Henriette,  German  singer,  b.  in  Cob-
lentz,  13  May,  1805;  d.  in  Vera  Cruz,  Mexico,  18
June,  1854. "Her  parents  belonged  to  the  theatrical

Profession,  and  carefully  cultivated  her  vocal  and
ramatic  powers,  which  were  naturally  great.  Be-
fore she  was  six  years  old  she  sang  on  tne  stage  in
children's  parts  at  Darmstadt,  Berlin,  and  Prague.
She  studied  for  four  years  at  the  conservatory  of
Prague,  where,  in  her  fifteenth  year,  with  marked
success,  she  took  the  leading  part  in  Boieldieu's
"  Jean  de  Paris."  She  then  went  to  Vienna,  and
before  she  was  nineteen  she  was  prima  donna  of  the
Berlin  stage.  Shortly  afterward  she  left  for  Paris,
where  she  competed  successfully  with  MalibraiT.
Pasta,  and  Catalani.  In  1828  she  made  her  debut
in  London,  but  at  the  close  of  the  season  she  mar-
ried Count  Rossi,  a  Piedmontese  nobleman,  and
after  a  triumphant  operatic  career  in  the  great"
capitals  of  Europe  retired  to  private  life.  She  still
retained  her  great  love  of  art  for  its  own  sake,  and
continued  to  study  while  mingling  in  the  highest
circles  of  society.  In  1848  her  husband  became
involved  in  political  troubles,  and  lost  his  fortune.
For  his  sake  and  for  that  of  their  children  she
resolved  to  resort  again  to  her  art,  and  accepted  an
engagement  at  London  for  the  season  of  1849.  In
1853,  encouraged  by  the  successful  career  of  Jenny
Lind,  she  decided  to  visit  the  United  States,  and
in  the  autumn  of  that  year  arrived  in  New  York.
Her  tour  through  the  chief  cities  of  the  Union  was
brilliant,  remunerative,  and  exceeded  her  expecta-
tions. In  1854  she  accepted  an  engagement  from
the  manager  of  the  principal  theatre  of  Mexico,  at
Vera  Cruz ;  but  she  was  suddenly  stricken  down  by
cholera  while  preparing  for  her  first  ajppearance.


SONTIIONAX


SOTIIERAN


607


SONTHOXAX.  I>»er  F^liriU'.  Fivnch  com-
missioner. I),  ill  Oyonimx.  A  in,  17  Mnrrh,  1703;  d.
tlnTc,  2H  July.  lHi;{.  Ho  prHcti^Ml  law  nt  lioiirj;.
an<l  pjinp  to  Paris  at  tli«>  iM'^Miuiini;  of  th«'  Frt'm-h
rfvolution,  to  iNM-omo  a  inpinU-r  of  the  notiil  flub,
-"lies  amis  d<'S  noirs,"  loctiirpd  and  issuetl  i»ain-
phlrts  in  a«lvocafy  of  tho  en f ranch i!«enu'nt  of  the
Klaves  in  the  French  dominions.  Tho  nc>fn»cs
having  r«>lH'Uitl  in  .Santo  Doming,  .S)nthonax,
fttienno  I'olven>l,  and  Joan  Ailhaiid  wore  ai)i>oint-
c<l  hij»h  commissioners  to  tho  licewunl  iMands.
Thoy  sailetl  fn»m  IjH  R<K-hi'Ilo  in  July,  171M,  with
an  army  of  O.flOO  men,  and  hirxled  at  Ca|xi  Fran-
^•ais  on  11)  Sept.  Ailhaud  s<M>n  returned  to  France,
and  Sonthonax  and  Polvcrcl,  after  a  brilliant  cam-
naign,  dividwl  tho  colony  into  two  governments.
Gen.  Ciall)aud  arrived  from  Franco  in  June.  170JI,
to  asstime  tho  comnjand  of  tho  French  fon-es,  but
was  op|)os<'d  by  Sonthonax  and  removed  from
office.  iTalliaud  then  atliuked  Cape  Fnin<;ais,  and,
wtuiring  possession  of  tiio  arsenal,  comiH-Ui'd  S)n-
thonax  to  take  refuge  in  the  interior.  Hut  the
latter  ma4lc  his  junction  with  I'olverel,  and,  return-
ing, issuinl  his  famous  dec-ree  of  29  Aug.,  17U:J,
which  enfranchised  the  slaves  forever.  Thn)Ugh
tho  help  of  tho  negroes  Galluiud  wtis  finally  de-
featoil,  and  sailed  for  tho  Unitt^l  St^ites.  .Sontho-
nax's opposition  to  tho  whites c<jntinued  meanwhile,
and  they  asked  succor  from  the  authorities  at
Jamaica.  An  English  ex|HMlition  landed  at  Mole
Saint  Nicholas,  and  soon  occupied  the  princi|»al
parts  of  the  colony  ;  Sonthonax  retire<l  to  Jacmel,
and  sailetl  in  1794  for  France,  where  ho  hatl  l)een
indicted  for  his  conduct.  But  he  easily  justified
himself  before  the  convention,  and  was  again  aj>-
pointed  in  1796  high  commissioner  to  Santo  I)o-
'mingo.  After  removing  Gen.  Rochaml>eau  he  was
com|H>lled  to  appoint  Toussaint  I/Ouverture  com-
mander-in-chief, and  finally  left  the  island  in  Julv,
1797.  having  b*H^n  elected  a  deputy  to  tho  assembly
of  the  five  hundred  by  the  colony.  He  was  exiled
after  the  coup  d'etat  of  1799,  and  again  in  18W3  for
having  criticised  the  appointment  of  Gen.  Rocham-
beaii  as  commander-in-chief  in  Santo  Doniinifo.
Napoleon  forbade  him  to  remain  in  Paris  after
IHIO,  and  he  retired  to  his  estate  at  Ovonnax.

SOPH<>('LKS,Evang<>linusA|»oHtolideH,schol-
ar,  b.  in  Tsangaraiida.  near  .Mount  Pelioii,  Thessaly,
Greece,  8  March,  1H()7;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Ma.**.,  17
1)60.,  1883.  He  resided  in  Egypt  during  the  Greek
revolution,  studied  in  the  convent  of  the  Greek
church  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  in  1829  came  to  this
country  under  the  patronage  of  the  American
board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions.  After
studying  in  Monson,  Mass.,  he  entered  Amherst,
but  tiid  not  complete  his  course.  He  then  taught
in  schf)ols  in  Amherst,  Hartford,  ami  New  Haven,
and  in  184(>-'5  and  1847-'9  was  tutor  in  Harvanl.
In  the  last  year  he  became  assistant  professor,  and
in  IWK)  he  was  given  the  chair  of  ancient,  modern,
and  Byzantine  Greek,  which  he  retaim-ii  till  his
death.  He  retreived  the  degree  of  A.  M.  fn>m  Yale
in  lH:i7  and  trom  Harvard  in  1847,  and  that  of
LL.  I),  from  Western  Keserve  in  18(J2  and  from
Harvard  in  1808.  He  made  two  voyages  to  his
native  country,  returning  each  time  with  valuable
books.  Prof.  Sophocles  published  "Greek  Gram-
mar for  the  Use  of  I^«mers "  (Hartford,  Conn.,
1838;  3«1  ed.,  entitled  "Greek  Grammar  for  the
Use  of  Schools  an<l  Colleges,"  1847) :  "  First  Ijcs-
sons  in  Greek"  (1839);  "Greek  P'xercises"  (1841);
"  R4>maic  (Jrammar"  (1842;  2d  ed..  Boston,  1857;
London,  18<t0);  "Greek  I^essons  for  Beginners"
(Hartfonl,  lS4iJ);  "Catalogue  of  Greek  Verbs"
(1844); "History  of  the  Greek Alphabet, with


oLJjyy


'jyrrL^  C  rc


Remarks  on  Grw>k  Orthography  and  Pmnunci*-
tion"  (Cambridge.  1848);  "(Mowuiryof  iMier  and
Byzantine  Grwk  "  (lt<mton.  iMflO,  fonning  vol.  vil.,
new  series,  of  ••  Memoirs  of  the  American  Ai«d-
emy");  and  "(Jn-ek  Ijexicvm  of  the  Roman  and
Byzantine  Perioils."  his  chief  work  (Ii«>ston,  1870).
SORIN,  Kdward,  clergyman,  b.  ni«r  ParU,
France,  6  Feb..  1N14.  He  was  gnwIiiatiHl  at  the
University  of  Paris,  aftorwanl  studii-d  for  the
priest ho(Mi,  and  was  ordained.  9  June,  1838.  At
the  end  of  a  year  he  felt  a  desire  to  iMH^omc  a  min-
sicmary  among  the  Indians  of  .\meri(«,  and,  with
the  view  <»f  pre-
paring himself
for  this  work,  he
entered  the  new-
ly foundetl  order
of the Holy

I  Cross. Ho  was

j  shortly after-
wanl  appointtnl

I  bishop  of Ik'ii-

fal,butdecline«l.
le  sailed  from
Havre,  5  Aug.,
1841,  reach.Hl
New  York  on
14  Sept.,  and  at
once  set  out  for
Indiana,  where
he  iH'gan  his  la-
bors among  the
Indians,  tie  was
force<l  to  aban-
d<m  this  field  by

the  superior  of  his  order,  who  directed  him  to  es-
tablish sch(K)ls  wherever  an  opjMjrtunity  offered.
He  arrived  at  the  present  site  of  Notre  Dame  on
24  Nov.,  1842.  with  only  five  dollars  to  l>egin  the
work  of  erecting  a  school.  The  wa.-te  was  cov-
ered with  snow,  and  the  only  building  for  miles
around  was  a  dilapidated  log-hut  He  began  with
energy,  and  spent  five  days  in  re|)airing  the  log-
cabin  and  in  fitting  it  up  so  that  one  half  served
as  a  chafK^I  and  the  other  as  a  dwelling  for  him-
self and  six  brothers.  He  then  began  to  build  a
college,  which  was  chartere<l  as  a  university  in
1844  by  the  legislature  of  Indiana.  From  that  day
the  University  of  Notre  Dame  progressed  under
his  guidance  until  it  is  to-<lay  the  largest  and
most  important  Roman  Catholic  educational  es-
tablishment in  the  United  States.  In  1857  he
was  ap|K)inted  provincial  su|>erior  of  the  houses
of  the  order  of  the  Holy  Cross  in  the  United
States,  and  in  1868  he  was  electwl  superior-general
for  Ijfe.  He  crosse<l  the  Atlantic  forty-three  times,
and  it  has  been  computed  that  his  journeys  and
voyages  together  would  more  than  eoiial  eight
times  the  circumference  of  the  earth.  liesides  the
University  of  Notre  Dame,  he  e^tablLshe<l  flourish-
ing colleges  and  schools  in  every  jmrt  of  the  United
States  and  Canada.  He  is  likewise  t  he  founder  and
superior-general  of  the  Sisters  of  the  Holy  Cross
in  the  Unite<l  States,  of  whom  there  are  more
than  eight  hundreil.  chiefly  engaged  in  conducting
aca<lemies  and  schools.

SOTH  KR  AN.  Charle8,bibliographer.  b.in  Stoke
Newington,  Surrey,  En»:lnnd,  8  July,  1847.  He  was
eclucated  at  private  schools,  an<l  in  1K02  was  ao-
prenticed  to  a  bot>kseller  at  Rugby  by  his  uncle,
Henry  Sotheran,  the  I>md<m  publisher.  After  mak-
ing a  reputation  as  a  bibliograjiher  and  antiquary,
he  came  to  this  country  in  1874.  and  l)ecaine  etlitor
and  pmprietor  of  the  !^ew  York  "  Echo  "  in  1878,
and  literary  editor  of  the  "Star  "  in  1879. lie  has


608


SOTHERN


SOTO


lccture<l  on  philological,  historical,  and  popular  sub-
jects, and  has  compiled  bibliographical  catalogues
of  many  well-known  libraries,  including  those  of
Rush  C.  Hawkins,  Charles  O'Conor,  and  William
Beach  Lawrence.  His  works  inclnde  "Genealogi-
cal Memoranda  relating  to  the  Family  of  Sotheran
and  to  the  Sept  of  MacManus  "  (printed  privately,
London,  1871-4) ;  "  Manchester  Diocesan  Church
Calendar"  (Manchester,  1873-'4) ;  "  Alessandro  di
Ca";liostro,  Impostor  or  Martyr  "(New  York,  1876);
and  "  Percy  Bysshe  Shelley  as  a  Philosoj»her  and
Reformer"  (1876).  He  edited  vols.  vi.  and  vii.  of
the  "American  Bibliopolist"  (New  York,  1874-'5).
SOTHERN,  Edward  Askew,  actor,  b.  in  Liver-
pool, England,  1  April,  1830 ;  d.  in  London,  20  Jan.,
1881.  He  was  intended  by  his  parents  for  the  min-
istry, but  became  an  actor,  making  his  first  appear-
ance as  an  amateur  in  Jersey  ;  and,  coming  to  the
United  States  soon  afterward,  he  made  his  debut  in

this  country  at  the
Boston  national
theatre  in  Septem-
ber, 1852,  as  Dr.
Pangloss  in  "  The
Heir  at  Law."  At
this  time  he  was
known  as  Doug-
las Stewart,  and
he  did  not  assume
his  own  name  till
1858.  His  early
career  was  marked
by  seeming  inca-
pacity, and  he
played  only  minor
parts  till  on  18
Oct.,  1858,  he  was
cast  for  the  char-
acter of  Lord  Dun-
dreary in  Tom
Taylor's  comedy  "  Our  American  Cousin,"  at  Laura
Keene's  theatre.  New  York,  where  he  had  been
playing  for  some  time.  The  part  consisted  of
only  a  few  lines,  and  Sothern  assumed  it  under
protest,  but  made  such  a  hit  in  it  that  it  was  en-
larged, and  became  the  great  attraction  of  the
play,  which  ran  for  one  hundred  and  forty  con-
secutive nights.  It  is  said  that  the  laughable  skip
which  was  one  of  the  most  amusing  of  Sothern's
absurdities  of  manner  in  this  part  was  at  first  acci-
dental, and  was  caused  by  the  actor's  stumbling
over  some  "  properties  "  as  he  made  his  first  en-
trance on  the  stage.  This  skip,  with  a  peculiar  lisp
and  drawl,  never  failed  to  win  the  applause  of  his
audiences.  Dundreary's  part  became  virtually  a
series  of  monologues,  wiiich  were  interspersed  in
various  parts  of  the  original  play.  On  11  Nov.,
1861,  he  appeared  in  the  part  at  the  Haymarket
theatre,  London,  where  the  play  ran  four  hundred
and  ninety-six  consecutive  nights.  He  afterward
acted  in  it  continually  till  his  death,  always  with
success,  except  in  Paris  in  1867,  where  he  was  not
well  received.  Besides  playing  this  part,  the  details
of  which  he  constantly  changed,  Sothern  was  suc-
cessful as  David  Garrick  in  Robertson's  comedy  of
that  name,  and  in  many  pieces  that  were  written
for  him  by  English  playwrights.  Though  he  was
very  popular  in  England,  where  he  remained  till
1871,  he  preferred  the  American  stage.  He  also
played  in  his  native  country  in  1874-'6.  His  last
appearance  in  the  United  States  was  in  New  York
on  27  Dec,  1879.  Sothern's  acting  was  marked  by
perfect  refinement,  even  in  the  most  farcical  touches
of  his  "  Dundreary."  He  wrote  well,  though  slowly,
and  but  little. The  part  of  Dundreary  was  almost


entirely  his  own,  and  he  composed  the  best  part  of
the  love  scenes  in  Rol)ert.4on's  comedv  of  "  Home."
He  was  also  part  author  of  "  Trade,"  a  comedy,
which  has  not  yet  been  acted.  The  illustration
represents  him  in  the  character  of  Dundreary.

SOTO,  Bernardo,  president  of  Costa  Rica,  b.
in  San  Jose,  Costa  Rica,  in  1853.  Prom  his  youth
he  served  in  the  army,  and  had  attained  the  rank
of  colonel,  when  President  Tomas  Guardia  died  in
1882.  The  new  president,  Prospero  Fernandez,
called  him  to  his  cabinet  as  secretary  of  the  treas-
ury, and  he  also  had  temporary  charge  of  the  port-
folio of  war.  In  February,  1884,  Soto's  proposi-
tion for  the  adoption  of  radical  measures  of  econo-
my caused  a  cabinet  crisis,  and  the  secretaries  of
war  and  the  interior,  Miguel  and  Victor  Guardia,
resigned.  The  president,  with  the  sanction  of  the
assembly,  resolved  to  reduce  the  cabinet  to  two
secretaries,  and  Soto  was  charged  with  the  port-
folios of  the  interior,  commerce,  and  agriculture,
being  at  the  same  time  elected  first  vice-president,
and  promoted  brigadier.  When  Gen.  Rufino  Bar-
rios issued  his  decree  of  28  Feb.,  1885,  declaring
the  forcible  union  of  the  five  Central  American  re-
publics, Nicaragua  and  Costa  Rica  protested,  and
the  latter  declared  war  upon  Guatemala  on  10
March.  On  the  next  day  President  Fernandez
died  suddenly,  and  Soto,  who  was  preparing  the
army  to  march  against  Barrios,  was  called  to  the
executive.  Leaving  the  second  vice-president  in
charge,  he  marched  with  his  contingent  to  Nicara-
gua, and,  together  with  the  army  of  that  country,
invatled  Honduras,  the  ally  of  Barrios.  There  he
heard  of  the  death  of  Barrios  at  Chalchuapa  and
the  collapse  of  the  scheme  of  unification,  and  re-
turned with  his  little  army  to  Costa  Rica.  On  the
expiration  of  Fernandez's  term,  10  Au^.,  1886,
Soto  was  re-elected  as  constitutional  president  for
the  terra  of  four  years.  During  his  administration
great  improvements  have  been  introduced,  the
finances  have  been  put  on  a  sound  basis,  and  Costa
Rica,  which  had  always  opposed  Central  American
union,  as  it  was  formerly  advanced  to  favor  an
ambitious  leader,  has  taken  the  initiative.  Dele-
gates of  the  five  republics  assembled  in  Guatemala
and  concluded,  15  Aug.,  1887,  a  treaty  of  mutual
union  with  a  proviso  for  the  possible  establishment
of  a  confederation  in  1890.  Soto  concluded  also,
in  July,  1887,  a  treaty  with  Nicaragua,  in  a  per-
sonal interview  with  the  president  in  Granada,  for
the  submission  of  the  dispute  regarding  the  bound-
ary and  the  interoceanic  canal  to  the  arbitration  of
President  Cleveland.  He  also  made  an  arrange-
ment with  an  English  company  for  the  admiiBs-
tration  of  the  different  sections  of  a  railroad  and
the  completion  of  the  «mie  from  ocean  to  ocean.

SOTO,  Marco  Aiirello,  president  of  Honduras,
b.  in  Tegucigalpa,  13  Nov.,  1846.  He  studied  ii^
the  University  of  Guatemala,  where  he  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1866,  and  began  the  prac-
tice of  law.  President  Barrios  soon  called  him  to
his  cabinet  as  secretary  of  foreign  affairs,  and  pub-
lic instruction  and  worship,  which  place  he  neld
till  February,  1876.  At  that  time  hostilities  be-
tween Guatemala  and  ^Honduras  began.  President
Ponciano  Leiva,  of  the  latter  republic,  was  deposed,
and,  by  agreement  of  the  contending  parties,  Soto
was  sent  as  commissioner  to  his  native  country,
and  in  August  was  appointed  provisional  presi-
dent. In  May,  1877,  he  was  elected  constitutional
president,  and,  assisted  by  his  general  secretary.
Dr.  Ramon  Rosa,  he  created  resources,  fostered  the
raining  industry,  encouraged  the  exportation  of
cattle,  built  telegraphic  lines,  and  pushed  for-
ward the  construction  of  the  intero(^nic  railway.


SOTOMAYOK


SOUBLETTK


609


In  1881  he  wa»  re-clw-twl  for  a  fiocond  tonn.  but  in
1888,  when  President  liarriox  brought  forwnnl
•gain  the  ttcheine  of  a  (Vnlnil  American  cMinfiMl.
eracy,  with  a  view  of  licH-otninc  its  lender.  Sito.
out  of  |H>rsonHi  jealouKy,  opposed  the  idea  streini-
ously,  and  retired  in  May  to  San  Kranoisco,  whence
heattaeited  Barrios  in  several  paniphlet-s.  A  tri-
umvirate hml  meanwhile  taken  charf^e  of  the  ex-
ecutive, anil  after  Soto's  formal  resignation,  15
Oct,  1883,  Oen.  liojjran,  liarrios's  intimate  friend
and  follower,  was  eli«fte<l  president.  Soto  came
later  to  New  York,  where  he  sfheme<l  n^rainst  Bo-
jfran,  aii<l  in  Februarv,  IMHfi,  an  allep-il  filibuster-
U)g  ex(Mxlition  for  ifondunis  was  captured  in  the
steamer  "City  of  Mexico"  bv  the  U.  S.  sl<K>p  "Ga-
lena "  and  broujfht  to  Key  VS'est.  Soto  then  left
New  York  for  Costa  Rica,an<l  t  hence  despatched  in
August  of  the  same  year  an  expiHlition  of  seventy-
seven  men,  under  the  leatlership  of  the  officers  that
had  been  capture<l  in  the  "  City  of  Mexico,"  to  stir
up  a  nn'olutionary  movement.  But  in  Ihmduras
none  seemed  iiu-lincd  to  join  t  he  enterprise,  the  ex|»e-
dition  was  dcfeati*d  and  captured  near  Cotnayagua.
and  the  four  leaders  were  shot  in  that  citv  on  18
Oct,,  1886.  Soto  then  left  Costa  Rica,  and  re-
turned to  the  United  States.

SOTOMAYOK,  Cristobal  de (so-to-mah-yohr).
S|)anish  officer,  b.  in  Sjwin  in  the  last  quarter  of
the  15th century ;  d.  in  (luanica,  Porto  Kico,  25  July.
1511.  He  arrived  in  Santo  Domingo  with  the  ex-
pedition of  Diego  Columbus  in  August,  1501),  and
the  same  year  went  to  Porto  Rico  with  the  expedi-
tion of  Juan  Ceron.  who  had  l)een  appointed  p)v-
emor.  In  1510,  when  Ponce  de  Leon  obtauietl
from  King  Ferdinand  the  apjjointment  of  gov-
ernor of  Porto  Rico,  Sotomayor  entered  his  service
Hnd  became  his  lieutenant,  Jissisting  in  the  founda-
tion of  Caparra  and  the  conquest  of  the  island.
Toward  the  end  of  1510  he  discovere<l  on  the
southwest  of  the  island  a  great  Iwy,  on  the  coast
of  which  he  founded  the  city  of  Guanica,  from
which  that  l)ay  afterward  took  its  name.  One  year
afterward  he  founded  on  the  north  coast  another
town,  which  was  called  after  his  name,  Sotomayor.
In  1511,  when  the  cac-ique  Agueynaba,  aided  by
the  Caribs,  revolted,  the  city  was  surprisetl  during
the  night  of  25  July  and  set  on  fire,  and  Soto-
mavor,  after  a  brave  resistance,  met  his  death  with
the  greater  part  of  the  garrison.

SOTOMAYOE,  Pedro  de,  Central  American
linguist,  b.  in  Guatemala  in  1554;  d.  there  in  1631.
He  was  the  son  of  the  Spanish  post-commander  of
his  native  city,  but  in  1581  entered  the  ortler  of  St.
Francis,  and  soon  l)ecjime  professor  of  theology
and  learned  in  the  language  of  the  natives.  He
was  elected  in  1612  provincial  of  his  ortler.  He
wrote  "  Arte,  Vocabulario,  y  Sermones  (t uatemal-
tecos"and  "Historia  de  los  V^arones  ilustres  del
Onlen  de  San  Francisco,  del  Iteino  de  Guatemala,"-
which  are  preserved  in  manuscript  in  the  Francis-
can convent  of  Guatemala.

SOl'BIN.  Pierre,  surnamed  Le  Marseillais
(soo-bang),  French  buccaneer,  b.  in  Marseilles  about
1625;  d.  at  sea  near  Cul)a  in  1676.  He  served  on
a  Dutch  merchant  vessel,  and,  being  capture<l  in
Cuban  waters  by  a  S|>anish  man-of-war,  was  com-
pelle«l  to  enlist  among  the  crew,  but  in  1652  he
deserted,  joined  the  buccaneers  in  Tortugas,  and
soon  rose  to  be  a  leader.  After  1665,  in  a.sso-
ciation  with  other  chiefs,  he  imrticipated  in  the
(>i1laging  of  Puerto  Calwllo.  San  Antonio  de  Giln
raltar.  and  of  the  Isthmus  of  Darien.  Afterward,
joining  Sir  Henry  Morgan,  he  was  placed  at  the
head  of  a  division  and  led  the  ai<sault  on  Puerto
del  Principe,  but,  as  Morgan  kept  the  larger  ^hare
TOL. ▼. — 8»


of  the  booty,  Snubin  left  him  in  disgust.  In  1671
he  (tart  iei  tiate<l  in  the  exited  it  ion  to  Panama.
M>rve«l  in  tne  flr^t  diviMion,  and  le<I  the  aaaault  on
the  fortress  of  San  I»rrnzo.  on  Chagrea  ri»er.
Joining  .Moysc  Van  Vin  in  1672.  he  ravaged  the
coast  of  Culia,  U'siege*!  the  city  of  Maracaibo.
which  |>aid  them  a  ransom,  nillaged  the  pearl-fUh-
eries  near  Rio  Hat^'ha,  ana  c*oiitinued  the  war
against  the  Simnianls  till  his  death.

SOrBLETTE.  ('Mrltw,  Venezuelan  soldier,  b.
in  Canu-as  in  171K):  d.  then-,  11  Feb..  1H70.  He
re<-eive<l  an  excellent  educati<in.  and.  on  the  pnxr-
lamation  of  inile|H>ndence  in  1810.  entered  the  («-
triot  »ervi«v.  In  1811  he  l»e<-ame  s«Hjn'tar>'  to  (Jen.
Francisco  Miranda,  and.  after  the  capitulation  of
the  latter  in  1812,  retirwl  to  his  iiro|M'rty  in  the
interior.  Afterwanl  he  joine<l  ilolivar'  in  the
western  provinces,  and  entennl  Caracas  with  him.
7  Aug.,  1818,  but  after  the  defeat  of  I^  Puerta  on
15  June,  1814,  he  fled  tf>  liarcelona  and  Margarita.
When  that  island  fell  into  the  hands  of  Morillo.
Soublette  went  to  Cartagena,  when*  he  iiartici-
jmted  in  the  memorable  defence  «)f  that  fortress
against  Morillo.  He  then  went  to  Hayti  and
joined  Bolivar's  ex[K'dition  in  1816,  being'  second
m  command  of  a  division  during  the  cam|iaign  of
1816.  When  Mariflo  pronounced  against  Ikwivar.
Soublette  joined  the  latter,  and  as  hus  chief  of  staff
occunied  Angostura,  17  July,  1817.  and  was  a
member  of  the  congress  that  met  in  that  city.
SfMtn  after  the  occupation  of  Bogota,  .Soublette
was  sent  with  jMirt  of  the  armv  to  Apure,  and  on
the  way  defeated  the  enemy  in  l^as  Cruces.  After
the  occupation  of  Caracas.  14  May.  1821,  he  was
sent  to  Barcelona,  where  he  organized  the  .\rmy
of  the  ¥jhs{,  which  a.ssiste<l  in  the  victor)'  of  Cara-
bobo  on  24  June.  When  liolivar  left  for  It<igr)ta
on  1  Aug.,  he  ap|H)intiHl  .Soublette  vice-president,
in  which  {)lace  lie  showe«l  great  talent  as  an  ad-
ministrator. In  1825  he  was  apitointisl  interidant
of  the  department  of  Magdalena,  and  in  1826  Co-
lombian secretary  of  war  under  the  vice-presidency
of  Santander.  In  1829  he  was  sent  by  liolivar  to
Venezuela  to  trv  to  prevent  the  separation  of  the
Colombian  n-pu^ilic.  nut  when  he  saw  the  impossi-
bility of  maintaining  the  union  he  ai^-cepted  an
election  to  the  constituent  as.sembly  of  Venezuela,
and  as  president  of  that  Ixnly  was  one  of  the  chief
promoters  of  a  lilx'ral  constitution.  Gen.  Paez
calleil  him  to  his  cabinet  jus  secretary  of  war.  and
in  1K14  he  was  sent  by  President  Varras  as  minis-
ter to  England.  France,  and  Spain.  lie  wasalK>ut
to  conclude  with  the  last-named  power  a  treaty  for
the  rifognition  of  the  independence  of  Venezuela
when,  in  18JJ6.  he  was  re<-alle<l  by  his  elec-tion  as
provisional  president,  on  the  resignation  of  Dr.
Vargas.  From  18J19  till  1842  he  was  again  secre-
tarj*  of  war  un«ler  (Jen.  Paez.  and  in  the  latter  year
he  was  electe<l  ctmstitutional  president.  In  1847
he  retinnl  to  his  estate,  but.  after  the  forcible  dis-
solution of  congress  in  1848.  he  pn)testetl  against
Monagas's  unconstitutional  pn>ceedings,  and  was
oblig^  to  emigrate  to  New  (iranada,  where  he
livetl  till  1858.  By  a  si)ecial  a<t  of  congress  he  re-
ceivwl  his  pay  as  gt-nenil  of  Colombia.  He  t<x)k
no  part  in  the  political  commotions  of  hisct)untry,
ami  after  the  fall  of  Monagas  in  1858  he  was  re-
calle.1  and  onlere<l  to  put  down  the  revolution  in
the  western  {»rovinc«\s,  but  when  his  conciliatory
measures  were  not  appn»ve<l  he  resigneii.  retiring
to  his  farm.  Cnder  the  sh<»rt  administration  of
I'aez  in  18<52  he  was  again  a  memU-r  of  the  cabi-
net, and  sevend  times  was  elwt«>«l  to  congn-ss.  He
was  more  than  a  j>arty-leiwler.  and  is  n»ganle<l  as
among  the  most  honorable  statesmen  of  Venezuela.


610


SOUDER


SOULfi


SOUDER,  Casper  (sow'-der),  journalist,  b.  in
Philadeluhiiu  Pa..  8  Nov.,  1819;  d.  there,  21  Oct..
1868.  He  supplemented  a  common-school  exiuca-
tion  by  private  study,  and  in  1850-'64  was  connect-
ed with  the  Philadelphia  "Dispatch,"  devoting
himself  specially  to  local  antiquities.  In  1853  he
also  became  associated  with  the  "  Evening  Bulle-
tin," of  which  he  was  afterward  an  editor  and  part
proprietor  till  his  death.  Mr.  Souder  was  an  active
supporter  of  the  administration  during  the  civil
war.  His  "History  of  Chestnut  Street,"  which
was  published  serially,  has  been  praised  for  trust-
wortniness  and  originalitv  of  treatment.

SOULABIE,  Louis  f'erdinand  (soo-lah-bee),
explorer,  b.  in  Pierre-fitte-Lestatas,  Beam,  in  1587;
d.  in  Bahia  in  1656.  He  became  a  Jesuit,  was
sent  to  labor  among  the  Indians  of  Brazil,  and
was  attached  for  years  to  the  Amazon  missions.
His  travels  in  the  country,  which  extended  to  Napo
river,  gave  him  opportunities  to  make  hydrograpn-
ieal  observations,  and  he  prepared  a  valuable  chart
of  the  basin  of  the  Amazon,  with  which  he  became
thoroughly  familiar.  In  1637  he  became  assistant
of  Father  Cristobal  Acuna  and  accompanied  Tcxei-
ra's  expedition,  which  sailed  down  the  Amazon  from
Peru  to  its  mouth.  The  maps  and  geographical  ob-
servations in  Acufia's  narrative,  "  Descubrimiento
del  Rio  de  las  Amazonas  "  (Madrid,  1641),  are  Soula-
bie's  work.  Soulabie  was  afterward  professor  of
theology  in  the  college  of  the  Jesuits  at  Bahia.  He
left  in  manuscript  "  Historia  del  descubrimiento  v
de  la  conquista  de  la  America  meridional,"  which
was  afterward  published  (Rome,  1752).

SODLE,  Caroline  Aiignsta  (soo-lav'),  author,
b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  3  Sept.,  1824.  Her  father's
nanje  was  Nathaniel  White.  She  was  graduated
at  Albany  female  academy  in  1841,  and  on  28
Aug.,  1843,  married  Rev.  Ilenry  B.  Soule,  a  Uni-
vcrsalist  clergyman,  who  died  in  1851,  leaving  her
with  five  children  to  support.  Since  that  time  she
has  devoted  herself  to  teaching  and  to  literature.
She  was  corresponding  editor  of  the  •'  Ladies'  Re-
pository" in  Boston  from  1855  till  1863,  and  for
eleven  years  edited  and  published  "  The  Guiding
Star,"  a  Sunday-school  fortnightly,  in  New  York.
Afterward  she  was  ordained  as  a  minister  of  the
Universalist  church,  and  in  1879  became  its  first
foreign  missionary.  She  is  now  (1888)  pastor  of  a
congregation  in  Glasgow.  Scotland.  In  a  recent
letter  Mrs.  Soulc  says:  "I  have  written  everything
from  a  sermon  to  a  song,  and  done  everything
from  making  sorghum  molasses  in  a  log-cabin  on
a  prairie  to  preaching  three  times  a  Sunday  in  the
city  of  London."  Besides  numerous  contributions
to  current  literature,  she  has  published  "  Memoir
of  Rev.  H.  B.  Soule"  (New  York,  1852);  "Home
Life  "  (Boston,  1855) ;  "  The  Pet  of  the  Settlement "
(1859);  and  "Wine  or  Water"  (1861);  and  edited
for  two  years  "  The  Rosebud,"  an  annual,  to  which
she  contributed  many  articles  (1854-'5).

SOULfi,  George,  educator,  b.  in  Barrington,
Yates  CO.,  N.  Y.,  14  May,  1834.  After  the  death
of  his  father  in  1838  he'  was  taken  to  Illinois  by
his  mother.  He  was  graduated  at  Sycamore  acad-
emy, 111.,  in  1852,  and  during  the  next  three  years
studied  medicine,  law,  and  the  commercial  sciences
in  St.  Louis,  Mo.  In  1856  he  founded  the  Soule
commercial  and  literary  college  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  of  which  he  is  still  (1888)  president.  He  was
an  officer  in  the  Confederate  army  from  1862  to
the  close  of  the  war,  attaining  the  rank  of  lieu-
tenant-colonel. He  was  capture<l  at  Shiloh.  and
afterward  was  chief  of  the  labor  bureau  of  Gen.
Kirby  Smith's  army.  Col.  Soule  is  engaged  in  lec-
turing and  writing  on  educational  and  social  top-


ics, and  has  held  many  offices  in  benevolent  and
civic  societies.  He  has  published  "  Practical
Mathematics"  (New  Orleans,  1872);  a  series  of
"  Philosophic  Arithmetics  "  on  a  new  system  (1884) ;
and  "Science  and  Practice  of  Accounts"  (1887).

SOULE,  Joshua,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Bristol,
Me.,  1  Aug.,  1781  ;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  6  March,
1867.  His  father  was  a  man  of  great  local  influ-
ence, went  by  the  name  of  "  Captain  Soule,"  and
was  one  of  the  select-men  of  Bristol.  When  Joshua
was  sixteen  he  united  with  the  Methodist  church,
and  about  a  year  later  introduced  himself  to  a
Methodist  presiding  elder  and  asked  that  he  might
travel  with  him.  Consent  being  given,  he  began
his  career  as  "  boy  preacher,"  but.  though  young,
he  was  tall,  dignified,  and  able,  and  acquired  note
as  an  opponent  of  Calvinism,  Unitarianism,  and
Universalism.  He  studied  hard  and  made  great
progress.  When  he  was  but  twenty-three  he  was
placed  in  charge  of  the  state  of  Maine  as  presiding
elder.  He  was  on  the  committee  to  draft  the
constitution  of  the  delegated  general  conference,
which,  since  1813,  has  been  the  fundamental  law
of  the  church.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  general
conference  of  1812,  and  also  to  that  of  1816.  At
the  latter  he  was  elected  book-agent  and  editor  of
the  "  Methodist  Magazine."  He  did  not  like  these
posts,  and  had  made  up  his  mind  not  to  accept  a
re-election  ;  but  in  1820,  before  that  question  was
raised,  he  was  elected  a  bishop.  A  great  debate
had  occurred  on  whether  presiding  elders  should
be  elected  or,  as  before,  appointed  by  the  bishops.
Mr.  Soule  was  opposed  to  their  election,  but  the
majority  of  the  conference  voted  in  favor  of  it.
Having  full  confidence  in  his  sincerity,  they  elected
him  bishop,  but  he  declined  rather  than  administer
what  he  believed  to  be  an  unconstitutional  law,  re-
entered the  pastorate,  and  was  stationed  first  in
New  York  and  then  in  Baltimore.  In  1824  the
general  conference  reversed  its  action  and  re-
elected him  bishop.  These  circumstances  have  no
parallel  in  the  history  of  the  denomination,  and
are  indisputable  proofs  of  his  great  ability  and
influence.  Up  to  1842  he  continued  in  the  du-
ties of  the  office,  and  then  visited  Great  Britain
as  a  delegate  from  the  general  conference  of  the
United  States  to  the  British  Wesleyan  conference.
In  1844  the  general  conference  was  held  in  New
York.  Bishop  James  0.  Andrew  had  become  com-
plicated with  slavery,  and  the  conference  pas-sed  a
resolution  asking  him  to  desist  from  the  exercise
of  his  functions  until  this  encumbrance  should  be
removed.  It  was  Bishop  Soule's  opinion  that  the
conference  had  no  right  to  pass  such  a  resolution.
Bishop  Andrew  declined  the  proposition,  and  the
result  was  a  division  of  the  church.  Bisho|:>  Soule
adhered  to  the  southern  members,  and  when  the
Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  was  established
he  went  with  it,  and  became  its  senior  bishop.  In
1848  he  visited  the  general  conference  of  the  Meth-
odist Episcopal  church  at  Pittsburg,  but  was  not
recognized  as  a  bishop  or  a  delegate,  though  he  was
courteously  received  as  a  visitor.  At  the  age  of  sev-
enty-two he  retired  from  public  life.  Bishop  Soule
was  a  great  man  intellectually,  of  remarkable  per-
sonal appearance,  dignified  and  even  ostentatious
in  bearing,  of  a  strong  and  imperious  will.  Had  he
been  thoroughly  educated,  ana  in  early  life  brought
into  close  relations  with  educated  men,  his  infirmi-
ties, if  not  eradicated,  would  have  been  concealed.
As  it  was,  few  men  in  church  or  state  have  exerted
greater  influence  over  their  contemporaries.

SOULfi,  Pierre,  statesman,  b.  in  Castillon,  in
the  French  Pyrenees,  in  September,  1802 ;  d.  in
New  Orleans.  26  March.  1870. Histather  held  the


SOULfe


S0UL6


611


inherited  post  of  a  magistrate  when  the  French
revolution  b«*^Hn.  Il<^  then  cntertNl  the  armj  of
the  new  republic,  ami  rose  to  hi^h  rank,  but
finally  ri'tumed  to  the  iKMU'h.  Pierre,  his  vounjfest
son.  was  !H>nt  to  the  Jesuits'  college  at  I'oulouse,
to  be  |)re|«nHl  for
ei'clesiastical  onlers;
but  the  rigid  di»<ci-
pliiio  was  repugnant
to  him.  and  he  re-
turned home  in  1816.
The  following  year  he
was  sent  to  the  city
of  Bordeaux  to  com-
plete his  education  ;
out  he  took  part  in  a
plot  against  Ijouis
XVIII..  was  detprte«l,
and  fled  on  fo4>t  to
the  mountains  of  the
ancient  IJearn  coun-
^  ■  try,  where,  disguisetl

^w  /J4  /  /^  /^  ~  **  *  shepherd,  he  re-
7  C'^mA.  ^t/u2L<X  maincd  a  year.  The
government  i)ardoned
him,  and  he  returned  to  Bordeaux,  where  he  taught
in  an  acmlemy,  and  he  then  removed  to  Paris,
where  he  earned  support  as  a  tutor  while  complet-
ing his  education,  and  then  studie<l  law.  In  1824
Soule's  jMjn  found  access  to  the  Paris  Liberal  jour-
nals, and  introduced  him  to  the  intimacy  oi:  the
Liberal  leaders.  In  1825  he  was  an  editor  of  "Le
Nain  jaune,"  a  paper  noted  for  its  extreme  liberal
ideas  and  the  bitterness  of  its  attacks  ujion  the
ministers  of  Charles  X.  One  of  the  severest  of
these  articles  was  trace<l  to  Soule,  and  he  was  ar-
rested and  tried  before  the  cour  correctionnelle.
Soule's  lawyer  sought  rather  to  soften  the  severity
of  the  imjK'uding  sentence  than  to  defend  his
client's  course,  whereupon  St)ule,  indignant  at  this
surrender  of  his  honest  convictions,  rose  in  court
and  defended  them  boldly,  frankly,  and  elwjuently.
His  sentence  was  only  the  more  severe^lose  con-
finement in  the  prisort  of  St.  Pelagie  and  a  fine  of
lO.(XX)  francs.  The  only  escajie  from  this  was  self-
exile.  Soule  left  Paris,  with  the  pass[)ort  of  his
friend,  the  poet  Barthelemy,  who  closely  resembled
him.  He  had  an  offer  from  the  president  of  Chili
to  become  his  private  secretary,  and  he  intended
to  sail  from  England  with  the  Chilian  charge
d'affaires,  but  when  he  had  crossed  the  channel  the
ship  on  which  he  was  to  embark  had  departetl.
^ule  now  was  reduced  to  such  a  strait  tnat  he
returned  to  France,  prepared  to  face  the  dungeon.
At  Havre,  just  as  he  lande<I,  he  was  met  by  a
friend,  afterwanl  a  French  admiral,  who  persuailwl
him  to  embark  for  Hayti,  where  he  arrived  in  '
Septemlwr,  1826.  He  was  kindly  received  by
President  Boyer.  to  whom  he  bore  letters  of  intro-
duction, but,  finding  no  opening,  sailed  in  October
for  Baltimore,  and  thence  went  to  New  Orleans
toward  the  close  of  the  year.  He  found  a  knowl-
«dge  of  English  indispensable,  and  went  to  Ten-
nessee to  study  it,  liecoming  for  a  while  a  guest  of
Gen.  Andrew  Jacks<m.  Afterward  he  went  to
Bardstown,  Ky.,  where,  falling  sick  and  being
without  funds,  he  obtained  employment  as  a
eardener,  and  while  engaged  in  that  capacity
Ieame<l  English  and  studied  the  elements  of
American  law.  On  his  return  to  New  Orleans,
Souh;  studied  TjouLsiana  law  in  the  office  of  Moreau
Lislet,  speedily  passed  his  examination  in  English,
and  then  l»ecame  Lislet's  partner.  He  rose  rapidly
in  his  profession,  and  for  many  years  he  was  asso-
ciated in  the  conduct  of  most  of  the  celebrated


civil  and  criminal  caseii  in  the  Ix>uisian«  court* ;
but  he  was  nmro  distinguishe<l  for  originality,
power,  and  brilliancy  a.s  an  a4lv(M'ate  than  for  pro-
fundity as  a  jurist.  He  enti-riMl  |x)liticii,  in  tlie
first  presidential  cam|>aign  after  lie  liegan  his  le-
gal career,  as  a  public  s|M>aker  «>n  the  Democratic
side.  L'nder  the  new  constitution  of  1845  Mr.
S«mle  was  eloctcil  to  the  state  senate.  In  1847
(rov.  Isaac  Johnson  ap[>ointed  him  to  the  U.  8.
senate  to  fill  a  vacancv,  and  in  1849  he  was  elected
to  that  body  by  the  fegislature  for  the  full  term.
In  all  nublic  measures  affecting  the  south  he
esftoused  the  extreme  southern  view.  He  took  an
active  {uirt  in  the  long  debates  u|K»n  Henry  Clay's
compromise  bill  of  iNoO,  and  led  his  party  in  op-
i)osition  to  that  mea^sure.  He  frtniuently  chal-
lengwl  Clay  and  Webster  in  delinte,  and  advfK-ated
secession  without  delay,  fort?»e<'ing,  as  he  claimed,
that  from  compromise  to  comf>romi8e  the  sov-
ereignty.of  the  states  would  8|H*«'dily  surren<ler  to
the  supremacy  of  a  central  g<^vernment.  In  March,
1853,  President  Pierce  offered  S«jul«*  the  mission  to
Spain,  with  the  special  object  in  view  of  the  ac-
quisition of  Cuba,  This  news  precedwi  him  to
Madrid,  and  he  was  received  there  very  coldly.
At  a  ball  in  Madrid  a  remark  bv  the  Duke  of
Alva  was  accidentally  heanl  by  >fr.  Soule's  son,
Nelvil,  who  considere<l  it  offensive  to  his  fam-
ily, and,  though  the  duke  denietl  any  such  in-
tention, a  duel  with  swonls  was  the  result.  Mr.
Soule  then  challenged  the  P'rench  ambassador,  the
Marquis  de  Turgot,  as  resjKinsible  for  what  had
taken  place  imder  his  roof,  and  crippled  him
for  life.  On  28  Autr.,  1854,  a  revolutionary  out-
burst took  place  in  the  street,s  of  Madrid.  It  has
lx»en  charged  that  Mr.  Soule  favorwl  this  with  all
his  power ;  but  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  it,
though  he  doubtless  sympathizeil,  as  was  natural,
with  the  Spanish  Liberal  jmrty.  In  1854,  Mr.  Soule
was  one  of  the  nunisters  that  framed  the  cele-
brated "  Ostend  manifesto"  (see  Pikrck,  Fra.vk-
lin),  and  it  was  understood  that  he  was  the  mov-
ing spirit  in  its  pre|>aration.  At  some  previous
periou  he  had  violently  atUicked  Najwleon  III.,
and  when  on  his  way  to  Ostend  he  was  stopne<l  by
the  authorities  at  the  southern  frontier  of  r  ranee ;
but  as  soon  as  the  officials  at  Paris  were  in-
formed of  this  they  sent  him  authority  to  pursue
his  journey.  At  the  same  time  French  spies  fol-
lowe<l  him  to  Ostend.  Mr.  Soule  was  naturally
deeply  disappointed  by  his  government's  policy  of
non-action  ujK)n  the  manifesto.  He  resigned  in
June,  1855,  and  returned  to  New  Orleans,  where
he  resumed  the  practice  of  law  without  aban-
doning politics.  In  1850,  and  again  in  18450.  he
warmly  advocated  the  nomination  of  Stephen  A.
Douglas  for  the  pre,«iideiicy.  After  the  election
of  Abraham  Lincoln,  Mr.  Soule.  to  the  surprise  of
his  friends,  opposed  se<'ession,  aiul  favored  "co-
operation" of  the  southern  states  to  secure  what
they  considered  their  rights.  With  this  view,
when  Gov.  Thomas  O.  Moore  calle<I  a  state  conven-
tion in  January,  1861,  Mr.  .Soule  was  a  candidate
for  delegate,  but  was  not  electe<l.  During  the  can-
vass he  depicted  in  the  darke^st  colors  the  calami-
ties secession  would  bring,  and  nredicte<l  the  de-
feat of  the  south,  but  declared  that  he  would
abide  by  the  decision  of  his  state.  On  the  nassage
of  the  ordinances  of  secession  he  tenderetl  nis  ser-
vices to  the  Confederate  government,  but.  Iieing  in
failing  health,  he  soon  returned  to  New  Orleans,  and
remaine<l  there  until  the  citv  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  National  forces  in  April,  1862.  Shortly  after-
ward he  was  arrested  and  taken  to  Fort  Ijafayette,
New  York  harlKir,  where  he  was  imprisoned  for


612


SOULB


SOUPfi


several  months.  Finally  he  was  released  and  went
to  Nassau,  whence,  in  the  autumn  of  18G2,  he  ran
the  blockatle  at  Charleston  and  tendered  his  ser-
vices to  Gen.  Beauregard.  After  serving  on  his
staff  for  some  time  as  an  honorary  member,  Mr.
Soule  went  to  Richmond  in  1863,  and  was  com-
missioned a  brigadier-general  to  raise  a  foreign  le-
gifin ;  but  the  plan  was  not  carried  out.  Mr.  Soule
then  went  to  Havana.  In  the  summer  of  1864
he  became  connected  with  Dr.  William  M.  Gwin
in  the  latter's  scheme  for  settling  Sonora,  in  Mex-
ico, with  immigrants  from  California.  This  was
a  project  patronized  by  Napoleon  III. ;  the  Con-
feuerate  government  had  no  connection  with  it.
It  failed  through  disagreement  between  Maximil-
ian and  Dr.  Gwin.  When,  at  the  close  of  the  war,
Mr.  Soule  returned  to  New  Orleans,  though  his
health  was  broken  and  his  fortune  was  gone,  he
resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession,  but  in  1868
he  had  to  give  up  all  work.  Soule's  remarkable
powers  of  eloquence  were  acknowledged  by  Henry
Clay  and  Daniel  Webster.  The  effect  of  his  glow-
ing periods  was  deepened  by  a  strong,  clear,  and
mellow  voice  and  by  a  massive  and  imposing  form,
a  noble  head,  with  long,  glossy,  black  locks,  flash-
ing black  eyes,  and  an  olive-tinted  face,  which  was
cast  in  the  mould  of  the  great  Napoleon's  and  was
full  of  expression.

SOULE,  Richard  (sole),  lexicographer,  b.  in
Duxbury,  Mass.,  8  June,  1812 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  25  Dec,  1877.  He  was  descended  in  the  sixth
generation  from  George  Soule,  who  was  one  of  the
signers  of  the  compact  on  the  "  Mayflower."  Rich-
ard was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1832  and  was  a
civil  engineer  till  1838.  Prom  1840  till  1853  he
engaged  in  sugar-refining,  and  after  1855  he  de-
voted himself  to  literary  pursuits.  Most  of  his
life  was  spent  in  Boston.  He  was  a  member  of  the
school  committee  of  that  city  in  1848  and  1849.
and  of  the  legislature  in  the  latter  year.  From
1855  till  1859  Mr.  Soule  had  supervision  of  the
corps  of  editors  that  assisted  Dr.  Joseph  E.  Worces-
ter in  the  preparation  of  his  quarto  dictionary.  He
published  "  Memorial  of  the  Sprague  Family,"  a
poem,  with  genealogical  and  biographical  notes
(Boston,  1847) ;  "  Manual  of  English  Pronuncia-
tion and  Spelling,  with  a  Preliminary  Exposition
of  English  Orthoepy  and  Orthography,"  with  Will-
iam A.  Wheeler  (1861);  "Dictionary  of  English
Synonymes"  (1871);  and  "Pronouncing  Hand-
Book,"  with  Loomis  J.  Campbell  (1873).

SOULOUQUE,  Faiistin  EHe  (soo-look),  Hay-
tian  emperor  under  the  name  of  Faustin  I.,  b.
in  Petit  Goave  in  1785;  d.  there  6  Aug.,  1867.
He  was  a  negro  slave  of  the  Mandingo  race,  but
was  freed  by  the  decree  of  Felicite  Sonthonax,  is-
sued 29  Aug.,  1793.  and  took  part  in  the  civil  war
that  raged  in  the  island,  and  in  1803  in  the  negro
insurrection  against  the  French.  He  became  in
1810  a  lieutenant  in  the  horse-guards  of  President
Alexandre  Petion,  and  was  promoted  captain  by
President  Jean  Boyer,  but  in  1843  joined  the  party
of  Riviere-Herard,  who  made  him  a  colonel.  He
was  promoted  brigadier-general  by  President  Guer-
rier  and  lieutenant-general  by  President  Jean
Riche,  and.  after  the  death  of  the  latter  in  Febru-
ary, 1847,  while  rival  aspirants  were  disputing  and
plotting  for  the  succession,  the  leaders  of  the  senate
agreed  to  elect  an  old  and  incapable  negro  general.
Senators  Ardouin  and  Dupuy  nominated  Soulouque.
urging  in  his  favor  that  he  was  unable  to  read  or
write,  and  he  was  unexpectedly  elected  on  1  March,
1847 ;  but,  instead  of  proving  a  tool  in  the  hands
of  the  senators,  he  showed  a  strong  will,  and.  al-
though by  his  antecedents  belonging  to  the  mulat-


to party,  he  began  to  attach  the  blacks  to  his  in-
terest. The  mulattoes  retaliated  by  conspiring ;  but
Soulouque  began  to  decimate  his  enemies  by  con-
fiscation, proscriptions,  and  executions.  The  black
soldiers  began  a  general  massacre  in  Port  au
Prince,  which  ceased  only  after  the  French  con-
sul, Charles  Reybaud,  threatened  to  order  the  land-
ing of  marines  from  the  men-of-war  in  the  harbor.
Ambitious  to  unite  the  two  parts  of  the  island.
Soulouque  invaded  the  Dominican  territory  in
March,  1849,  with  4,000  men,  but  was  defeated  in
a  decisive  battle  by  Pedro  Santana  near  Ocoa  on
21  April  and  compelled  to  retreat.  Despite  the
failure  of  the  campaign,  he  caused  himself  to  be
proclaimed  emperor  on  26  Aug.,  1849,  under  the
name  of  Faustin  I.,  apparently  by  the  will  of  the

fieople  and  the  unanimous  action  of  parliament,
le  surrounded  himself  with  a  numerous  court,
created  dukes  and  other  nobles,  founded  military
and  civil  orders,  and  issued  a  constitution,  reserv-
ing to  himself  the  right  to  rule  at  any  juncture  as
he  pleased.  On  18  April,  1852,  with  his  wife  Ade-
lina,  a  woman  of  questionable  character,  whom  he
had  married  in  December,  1849,  against  the  advice
of  his  lieutenants,  he  was  crowned  with  great
pomp  by  the  vicar  of  Port  au  Prince,  in  imitation
of  the  ceremonial  at  the  coronation  of  Napoleon  1.
Toward  the  close  of  1855  he  invaded  the  Domini-
can territory  again  at  the  head  of  an  army  of  8,600
men,  but  was  again  defeated  by  Santana,  and
barely  escaped  being  captured.  His  treasure  and
crown  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  In  the
following  year  a  new  campaign  was  again  unsuc-
cessful, and  two  years  later  there  was  a  commer-
cial crisis  in  the  island.  Insurrections  began  in
several  counties,  but  they  were  put  down.  In  De-
cember, 1858,  Gen.  Fabre  Geffrard  put  himself  at
the  head  of  the  movement,  and,  after  some  en-
counters with  the  imperial  troops,  entered  Port  au
Prince,  15  Jan.,  1859,  Soulouque's  soldiers  refusing
to  fight.  He  took  refuge  at  tne  French  consulate,
and,  protected  in  his  flight  by  Geflfrard,  sailed  with
his  family  on  board  the  British  ship  "  Melbourne  "
for  Jamaica,  arriviiig  in  Kingston  on  22  Jan.  with
great  riches,  consisting  of  jeweln',  diamonds,  and
money,  although  his  property  in  tiayti  was  confis-
cated. After  the  accession  of  Salnave  in  March,
1867,  he  was  permitted  to  return  to  Hayti,  and
died  soon, afterward.

SOUPE,  Marie  Joseph  (soo-pay),  French  phy-
sician, b.  in  Asnieres  in  1738 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  1794.
He  studied  principally  contagious  diseas^,  and
presented  to  the  Academy  of  sciences  a  memoir  in
which  he  asserted  that  he  had  discovered  the*  real
cause  of  the  plague  known  as  the  black  cholera,
which  raged  in  Europe  and  Asia  in  the  14th  cen-
tury. He  was  surgeon  in  the  Hotel  Dieu  at  Paris
when  news  was  received  that  cholera  had  broken
out  in  Callao,  and  at  the  invitation  of  the  academy
Soupe  went  to  Peru  to  study  its  effects  in  1783.
He  arrived  in  Callao  when  tlie  disease  was  at  its
height  and  the  city  was  nearly  deserted  by  physi-
cians, and,  offering  his  services  to  the  authorities,
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  sanitary  council.
He  divided  the  city  into  relief  wards,  and,  by  pull-
ing down  old  wooden  houses  and  Indian  huts  in
or  near  the  city,  contributed  to  ward  off  a  greater
calamity  from  Callao.  Before  returning  to  France
he  visited  I^ima  and  other  large  cities,  went  on
botanical  expeditions  in  the  Andes,  and,  passing
to  Chili,  collected  an  herbarium  of  about  500  me-
dicinal plants  (1784-'6).  His  report  to  the  acade-
my was  criticised,  as  he  claimed  that  cholera  was
a  poisonous  blood  disease,  and  suggested  as  its
remedy  a  treatment  by  spirits,  which  he  said  he


SOUTH  AM  ITON


80UTH0ATK


613


r


had  umhI  with  gruat  cfncacy  in  Callim.  MfNlprn
science  hati  in  |>art  wiuptfil  S4)u|m''««  theory,  which
WM  in  his  time  stmnt^iy  np|MiM><l.  Aithouf^h  ho
WM  very  {>opulsr  in  I'aris,  hi»  title  of  physician  to
the  kin^  cnuse<l  his  arrest  and  siiliscqucntly  his
death  (liirinj;  the  reijjn  of  icrmr.  Ilis  works  in-
clude "  Orijfino  et  nmrcho  dc  la  |K'sto  noire  "(Paris,
1779) ;  **  I>e  cholera  &  Cailao,  son  orijfinc,  sa  niarchr,
MS  proprcs"  (1787);  "Coup  il'tpil  sur  k»8  plantes
nn^licinalos  du  Porou  et  du  Chili"  (1787):  and
"  Monojjmphie  du  sanj;  et  de  ses  affections  "  (1791).
SOl'THAMPTON.  Henry  Wriothesler,  Pjirl
of.  Knjjlish  stut.sman.  »).  0  Oct.,  l.*)?:};  d.  In  Hol-
land, 10  Nov..  1()24.  In  15JMJ  he  scrvc<l  in  the  ex-
n«Hlition  of  the  Karl  of  Ksm'X  to  Cjidiz,  and  in  15JM)
ne  was  genenU  of  horse  under  Ksscx  in  Ireland.
After  seeinfj  further  service  in  Hollaml,  he  took

Eart  in  the  insurrection  that  his  former  chief
eadetl  in  Ijondon,  and  was  scntence<l  to  death,
but  pardonetl  by  the  queen.  He  took  part  in  the
colonization  of  this  country  under  Sir  Walter  Ral-
egh, sending  out  the  expe«lition  in  the  "Concord,"
under  Bath(»loniew  Gosnold  in  1(J02,  at  his  own  ex-
pense, and  also  interested  many  others  in  schemes
for  developing  the  New  World,  including  his
brother-in-law,  Ijord  Arundel,  and  the  latter's
son-in-law,  Cecil  Calvert,  afterward  Ijord  Balti-
more. In  1005,  with  Lonl  Arundel  he  despatche<l
an  expedition  to  New  England.  Though  his  name
does  not  appear  in  the  first  charter  of  the  London
company  of  Virginia,  he  is  cre<lited  with  the  chief
part  in  obtaining  it.  and  in  the  second  charter  his
name  stands  next  to  thaee  of  the  high  officers  of
state.  When  his  friend.  Sir  E<lwin  Sandys,  who
had  converted  him  to  Protestantism,  retireid  from
the  treasurership  of  the  comnanv  (its  chief  office),
Southampton  was  unanimously  chosen  in  his  stead,
and  he  continued  the  liberal  policy  of  Sandys,  re-
taining office  till  the  comjwny's  charter  was  taken
away.  Southampton  was  a  firm  sup{)orter  of  re-
ligious liberty,  and  was  imprisoned  by  the  king's
order  for  some  time  in  1621  on  a  charge  of  corre-
sponding with  the  IndefHjndents.  After  the  Vir-
ginia comjwny  had  l)een  suppressed,  he  commande<l
a  regiment  in  the  Netherlands  in  the  struggle  for
Dutch  independence.  In  their  winter-quarters  at
Rozendaal  ne  and  his  son  were  seized  with  fever.
The  latter  die<l,  and  the  earl  followe<l  him  after
recovering  sufficientiv  to  reach  Bergen-op-Zoom  on
his  way  home.  Shakespeare  dedicated  to  him  his
"Venus  and  Adonis"  in  1593.  and  the  "  Itajie  of
Lucn'ce  "  in  1594,  and  he  is  the  only  man  fron>
whom  the  [KM>t  acknowledgers  receiving  a  benefit.

SOrXHARD,  Henry  (suth  -ard),  congressman,
b.  on  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  in  October,  1749 ;  d.  in
Baskingridge.  N.  J.,  2  June,  1842.  The  family
name  was  formerly  Southworth.  His  father,  Abra-
ham, removed  to  Baskingridge  in  1757.  The  son
w^as  brought  up  on  a  farm  and  eamwl  money  as  a
day-lalxirer  to  purchase  land  for  himself.  He  was
an  active  t>atriol  daring  the  Revolution,  .servetl  in
the  state  Douse  of  representatives  for  nine  years,
and  sat  in  congress  in  1801-'ll  and  1815-'21,  hav-
ing been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.  Mr.  Southard  was
a  man  of  superior  talents  and  possessed  a  remarka-
ble memory.  Until  he  had  passe<i  ninety  vears  he
neither  wore  glasses  nor  use<l  a  staff. — His  son,
Samuel  liewlx,  senator,  b.  in  Baskingridge,  N.  J.,
9. June,  1787;  d.  in  Frtnlericksburg.  V  a.,  26  June,
1842.  was  graduated  at  Prim-eton  in  1804,  taught
in  his  native  state,  and  then  went  to  Virginia  as
tutor  in  the  family  of  John  Taliaferro.  After
studying  law  and  l)eing  admitttMl  to  the  bar  in  that
state,  he  returne«l  to  New  Jersey  and  settled  at
Hcmington. He  was  a{>|K)inted  law-reporter  by


the  legislature  in  1814,  bi>f»me  associate  justice  of
the  state  supreme  court  in  1815,  was  a  presidential
elector  in  1820,  and  was  (>hoM>n  to  the  IJ.  .S.  senate
as  a  Whig  in  place  of  Janu>s  J.  Wiltum.  who  had
resigned,  serving  from  16  Feb.,  1821,  till  8  March,
1828.  In  1N21  he
met  his  father  on
a  joint  committee,
and  they  voted  to-
gether on  the  Mis-
.xouri  compromise.
In  September,  1828,
he became secre-


X^/trtA^ ^^x^f^^Oi^^


larv  of  the  nav^,
and  he  serve<l  tdl
3  March,  1829.  act-
ing al«)  as  s«'cre-
tary  of  the  treasury
from  7  March  till
1  July,  1825.  and
taking  charge  of
the  portfolio  of  war
for  a  time.  When
he  was  dining  with
Chief-Justice  Kirk-
patrick,  of  New  Jer-
sey, soon  after  his

appointment  to  the  navy,  the  judge,  aware  of  his
ignorance  of  nautical  affairs,  said :  "  Now.  Mr.
Southard,  can  you  honestly  assert  that  you  know
the  bow  from  the  stern  of  a  frigate!"  On  his
retirement  from  the  secretaryship  of  the  navy  in
1829  he  l)ecame  attorney-general  of  New  Jersey,
and  in  1832  he  was  electe<V  governor  of  the  state.
He  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  again  in  1833,  and
served  till  his  resignation  on  3  Mav,  1842.  In
1841,  on  the  death  of  President  Harrison  and  the
consequent  accession  of  John  Tyler,  he  became
president  of  the  senate.  He  was  made  a  trustee
of  Princeton  in  1822,  and  in  1*13  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
Mr.  Southard  published  "  Reports  of  the  Supreme
Court  of  New  .Jersey.  1816-'20"  (2  vols..  Trenton,
1819-'20),  and  numerous  addresses,  including  a
"Centennial  Address"  (18.32),  and  "Discourse  on
William  Wirt"  (Wa.shington,  1834).— Samuel  liew-
is's  son,  Samuel  Lewis,  clerg>-man  (1819-'59).  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  18;J6,  and  took  orders
in  the  Protestant  F)pisc'opal  church.  He  published
"  The  MysttTV  of  Godliness,"  a  series  of  sermons
(New  York.  1848).  and  single  discourses.

SOl'THOATE,  Horatio,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  5  July,  1812.  He  was  gnwluated  at
Bowdoin  in  1882,  and  then  went  to  the  Andover
theological  seminary,  intending  to  enter  the  minis-
try. Two  years  later  he  a[>plied  for  orders  in  the
Episcopal  church,  and  was  confirme<l  in  October.
18^34.  He  was  onlainwi  deacon  in  Trinity  church.
Boston,  Mass.,  12  July,  IKW.  by  Bishop  (Jriswold,
and  soon  afterwani  was  ap|x>int«><l  by  the  foreign
committee  of  the  board  of  missions  to  make  an  in-
vestigation of  the  state  of  Mohamme<Ianism  in
Turkey  and  Persia.  He  sailed  from  New  York  in
April.  1838.  antl  was  occupieil  for  five  years  in  this
field  of  research.  On  his  returning  to  the  United
States  he  was  onlaintnl  priest  in  St.  Paul's  chapel.
New  York  city,  3  Oct.,  1839,  by  Bishop  Itenjamin
T.  Ondenlonk.  He  was  ap{K)inte«l  missionary  to
(Constantinople  in  1840,  ana  .served  for  four  years
in  that  capacity,  during  which  time  he  made  a
tour  through  Mesojxitamia.  The  Episco|ial  church
having  resolve<l  henceforth  to  send  bishojw  into
the  fon'ign  missionary  field.  Dr.  Southgate  was
consecrate*  1  bishop  for  the  dominions  and  depend-
encies of  the  sultan  of  Turkey,  in  St.  Peter's  church.


614


SOUTHWICK


SOUTH  WORTH


Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  Oct.,  1844.  In  the  following
year  he  returned  to  C!onstantinople,  and  was  occu-
pied in  the  duties  of  his  office  until  1849.  He  then
cAine  back  to  the  United  States  and  offered  his
resignation,  which  was  accepted  by  the  house  of
bishops  in  October,  1850.  He  received  the  degree
of  S.  T.  I>.  from  Columbia  in  1845,  and  the  same
from  Trinity  in  1846.  He  was  elected  bishop  of
California  in  1850  and  of  Hayti  in  1870,  but  de-
clined. In  1851  he  went  to  Portland,  Me.,  and  or-
ganized St.  Luke's  parish,  now  the  cathedral  church
of  the  diocese.  The  following  year  he  accepted
the  rectorship  of  the  Church  of  the  Advent,  Bos-
ton, which  he  held  until  the  close  of  1858.  In  the
autumn  of  1859  he  became  rector  of  Zion  church.
New  York  city,  and  discharged  the  duties  of  that
post  for  thirteen  years,  resigning  in  September,
1872.  Since  that  date  he  has  lived  in  retirement
in  Ravenswood,  N.  Y.  Bishop  Southgate's  chief
publications  are  "Narrative  of  a  Tour  through
Armenia,  Kurdistan,  Persia,  and  Mesopotamia "
(2  vols..  New  York,  1840) ;  "  Narrative  of  a  Visit
to  the  Syrian  (Jacobite)  Church  of  Mesopotamia  "
(1844) ;  •'  A  Treatise  on  the  Antiquity,  Doctrine,
Ministry,  and  Worship  of  the  Anglican  Church,"
in  Greek  (Constantinople,  1849) ;  "  Practical  Di-
rections for  the  Observance  of  Lent "  (New  York,
1850) ;  "  The  War  in  the  East "  (1855) ;  "  Parochial
Sermons"  (1859);  and  "  The  Cross  above  the  Cres-
cent, a  Romance  of  Constantinople"  (Philadelphia,
1877).  Pie  has  also  contributed  freely  to  church
and  other  literature  in  magazines  and  reviews.

SOUTHWICK,  Solomon,  journalist,  b.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  25  Dec,  1773;  d.  in  Albanv,  N.  Y.,  18
Nov.,  1839.  His  father  was  editor  of  the  Newport
"  Mercury,"  and  an  active  patriot.  After  engaging
in  several  humble  employments  the  son  entered  a
printing-office  in  New  Y'^ork  city,  and  in  1792  re-
moved to  Albany,  where  he  was  employed  by  his
brother-in-law.  John  Barber,  the  owner  of  the  Al-
bany "  Register."  He  soon  became  Barber's  partner,
and  on  the  latter's  death  in  1808  succeeded  to  his
interest  in  the  paper  and  became  its  sole  editor.
Under  his  management  it  attained  great  influence
in  the  Democratic  party.  Mr.  Southwick  held
many  local  offices  at  this  time,  including  those  of
sheriff  of  the  county  and  postmaster  of  Albany,
and  in  1812  he  became  a  regent  of  the  state
university.  But  he  quarrelled  with  his  party,  his
journal  lost  support,  and  in  1817  it  was  discon-
tinued. In  1819  he  established  "  The  Ploughboy,"
the  first  agricultural  paper  in  the  state,  conducting
it  for  a  time  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Henry  Home-
spun," and  then  in  his  own  name.  About  this
period  he  also  conducted  the  "  Christian  Visitant,"
a  religious  periodical.  Subsequently  he  edited  the
"  National  Democrat,"  in  opposition  to  the  views  of
a  majority  of  his  party,  and  presented  himself  as  a
candidate  for  governor.  He  was  afterward  nomi-
nated by  the  anti-Masons  for  the  same  office,  and
conducted  for  several  years  the  "National  Observer,"
which  he  had  established  in  the  interest  of  that

fiarty.  Shortly  after  this  he  retired  from  political
ife,  and  between  1831  and  1837  delivered  courses
of  lectures  on  "  The  Bible,"  "  Temperance,"  and
"  Self-Education,"  which  were  very  popular.  For
the  last  two  years  of  his  life  he  was  connected  with
the  "  Family'  Newspaper,"  which  was  published  by
his  son  Alfred.  Just  oefore  his  death,  which  came
suddenly,  he  had  projected  a  literary  and  scientific
institute,  under  his  personal  supervision,  to  aid
young  men  in  pursuing  a  course  of  self-education.
Mr.  Southwick  published  many  addresses  and
pamphlets,  including  "  The  Pleasures  of  Poverty,"
a  poem (Albany, 1823); "A  Solemn Warning


against  Pree-Masonry  "  (1827 ) ;  "A  Layman's
Apology  for  the  Appointment  of  Clerical' Chap-
lains " ;  "  Letters  to  Thomas  Herttell,"  under  the
pen-name  of  "  Sherlock  "  (1834) ;  and  "  Five  L^
sons  for  Young  Men  "  (1837).

SOUTH  WORTH,  Constant,  colonist,  b.  in  Ley-
den,  Holland,  in  1614  ;  d.  in  Duxbury,  Mass.,  about
1685.  His  father,  Edward,  a  merchant  and  business
agent  for  the  Leyden  Pilgrims,  died  in  1621,  and
his  mother,  a  woman  of  great  worth  and  ability,
came  over  in  the  third  vessel  to  Plymouth  colony
in  1623  to  become  the  second  wife  of  Gov.  William
Bradford,  whom  she  had  formerly  known.  The
son  was  educated  bv  his  step- father,  and  in  1633
was  one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Duxbury,  which
he  represented  in  the  legislature,  becoming  also
commissioner  for  the  united  colonies,  governor  of
the  Kennebec  plantation,  and  assistant  governor  of
Plymouth.  He  was  the  supposed  author  of  the
supplement  to  "  New  England's  Memorial."  by  his
cousin,  Nathaniel  Morton  (Cambridge,  1669).  He
bequeathed  to  one  of  his  daughters  two  beds  and
furniture,  "  provided  she  do  not  marry  William
Fobbes  ;  but  if  she  do,  then  to  have  five  shillings."
The  daughter  preferred  the  latter  alternative.

SOUTHWORTH,  Emma  Dorothy  Eliza  Ne-
vitte,  author,  b.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  26  Dec,
1819.  She  was  educated  by  her  step-father,  Joshua
L.  Henshaw,  at  whose  school  she  was  graduated  in
1835,  and  in  1840  she  married  F^rederick  11.  South-
worth,  of  Utica,  N.  Y.  She  taught  in  a  puUic
school  in  Wash-
ington in  1844-'9,
and  while  so  occu-
pied began  to  write
stories,  the  first
of  which,  "  The
Irish  Refugee,"  ap-

6 eared  in  "  The
laltimore  Satur-
day Visitor."  Sub-
sequently she  wrote
for  the  "National
Era,"  and  became
one  of  its  regular
contributors.  In
its  columns  ap-
peared her  first
novel,  "  Retribu-
tion." It  original-
ly was  intended  to  J  <:^f  1/  ^  y-^  j^
be  a  short  story,  ^-^6'c/y<rz-<^^5*-i^>^
but grew into a

long  novel,  and  was  afterward  issued  in  book-fopn
(New  York,  1849).  With  unusual  rapidity  she  wrote
her  succeeding  stories,  issuing  sometimes  three  in
a  year,  and  they  have  attained  great  popularity.
Her  works  display  strong  dramatic  power  and  con-
tain many  excellent  descriptive  passages  of  south-
ern life  and  scenery,  to  which  they  are  chiefly  de-
voted. In  1853  she  settled  in  a  viJia  on  the  Poto-
mac heights,  near  Washington,  where  she  lived
until  1876,  when  she  removed  to  Yonkers,  N.  Y.
Mrs.  Southworth  claims  to  have  invented  for  her
own  use  the  manilla  box  envelope  that  was  after-
ward patented  by  others.  Her  published  novels
are  now  (1888)  about  fifty-six  in  number.  A  uni-
form edition,  beginning  with  "  Retribution  "  and
ending  with  "The  Fatal  Secret,"  was  issued  in
Philadelphia  in  1872.  It  includes  forty-two  sto-
ries. Since  1874  her  stories  comprise  "  Unknown  "
(1874);  "Gloria"  (1877);  "The  Trail  of  the  Ser-
pent" (1879):  "Nearest  and  Dearest"  (1881);
"The  Mother's  Secret"  (1883);  and  "An  Exile's
Bride"  (1887);  and  others  were  issued  serially  in


80UTHW0UTII


SOUZA


915


the  "New  York  Ledger,"  Many  of  Mn,  .South-
worth's  works  have  bci>n  translated  into  French.
Oennan,  and  SpanUh,  and  havo  beun  r«>i)ublL<ihi>d
in  London,  Paris,  IxMjisic,  Mtuirid,  and  Montreal.

80UTHW0BTH,  Nathmiiel.  artist,  b.  inScitu-
•ta,  Mass..  in  1806;  d.  in  Dorclu-stor.  Maaa.,  25
April,  IS.W.  Ho  took  hifjh  rank  in  lioston,  whero
he  e^itaMi.xhiMl  hiiiis<>lf  a.s  a  niiniiiturt>-|miiili'r,  his
portmits  U'inj;  charuftfriztHl  by  ac<-tirHtc  drawing;
and  very  <lelicate  execution.  In  1848  he  visited
KurojK',  and  after  his  retuni  nractised  his  profes-
Mon  in  Nt'w  York  and  I'liiladclphia.

SOrTMAN,  CorneliuM,  South  Ameriean  ex-
plon>r.  b.  nonr  Ik-rbicc,  I)ut<'h  (luiana.  in  I(l8fi;  d.
tn  llHrloui,  lIollHiid,  in  1751.  IIo  ^ludi(Hi  at  licy-
dt-n,  and  ri'tiiriii'il  to  (luiana  nftor  the  dcatli  of  his
father  to  n.ssuine  the  mnnn^enient  t>f  his  estate.
The  Kenoml  |H«ace  of  ITl^J  afforded  him  facilities
to  follow  his  natural  ta.xt*>s.  and  he  explore<l  the
three  Uuiafia.s.  crossed  to  Krazil.  and  was  making
botanical  researches  on  the  Iwuks  of  the  ()yaiK>c
river  when  an  uprisinf;  of  the  nefjnH;s  comiK'ned
him  to  flee,  altandonin^  his  pa(>ers,  which  were
lost.  He  was  cnpture«l  in  the  luisin  of  the  Ouanari
by  his  pursuers,  aiul,  although  he  was  n'scued
from  the  stake  by  a  jiarty  of  friendly  Indians,  he
never  afterwanl  completely  rccoven><l  from  the
injuries  that  he  had  suffere<l.  In  1723  he  vis-
ited HalHvia  and  the  Snnda  archi|>elaf;o,  doublet!
CajHj  Horn,  visited  Huenos  Ayres  and  Montevide<),
Samt  Eustatius,  and  st^veral  of  the  West  Indies,
and  made  a  valuable  collection  of  nuMlicinal  plants.
From  17;}2  till  1730  he  was  deputy  ifovernor  of
Surinam.  Failing  health  dwidetl  him  to  reside
in  Kuro|)e,  and  he  settled  in  Harlem,  devoting;  his
la.st  years  to  the  culture  of  tulips  and  ende«vorin)r
to  naturalize  in  his  fine  ganlen  trooical  and  medici-
nal plants  from  Guiana.  His  works  include  "  Be-
schryviuff  van  Cayenne  en  Surinam,  jjelepen  op
het  vaste  landt  van  Guyana  in  Amerika"  (The
Hnffue.  1722);  "  lieschryvinp  eener  Ueis  in  Zuid-
Anierika.  W'vattemle  verscliillende  iM'schouvinffcn
on  trent  mcdicinalc  planten  in  Hrazilic  en  Guya-
na" (Amsterdam.  1<29):  "Ileis  niuir  Cayenne  en
in  het  binnenland  van  Guyana  en  Krazilie  "  (17312) ;
"  IJest'hryving  van  Batavia  en  van  de  Kilanden  van
het  Smda  archiiK^l "  (17:^5);  and  "Gesc-hiedenis
der  planten  van  Guyana,  in  onle  jjebracht  volgens
de  sexueele  mctlKxIc"  (Harlem,  174(5).

SOt'VESTRE,  Henrv  Victiirnlen,  Chevalier
de,  Fn-nch  naval  «>nicer,  1 1.  near  Itoi-hefort  in  1729;
d.  at  sea.  12  April.  1782.  He  enteral  the  navy  as  a
midshipman  in  1744.  and  fought  at  Jjouisbourgand
in  the  campaign  in  Canada  in  175ft-'9.  After  th«'
conclusion  of  peace  he  was  atta<-hed  to  the  station
of  North  America,  and  mmle  a  cruise  in  1771  U>
Halifax  and  Newfoundland  to  determine  the  longi-
tude of  s»'veral  |)oints.  When  France  declared  war
against  England  in  1778  he  commanded  a  frigate
and  was  oruereil  to  the  West  Indies,  where  he  cn\t-
tured  several  English  privateers.  Joining  after-
ward Vaudreuil's  division,  he  was  employwl  to  con-
vey troops  to  Martinique  and  Santo  Domingo,  aixl
participate*!  under  De  Guichen  in  the  engagements
of  17  April  and  15  and  19  Mav.  1780.  When  C«iunt
do  Grasse  left  for  Chesafteake  l»ay.  5  ,Iuly.  1781.
Souvestre  assume*!  command  of  the  few  frigates
that  were  left  at  the  disposed  of  the  Marquis  de
Bouilld.  and  successfully  opiH)<«»<!  the  English  forces
in  the  West  Indies,  repelleU  their  landing  in  Mar-
tinique and  Dominica,  and  c<mveyed  the  French
trooix<  that  capture*!  St.  Eustaiius,  Salm,  and
St  Martin  in  1781.  Joining  Vaudreuil's  division
earlv  in  1782,  he  asslste*!  at  the  >>attleoff  Dominica,
12  April,  1782,  and  through  his  suggestion  Yau-


dreuiU  when  be  mw  the  perilous  position  of  Dt
(trapse,  aasuroed  command  of  the  whole  flecfL
While  carrying  Yaudrpuil's  orders  to  the  othar

divisions  S*>uvi>str«  wai*  killnd.

iM)UZA,  Martim  AIToniiode,  Portuguese  gover-
nor, b.  in  Coimbra  near  the  end  of  the  I5lh  century;
d.  in  Goa,  India,  alx>ut  15.V).  The  coast  of  South
America,  of  which  Cabral  ha*!  taken  jXMMHioo  for
the  crown  of  Portugal  in  1500,  had  baen  riaitad
only  occasiunally  by  Portugocae  TeMela,  bat  when
King  John  III.  heard  that  many  Prenoh  Teaaela
came  to  the  c^oa-si  of  Brazil  he  resolved  to  colonize
the  country.  In  D4><-ember.  1580,  he  de8|Nitched
from  Lislion  a  fleet  of  five  sail  and  four  hundred
men,  the  command  of  which  was  given  lo  .Sniza,  a

{oung  «»flicer.  with  the  title  of  governor  of  New
jusitania,  and  extniordinarv  |iower!«  to  distribute
land  and  exercise  civil  and  criminal  jurisdiction.
Capturing  thre«»  French  vcwels  loaded  with  Brazil-
woo*!,  he  touche*!  the  American  Ciiast  at  Ca|>e  .St.
Augustine,  whence  he  desfiatche*!  Diogo  I>eite  with
two  ships  to  explore  the  coa.st  northwanl  t<i  Amazon
river,  while  he  continue*!  to  the  south,  entering
Bahia  and  Rio  de  Janeiro,  where  he  remaine*!  for
s*)me  time  to  construct  two  brigantines  and  take
fresh  water.  C<mtinuing  his  voyage  to  the  south,
he  anchored,  on  12  Aug..  15.'n,  at  the  island  of  Ab-
rigo,  where  fr*)m  some  Spanish  settlers  he  obtained
reports  of  rich  mines.  He  landed  n<'ar  Cananea,
and  s«'nt  into  the  interior  an  exi>e<!ition  of  eighty
men,  who  i)erished  at  the  hands  of  the  Indians.
On  20  S«>pt.  he  continue*]  to  the  south,  but  his  flag-
shin  was  wreckin!  in  the  mouth  of  the  river  Chuy.
and  he  despatche*!  his  brother  to  explore  the  river
Plate.  On  22  Jan..  15:{2.  he  founde*!  the  first  Por-
tuguese c*>lony  in  Brazil  on  an  island  to  whi<-h  he
gave  the  name  of  .SSo  Yicente.  The  Indians  of  the
l*xality  showed  signs  of  hostility,  but  S*)uza  re-
ceive*! the  unexpecte*!  a.ssistance  of  Jofio  Kamalho,
who  had  Ijeen  shipwrei-ke*!  long  ago  on  the  coast,
and  ha<l  received  aid  and  pn)tection  from  the  sa\'-
ages.  He  urrivtHl  with  the  chief  Tybirica  at  .S4o
\  icente,  and  ma*le  a  treaty  lietwe<'n  the  hostile
In*lians  and  .Sjuza,  who  thenceforwanl  always  re-
ceive«l  assistance  and  support  fnun  the  savages.
Besides  this  *'olony.  Souza,  by  the  a«!vice  of  Ka-
malho, also  found*-*!  that  of  Piratininga  on  the
l)ank  of  the  river  of  that  name.  He  sent  his  brother
with  a  refHirt  *)f  his  dist-overics  to  Portugal,  and
establishe*!  in  the  neighb*irhoo*!  of  the  colony  the
first  sugar-mill  in  the  oiuntry.having  brought  can**-
plants  from  the  island  of  Maileira.  In  15;i:{  he  was
recalle*!  to  his  native  country  to  c*msult  al>out  the
partition  of  the  newly  erecttn!  here*litary  captain-
cies, but,  although  he  was  given  the  richest  one,
that  of  Sfti>  Vicente,  he  did  not  return,  but  in  15.34
saile*!  for  In<lia.  where  he  acquinxl  great  mili-
tary fame  and  die*!. — His  brother,  Peru  I<4ipes,  b.
in  Coimbra  aUiut  1500;  d.  on  the  c*iiist  of  .Mada-
gascar in  1589,  had  served  in  the  navy  against  the
Me*literranean  c*)rs<iirs,  when,  in  l.VU).  he  was  ai>-
pointe*!  by  his  brother  c*>mmander  of  one  of  the
vessels  of  the  exjitHlition  to  Brazil.  He  took  a
principal  part  in  the  capture  of  the  French  shins,
and  the  comman*!  of  the  largest  prize  was  awanlml
to  him.  After  .saving  .Martim  Affonso  from  the
shipwrt-ck  at  Chuy.  he  wa-s  sent  with  his  two  V4>ss4ds
to  explore  the  river  Plate,  with  orders  to  rally  at
the  i>land  of  Palmas.  He  .saile*!  on  23  Nov.,  en-
tere*!  the  estuarv  of  the  Plate,  am!  beyond  the  con-
fluence of  the  Uruguay  explor*"*!  the  Parana  for  a
considerable  distance  above  80'  S.,  returning  on  87
Dec.,  15:n.  Having  joined  his  brt^ther  at  Palmaa,
he  parti*ipate*l  in  the  foundHti*m  of  .SAo  Vicente,
and  in  May.  15^)2,  was  ^nt  with  desfiatches  to  For-


616


SOUZA


SOWER


tugal,  beine:  also  commissioned  to  give  a  detailed
report  to  King  John.  On  the  division  of  the  land
into  captaincies  on  28  Sept.,  1532,  he  was  awarded
two  tracts  of  twentv-flve  leagues,  and  sailed  in  1533
with  a  party  of  colonists  to  occupy  the  northern
division  between  Parahiba  and  Pernanibuco,  but,
meeting  with  opposition  from  a  neighboring  tribe,
the  Petiguares,  he  went  to  Europe  to  collect  more
abundant  means  for  colonization.  He  was  offered
the  command  of  a  fleet  to  the  East  Indies,  and,  hop-
ing to  obtain  funds  from  his  brother,  he  accepted,
but  perished  on  his  return  voyage  by  shipwreck  on
the  coast  of  Madagascar.  The  manuscript  of  his
report  to  King  John  III.  lay  in  the  royal  archives
till  it  was  published  by  Adolpho  de  Varnhagen
under  the  title  "  Diario  de  naviga^So  da  Armada,
que  foi  a  terra  do  Brazil  em  1530"  (Lisbon,  1829).

SOUZA,  Thom6  de,  first  governor-general  of
Brazil,  b.  in  Souza,  Beira.  early  in  the  16th  century;
d.  in  Lisbon  about  1560.  In  the  hereditary  cap-
taincies that  had  been  established  in  Brazil  abuses
soon  became  general,  so  that  King  John  III.,  on  7
Jan.,  1549,  ordered  the  organization  of  a  general
government,  abolishing  the  extraordinary  privileges
that  he  had  granted  to  the  captains.  I<  or  the  exe-
cution of  this  difficult  and  important  work  the
royal  choice  fell  upon  Thome  de  Souza,  a  natural  son
of  one  of  the  first  families,  a  prudent  and  enlight-
ened officer  and  statesman,  who  had  achieved  re-
nown in  the  wars  of  Africa  and  India.  He  sailed
from  Lisbon  on  2  Feb.,  1549,  with  a  squadron  of
six  vessels,  having  on  board  six  hundred  volunteers,
four  hundred  pardoned  convicts,  several  families  as
colonists,  some  artillery  oificers,  engineers,  mechan-
ics, and  six  Jesuits  under  the  lead  of  Father  Manoel
de  Nobrega.  On  29  March  he  entered  the  harbor
of  Todos  OS  Santos.  The  aged  Diogo  Alvares  Cara-
muru  (see  Paraguassu)  hastened  to  welcome  the
governor-general,  and  his  allies,  the  Tupinambas,
offered  their  services.  There  Souza  founded  a  city,
naming  it  Sjio  Salvador,  which  was  afterward
changed  to  Bahia  a  todos  os  Santos.  The  as-
sistance that  he  received  from  the  Tupinambas
hastened  the  progress  of  building,  and  soon  the
cathedral,  the  governor's  palace,  a  Jesuit  college,
and  one  hundred  houses  had  been  completed.  He
organized  the  administration  by  appointing  a  chief
justice  and  other  authorities.  The  colony  flourished
under  Souza's  prudent  administration,  and  numer-
ous emigrants  arrived,  founding  new  villages.  In
1551  a  bishopric  was  established  in  Bahia,  with
jurisdiction  over  the  whole  Portuguese  colony.
Souza,  weakened  by  the  fatigues  of  his  responsible
office,  solicited  relief,  and  on  13  July,  1553,  his
successor,  Duarte  da  Costa,  arrived,  to  whom  he
delivered  the  government  and  sailed  for  Portugal.

SOWARDS,  Joseph,  scout,  b.  in  eastern  Ken-
tucky about  1840 ;  d.  there  about  1863.  He  was
of  Scotch-Irish  descent,  and  at  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  occupied,  with  his  aged  father,  a
small  farm  in  the  upper  part  of  Johnson  county.
Ky.  He  was  a  decided  Unionist.  The  threats  of  his
neighbors  caused  him  to  take  refuge  in  the  woods.
While  he  was  thus  in  hiding  a  party  demanded  of
his  father  his  place  of  concealment,  and,  on  the  lat-
ter's  refusal  to  disclose  it,  Judge  Cecil,  one  of  the
number,  shot  the  old  man  dead  before  his  own
doorway.  Sowards  now  enlisted  in  the  8th  Ken-
tucky regiment  in  the  National  army,  and  in  De-
semter.  1861,  was  selected  by  Gen.  James  A.  Gar-
field as  a  scout.  Sowards  rendered  important
services,  among  others  going,  at  imminent  risk,
into  Marshall's  camp  on  the  eve  of  the  battle  of
Middle  Creek  and  reporting  to  Garfield  an  ambus-
cade into  which  he  would  doubtless  have  fallen


but  for  this  timely  information.  On  Marshall's
retreat  from  that  battle.  Judge  Cecil  was  captured,
and  Sowards  upbraided  him  with  the  death  of  his
aged  father.  A  taunting  reply  caused  Sowards  to
lose  his  self-control,  and  he  shot  Cecil  as  Cecil  had
shot  his  father.  A  court-martial  sentenced  Sow-
ards to  death ;  but  Garfield  was  careful  to  enjoin
upon  his  colonel  to  select  as  his  guard  only  such
men  as  were  especially  friendly  to  the  prisoner,
who  naturally  was  allowed  to  escape.  After  this
he  performed  the  most  important  services,  hang-
ing about  Garfield's  camp  and  giving  constant  in-
formation as  to  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  No
one  knew  how  he  lived  or  where  he  could  be  found,
but  he  was  sure  to  appear  whenever  he  was  wanted.
Through  him  Garfield  was  enabled  to  drive  the
last  organized  body  of  Gen.  Humphrey  Mar-
shall's men  from  Kentucky.  They  had  strongly
intrenched  themselves  at  round  Gap,  and  were
fast  receiving  re-enforcements  from  Virginia,  when
Sowards  penetrated  their  camp,  learned  their
strength  and  position,  and  then  returned  to  Gar-
field's lines  with  the  suggestion  that  he  should  fall
upon  and  destroy  them.  The  result  was  the  Pound
Gap  expedition,  which  Sowards  guided  over  a  hun-
dred miles  of  rough  road  and  through  a  blinding
snow-storm.  He  was  so  thoroughly  disguised  that
Garfield,  though  he  knew  Sowards  was  with  the
troop,  did  not  recognize  him  until  he  disclosed
himself  on  the  eve  of  the  battle.  This  is  the  last
that  is  certainly  known  of  Sowards,  but  he  is  re-
ported to  have  been  killed  in  the  following  year
by  a  band  of  Confederate  guerillas.

SOWER,  Christopher,  printer,  b.  in  Laasphe,
near  Marburg,  Germany,  in  1693 ;  d.  in  German-
town,  Pa.,  25  Sept.,  1758.  He  wrote  his  name
Christophe  Saur  on  his  German  publications.  He
was  a  graduate  of  a  German  university,  and  stud-
ied medicine  at  Halle.  He  came  to  I^hiladelphia
in  1724  and  settled  in  Lancaster  county  as  a
farmer,  but removed in  1731  to Germantown,


where,  in  the  same  year,  he  built  a  large  dwell-
ing (see  engraving)  for  his  residence.  In  order  to
supply  the  needs  of  his  countrymen  who  were  lib-
erally educated,  especially  in  theology,  he  first  sup-
plied them  with  Bibles  and  religious  works  from
Germany.  In  1738,  having  obtained  a  printing-
press  and  materials,  he  issued  an  almanac,  in  Ger-
man, of  twenty-four  pages,  which  was  continued
by  his  descendants  till  1'798.  In  1739  he  brought
out  the  first  number  of  "  Der  Hoch-Deutsch  Pen-
sylvanische  Geschichts-Schreiber,"  a  religious  and
secular  journal,  a  small  folio,  nine  by  thirteen
inches,  which  attained  a  circulation  of  nearly  ten
thousand,  and  had  great  influence  among  his
countrymen.  It  was  the  first  of  its  kind  that  was
published  in  a  foreign  language  in  Pennsylvania.
This  was  followed  by  a  numlier  of  larger  works
and  in  1743  by  a  quarto  edition  of  the  Bible  in
German,  Luther's  translation,  which«was  limited


SOWER


SPAIGIIT


617


to  l,2()0  copies  of  1,284  page*.  It  was  thivo  yoars
in  pri'ss.  tln»  larf;e«t  work  as  yet  issufd  in  the'folo-
niex,  Htid  w>iM  tht;  first  Itiblo  printiMl  in  thin  coun-
try, with  tli«'  cxwption  of  Kliot'.H  Indian  Hihie.
Tfien'aftcr  his  pultlications  were  very  numerous,
t)oth  in  Knglish  and  German.  In  the  same  year
he  bej;an  printing  he  estahlishiHl  the  first  tyne-
foundrv  in  this  country,  and  a  manufactory  for
nrinter^s  ink.  He  afterward  made  Ids  own  i«f)er,
bound  his  own  Ixxiks,  and  was  the  inventor  of
many  tliin>;s  of  practical  use  in  his  I)usine88.  lie
is  supn«»sed  to  have  invented  c»ist-in)iv  stoves,
which  ne  at  h*ast  introduced  into  peneral  use.  In
adtlition  to  farming  and  printing,  he  practised  his

ftrofession,  and  manufacture<i  tall  eijjht-daychx'ks.
le  wa.s  also  active  in  all  public  measures,  and  fre-
quently reoresented  his  countrymen  in  their  inter-
course witn  the  pfovernment.  i'|M»n  his  death,  his
business  and  his  estate  were  inheritwl  by  his  son,
ChriHtopiier,  b.  in  Liuisphe,  (Jernmnv,  20  .Sept.,
1?21;  d.  in  .Methatchen,  Pa.,  4  Aug..'  1784.  He
was  lilK'rallv  educated,  and  when  he  was  twenty-
six  years  old  became  a  minister,  and  was  associated
with  the  Il«»v,  Sanders  Mack  in  Germantown.  in
the  oldest  Dunker  church  in  this  country.  Five
years  later  he  w>i.s  chosi'n  overseer,  or  bishop,  and
continued  the  duties  of  his  office  in  connection
with  his  secular  business  until  his  death.  Unon
taking  charge  of  the  bu.siness,  he  so  inoreaseu  it
that  for  many  years  it  was  the  largest  book-manu-
factory in  the  country.  In  17(W  he  published  a
second  edition  of  the  great  quarto  Bible,  in  177()
a  third,  all  in  German.  These  editions  were  issued
previous  to  the  publication  of  an  Knglish  Hible
in  the  American  colonies.  A  i)art  of  the  unlwund
sheets  of  the  edition  of  1776  was  seized  by  the
*  British  during  their  occupation  of  Germantown
and  use<l  for  littering  horses.  Conies  of  all  the
editions  are  in  the  Lenox  library,  New  York  city,
the  Library  company  of  Phila<^lelphia.  and  the
Historical  society  of  Pennsylvania.  He  did  his
own  type-foundmp.  wood-engraving,  paper-  and
itik-making,  and  bniding.  carrying  on  also  a  large
business  in  his  father's  medical  preparations,  which
he  sent  to  various  j>arts  of  the  country.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Germantown  acmlemy.
to  which  he  largely  contributed.  He  also  was  an
opponent  of  slavery,  and  his  advfK-acy  of  the  doc-
trines of  universal  ix^ace  caused  him  to  be  misun-
derstood, so  that  (luring  the  Itevoluticm,  though
he  did  not  espouse  the  British  cause,  he  was  ar-
rested and  imprisoned.  On  a  se<'ond  arrest  for  not
conforming  to  an  edict,  of  which  he  seems  to  have
been  ignorant,  he  was  taken  from  his  lx?d.  mal-
treat eel  in  various  ways,  and  led  before  the  provost
as  a  spy.  His  large  pro|>erty  was  confiscated,  but.
instemf  of  having  recourse  to  the  law.  he  said :  "  I
made  them  to  understand  that  I  should  j>ermit
everything  to  happen  to  me  that  the  Lonl  should
ordain."  The  remainder  of  his  old  age  was  spent,
except  when  visiting  churches  within  his  jurisdic-
tion, at  M«'thatchen,  where,  assisted  by  a  faithful
daughter,  he  supported  himself  at  binding  and
selling  reinnantJi  of  his  publications. He  died  in

E overt y.  No  one  in  his  denomination  has  Uh'U
eld  in  higher  veneration,  and  his  benevolence  to
the  poor  families  of  the  soldiers  earned  him  the
title  of  the  "  bread  father."  He  was  an  eUxiuent
sneaker,  and  his  reputation  as  a  writer  extende<I
throughout  the  colonies. — His  son.  Christopher,
b.  in  Germantown.  Pa..  27  Jan..  1754:  d.  in  Balti-
more. Md.,  y  July,  1799,  was  engaged  in  business
in  Phila<lelphia  during  the  war.  and  afterwarii  led
an  unset  tle«\  life. — The  stn-ond  Christopher's  great-
grandson,  Charles  tillbert,b.  in  Norristown,  Pa..


I  21  Nov.,  1821.  remove*!  the  eatablinhroent  to  PhlU-

'  <K>lphia  in 1H44.  when*  he  continued  publii.hinK.

j  first  in  his  own  name,  then  iiucc<*]wivi'ly  ax  Stwi*r
and  Barm's,  S«»wi-r.  Iktnifs  and  Potts,  and  Sower,

j  potts  and  Co.  In  IKHM.  one  hundn'<i  and  fifty  year*
after  it  was  foiui<le<l  by  ( 'hristonher  Siwer.  the  house
wan  incor|K>mte4l  as  the  Christopher  Sower  com*

Ennv  by  a  charter  grante«l  by  the  state.  Charlea
.  ^v^w^'r  n'tiiains  us  pn-sident  of  the  com^MUir.

SPAKTH,  Adoliih  (H|Hite).  thi-ologian,  b.  in
Rsslingen.  WllrtemlHrg,  (n-nnanv.  29  Oct..  1889.
He  rec4>ived  his  classical  and  thinilngical  e<lu(Tatioii
in  the  University  of  Tdbingen.  where  he  was
^ra<luate<l  in  IHOl.  He  was  ordaiiicd  to  the  min*
istry  of  the  Lutheran  church  in  Octol)er,  1861,
c-ame  to  the  Unite<l  States  in  IHflS.  ancl  has  iieen
jmstor  of  St.  John's  (ierman  Lutheran  congrega-
tion in  Philadeljihia  since  1807.  He  iMH-ame  pro-
fessor in  the  Lutheran  theological  seminary.  Phila-
delphia, in  1873i,  president  ot  the  general  council
of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  church  in  North
America  in  188(),  and  was  a  tlelegate  of  the  general
council  to  the  general  conference  of  Lutheran
ministers  at  Hamburg,  Germany,  in  1887.  Al-
though a  German  by  birth  and  (nlucation,  he  has
lx»come  thoroughly  identified  with  American  in-
terests, l)oth  ecclesiastical  and  (xtlitical.  He  has
acquired  the  English  language  and  s|M-aks  it  with
ease.  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  gave  him
the  degree  of  D.  I),  in  1875.  Dr.  Spaeth  is  a  fre-
quent contributor  to  the  |>eriodicals  of  his  church
in  this  country  and  in  Eunnx;.  He  has  lx>en  edi-
tor of  the  "  Jugen<l-Freund, '  a  German  monthly,
since  1877.  Among  his  published  works  are  "  Die
Evangelien  des  Kirchenjahrs "  (Philadel(>hia,
1870);  "Brosamen  von  des  Herm  Tische"  (1871):
"S)nntagschulbuch  <les  General-Concils."  e<lit«<d
(1876) ;  *'  Kirchenbuch  des  General-(  'oncils,"  edited
(1877);  "Amerikanische  IWeuchtune"  (if^);
"  Luther  im  Lied  seiner  Zeitgenr»s.s««n  '  (Reading,
Pa.,  188:^):  "The  Luther  Jubilee  in  Philadelnhia"
(Philadelphia,  18H4);  "The  General  Council,"  in
English  and  German  (1885);  "  Ph<rlx'.  the  Dea-
coness." in  English  and  Gennan  (188."}) ;  "  Kaith  and
Life  as  represented  by  Martin  Luther"  (1887);
"  Liederlust "  (Allentown.  Pa..  1887);  and  a  large
number  of  sermons  and  addresses.  He  has  for
several  years  lx>en  engage«l  in  the  |>re|taration  of
a  complete  "  Life.  CorresiK»ndence.  and  Works  "of
Charles  P.  Kniutli.  the  Lutheran  thi-ologian.

SPAHiHT,  Richard  Dobbs.  govern<.r  of  North
Carolina,  b.  in  New  lierne.  N.  C..  25  March.  1758:
d.  then-.  6  Sent..  1S02.  His  father.  Richanl.  was  a
memU'r  of  tlie  king's  council  in  1757.  and  se<Te-
tary  of  North  Carolina  under  the  cMwn  in  1702.
His'  mother  was  the  sister  of  Arthur  Dobl>s.  gov-
ernor of  the  colony  in  1753-'r»5.  The  S4>n  lost  his
parents  at  eight  years  of  agi*  and  nn-eivwl  his
education  abroad.  Ix'ing  graduate*!  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Glasgow.  He  n'tununl  home  in  1778.  am!
at  twenty  years  of  age  Ixvaine  aide-<le-camp  to
Gen.  Ricfiafd  Ca.swell.  and  was  present  at  the  liat-
tle  of  Camden.  His  kinsman.  Cant.  William
Spalght.  of  the  65th  n'giment.  ha4i  already  l)een
engage<l  at  the  l»ttle  of  Itunker  Hill  on  tlie  Brit-
ish side.  In  1781  he  was  electe*!  to  the  North
Carolina  legislature,  and  again  in  1 7><2  and  1 783.
In  the  last  year  he  lK>came  a  member  of  congress
and  was  placed  on  the  committee  to  device  a  plan
for  the  tein|Kin«ry  goveniment  of  the  w»*steni  ter-
ritory. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  to
frame  the  constitution  of  the  Unit*-*!  States  in
1787.  and  was  active  in  the  proceedings.  In  the
iiillslx>ro',  N.  C,  convention  in  July,  1788.  though
afterward  a  JeflerBOuian  Republican,  he  eaniestly


618


SPALDING


SPALDING


advocated  the  adoption  of  the  U.  S.  constitution,
but  in  vain.  He  had  been  in  correspondence  with
Gen.  Washington  on  the  subject,  and  tiie  follow-
ing interesting  para^^ruph  occurs  in  an  uii{)uhlishi'd
letter  to  Gov.  Spaiglit,  dated  Mt.  Vernon,  May  25.
1788 :  "  I  am  sorry  to  find  by  your  letter  that  the
state  of  North  Carolina  is  so  much  oprK)sed  to  the
proposed  government.  If  a  better  could  be  agreed
on,  it  might  be  well  to  reject  this ;  but  without
such  a  prospect  (and  I  confess  none  appears  to  me),
policy  I  think  must  recommend  the  one  that  is
submitted."  On  the  invitation  of  Gov,  Spaight,
Washington  visited  North  Carolina,  and,  in  conse-
quence of  their  united  counsels,  North  Carolina
ratified  the  constitution,  21  Nov.,  1789.  Owing
to  feeble  health  Gov.  Spaight  retired  during  four
years  from  public  life.  In  1792  he  was  elected  to
the  legislature,  and  he  was  immediately  chosen
governor  by  that  body,  being  the  first  native  of
the  state  that  was  chief  magistrate.  In  1793  and
1797  he  was  a  presidential  elector.  He  was  a
member  of  congress  again  from  1798  till  1801,  and
in  the  latter  year  sat  in  the  North  Carolina  senate.
He  died  of  a  wound  that  he  had  received  in  a  duel
with  John  Stanly,  his  successor  in  congress. — His
eldest  son.  Richard  Dobbs,  governor  of  North
Carolina,  b.  in  New  Berne,  N,  C.,  in  1796;  d.  there
in  November,  1850,  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  North  Carolina  in  1815,  and  was  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1819,  and  of  the  state  senate
in  1820-'2.  He  sat  in  congress  m  1823-'5,  was
again  state  senator  in  1825-'34,  and  governor  of
the  state  in  1835-'7,  being  the  last  governor  that
was  elected  by  the  legislature.  Gov.  Spaight  was
a  member  of  the  Constitutional  convention  of  1837,
which  transferred  the  election  to  the  popular  vote.

SPALDING,  Henry  Harmon,  missionary,  b,
in  Bath,  N,  Y.,  in  1804 ;  d,  in  Lapwai,  Idaho,  3
Aug.,  1874,  He  was  graduated  at  Western  Re-
serve college  in  1833.  and  entered  the  class  of  1837
in  Lane  theological  seminary,  but  left,  without
graduation,  upon  his  appointment  in  1836  by  the
American  board  as  missionary  to  the  Nez  Perces
Indians  of  Idaho.  He  remained  at  Lapwai  till
1847,  when  he  fled  with  his  family  to  the  Willa-
mette valley  upon  the  murder  of  his  associate,
and  all  those  that  were  attached  to  his  post  at
Walla-Walla,  by  the  Indians,  After  this  he  la-
bored fourteen  years  among  the  savages,  using  his
translations  of  the  Scriptures,  and  acting  also  in
1850-'5  as  commissioner  of  common  schools  for
Oregon,  He  returned  to  Lapwai  in  1862,  combining
with  his  mission  work  that  of  superintendent  of
education  for  the  Nez  Perces  Indians  till  1871.
His  labors  thereafter  were  under  the  auspices  of
the  Presbyterian  board  of  missions,  and  were  in
northwestern  Idaho  and  northeastern  Washington
territories.  Several  thousands  of  Indians  were
civilized  through  his  efiforts.  and  more  than  1,000
became  professedly  Christians.  Mr.  Spalding
translated  parts  of  the  Bible  into  the  Nez  Perce
language,  which  he  had  reduced  to  writing.

SPALDING,  James  Reed,  journalist,  b.  in
Montpelier,  Vt.,  15  Nov.,  1821  ;  d,  in  Dover,  N,  H.,
10  Oct,,  1872.  His  father  was  for  nearly  half
of  a  century  a  well-known  physician  in  Vermont,
The  son  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Ver-
mont in  1840,  and  was  a  private  tutor  in  Georgia,
at  the  same  time  studying  law.  On  his  return  to
Montpelier  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  his  lit-
erary tastes  led  him  to  give  up  his  profession,  and
he  spent  several  years  in  travel  through  Europe
and  into  Asia  as  a  student  of  manners,  morals,  and

P)litics, He  was  a  witness  of  the  events  of  the
rench revolution  of  1848. His letters to the


New  York  "  Courier  and  Enquirer  "  during  his  so-
journ abroad  won  great  admiration  by  their  philo-
sophical grasp  of  events  and  persons  and  brilliancy
of  style.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States  in
the  spring  of  1850  he  became  attached  to  the
"Courier  and  Enquirer"  as  its  leading  writer.
His  reputation  led  in  1859  to  the  establishment
of  the  New  York  "  World,"  and  his  headship  of  it.
The  design  of  the  enterprise  was  altogether  new —
that  of  a  model  journal  conducted  throughout  on
Christian  principles,  independent  of  particular
sects  or  political  parties.  The  financial  crisis
that  attended  the  progress  of  the  civil  war  so  af-
fected the  paper  that  it  passed  under  a  new  man-
agement and  editorship.  In  1862  Mr.  Spalding
took  a  post  in  the  editorial  corps  of  the  New  York
"  Times,"  and  many  of  its  patriotic  editorials  were
from  his  pen.  He  was  stricken  with  paralysis
when  in  the  full  vigor  of  his  powers,  and  died  after
years  of  sickness.  Richard  Grant  White,  who  was
associated  with  him  both  in  the  "  Courier  and  En-
quirer" and  the  "World,"  wrote  of  Mr.  Spalding:
"  With  a  theme  congenial  and  an  occasion  to  arouse
him,  his  vigor  and  elegance  have  never  been  ex-
celled by  a  writer  upon  the  city  press."  His  pub-
lished addresses  are  "  Spiritual  Philosophy  and  Ma-
terial Politics"  (1854),  and  "The  True  Idea  of
Female  Education"  (1855). — His  brother,  George
Bnrley,  clergyman,  b.  in  Montpelier,  Vt.,  11  Aug.,
1835,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Vermont
in  1856,  studied  law  at  Tallahassee,  Fla.,  spent  two
years  at  Union  theological  seminary.  New  York
city,  and  was  graduated  at  Andover  seminary  in
1861.  He  was  ordained  at  Vergennes,  Vt.,  the
same  year,  and  after  holding  Congregational  pas-
torates in  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  Dover  and  Man-
chester, N,  11,,  took  charge  in  1885  of  the  1st
Presbyterian  church  in  Syracuse,  N,  Y.,  which
place  he  now  holds.  Dr.  Spalding  has  done  much
editorial  work  on  the  New  York  "  World,"  the
"  Times,"  the  "  Watchman,"  Boston,  and  the  "  New
Hampshire  Journal,"  which  was  established  by
him  in  1881.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Constitu-
tional convention  of  New  Hampshire  in  1877,  and
of  the  legislature  of  the  same  year.  He  received
the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Dartmouth  in  1878.  Dr.
Spalding  has  travelled  extensively  in  the  Old
World.  His  published  sermons  and  addresses  in-
clude "Sermon  Commemorative  of  Gen.  Samuel
P.  Strong  "  (1854) ;  "  Scriptural  Policy,"  a  political
tract  (1868);  "In  Memoriara,  John  Parker  Hale"
(1873);  and  "The  Idea  and  Necessity  of  Normal-
School  Training  "  (1878).

SPALDING,  John  Franklin,  P.  E.  bishop,  b..
in  Belgrade,  Me.,  25  Aug.,  1828.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Bowdoin  in  1853,  and  at  the  Episcopal
general  theological  .seminary.  New  York  city,  in
1857,  and  was  ordained  deacon  in  Portland,  Me.,  8
July,  1857,  by  Bishop  Burgess,  and  priest,  in  Gar-
diner, Me.,  14  July,  1858,  by  the  same  bishop.  He
did  missionary  duty  in  Old  Town,  Me.,  for  two
years,  was  rector  of  St.  George's  church,  Lee,
Mass.,  in  1859-60  assistant  minister  in  Grace
church.  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1860^*1,  officiated
for  a  short  time  in  St.  John's  church,  Providence,
and  in  April,  1862,  became  rector  of  St.  Paul's
church,  Erie,  Pa,  This  i)ost  he  held  for  nearly
twelve  years.  Having  been  elected  missionary
bishop  of  Colorado,  with  jurisdiction  in  the  terri-
tory of  Wyoming,  he  was  consecrated  in  St.  Paul's
church,  Erie,  31  Dec.,  1873.  Trinity  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1874,  Bishop  Spalding  is  author
of  "  A  Devotional  Manual,"  several  tracts,  and
numerous  occasional  sermons  and  addresses.  His
latest  publication  is  entitled  "  The  Church  and  its


SPALDING


SPALDING


019


Apostolic  Ministry,"  a  coiinw  of  iM'turcx  delivennl
in  St.  Mark's  thuwh,  Denver,  in  January,  1887
(Milwiiuki-f,  Wis..  1HX7).

SPALDING,  Lyman,  phvuieian,  b.  in  Cornish,
N.  H.,  5  .Iinio.  177.*) :  «1.  in  I'c.rtsmouth.  N.  H..  80
Oct..  1821.  Ilo  was  f;ritiliuit<*<l  at  Ilnrvanl  me<iical
school,  with  the  ile^n-e  <»f  M.  H.,  in  17U7.  In  17yH,
while  still  a  student,  he  assistwl  I'n>f.  Nathan
Smith  in  establishing  the  medical  school  at  Dart-
mouth, collected  and  pre|«nMl  chemical  apf»aratus,
dolivere<l  the  first  course  of  lectures  at  the  oiH'ning
of  the  institution,  and  publisluHl  "  A  New  Nomen-
clature of  Chemistrv,  nro|>osc<l  hy  Messrs:  De  Mo-
VBU,  Ijavoisier.  Ik-rthollet  and  Fourcrov.  with  .\d-
ditions  and  Impn»vements"  (17U1»).  ilis  medical
studies  were  afterward  continued  at  (.'amhridtje
and  Phila<lelphia,  and  heenteoMl  ui>on  the  practice
of  medicine  at  Portsmouth.  N.  If.,  in  17y9.  He
was  given  the  degr«»e  of  M.  D.  by  Dartmouth  in
1804  and  Harvard  in  1811.  He  devote<l  much  at-
tentitm  to  the  study  of  the  human  structure,  was  a
skilful  anatomist,  and  his  preparations,  |>articular-
Iv  of  the  lymphatics,  were  higlily  pmisetl.  In  1812
tne  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  of  the  west-
ern tlistrict  of  the  state  of  New  York,  at  Fairfield.
Herkimer  co.,  was  incor|K)rated,  Dr.  S|)alding
being  elected  president  and  profess(»r  of  anatomy,
and  he  maile  annual  visits  to  this  school.  In  181^
he  removed  to  New  York  city  and,  a  few  years
later.  resigne<l  his  position  at  the  college.  VVith
Dr.  Spalding  originated  tlie  plan  for  the  formation
of  the  "  Pharmaco|Ki'ia  of  the  L'nited  States,"  by  the
authoritv  of  all  the  medical  sm'ieties  and  medical
schools  in  the  Union.  In  January,  1817,  ho  sub-
mitted the  project  to  the  New  York  county  medi-
cal society.  In  Februarv,  1818,  it  was  a«lopted  by
the  Me<lical  society  of  the  state  of  New  York  and
oniered  to  lie  carried  into  execution  by  their  com-
mittee. Dr.  Spalding  InMng  one  of  the  numlx«r.  The
first  edition  of  the  work  wius  published  in  1820.  and
a  new  one  is  issued  every  ten  years.  Dr.  Spalding
was  a  contributor  to  medical  and  philosophical  jour-
nals. an<l.  besides  S4'veral  le«'tures  and  addresses.
f)ublished  "  Iteflections  on  Fever,  and  particu-
arly  on  the  Inflammatorv  Character  of  Fever"
(1817);  "  Reflecti<ms  on  Vellow-Fever  Periods"
(1819);  and  "A  History  of  the  Introiluction  and
Use  of  Scutellaria  I^ateri flora  a.s  a  Remedy  for  pre-
venting and  curing  Hyilroohobia "  (1819).  Dr.
Spalding  was  active  in  introuucing  into  the  Unite«l
States  the  i>ractice  of  vaccination  as  a  preventive
of  the  small-pox.  He  was  a  trustee  oi  the  only
free  schools  that  New  York  then  |xissesii«l,  and
aided  in  the  establishment  of  the  first  Sunday-
schools  in  that  city.

SP.\LIUNG,  Martin  John,  archbishop,  b.  near
licbanon,  Marion  co..  Ky..  2^1  May.  1810;  d.  in
Baltimore.  .Md..  7  Feb..  18?2.  In  1821  he  was  sent
to  St.  Marv's  seminary  in  Marion  county,  where
he  was  grmiuated  in  1820.  He  then  studied  theol-
ogy in  St.  Jost>ph"s  seminary.  IJardstown.  for  four
years,  and  then  in  the  Urban  college  of  the  propa-

Eanda,  Ilome,  where  he  won  his  doctor's  diploma
y  defending  for  seven  hours  in  Ijatin  200  theologi-
cal propositions  against  some  of  the  ablest  theo-
logians in  the  city.  He  was  ordaininl  priest  on  18
Aug.,  18;U.  and  on  his  return  to  Kentucky  was
charge<l  with  the  pastorship  of  the  catheilral  at
Barustown  and  with  the  professorship  of  philoso-
phy in  the  di«wesan  semmary.  He  was  instru-
mental in  founding  the  "  Catholic  Advocate."  and
his  articles  in  this  journal  attracted  wide  attention
among  Roman  Catholics  in  the  Unitwi  States.  In
1838  ho  was  appointe«l  nn'sident  of  St.  Joseph's
college. After  holding  this  post  two  years  he  was


k'^fuCTM*  ^K^  -i^Ca^/^ttm,


trannferrwl  to  the  pantnrship  of  St.  Petrr*ii  chiircb
in  licxingt^tn.  Upon  the  rvmoval  of  the  m«  from
Hanlstown  to  Ix)uiMvill«  in  1841  herrtumed  totlie
former  city,  where  hut  preiwnco  wam  thought  ncoaa-
sary  to  re^-oncilc
the  Roman  Cath<
otic  inhaliitants
to  the  change.  In
1844  he  was  re-
calleil  to  I>ouis-
villeand  ap{M)int-
«!  vicar-general.
The  age  of  Hish-
oti  Flagetand  the
illness  of  his  co-
tuijutor  toagreat
extent  threw  the
lulministnitionof
the  diocese  into
the  hands  of  Dr.
S|>alding.  yet  he
was  frequently
engaged  ingiving
lectures  in  Ijouis-
ville  and  other
ci til's,  and  at  the
same  time  prepar(>d  some  of  his  works  for  the  prem.
In  February,  1848,  he  was  ap|>ointe<l  coadjutor  bish-
op of  Louisville,  and  he  was  consecrate<I  bishop  of
licngone  in  partibus  on  10  S«'pt.  following.  He
provided  for  the  establishment  of  |iarocliial  schools,
(milt  an  orphan  asylum  for  lioys  at  St.  Thomas
and  one  for  boys  and  girls  of  (icnnan  parentage  in
Ixjuisville,  an<l  laid  the  fr)undation  of  a  cathedral.
He  recalleil  the  Jesuits  into  his  di<icese.  and  the
Trappist  ablx'y  at  Gethsemano  was  established  un-
der his  auspices.  After  taking  ste|>s  to  have  his
diocese  divided  and  the  see  of  Covington  cn»ated,
he  visited  KurojH?  in  IHHH-Tht  to  obtain  as.si.stant«.
He  then  set  ab«>ut  establishing  the  St.  Vincent  de
Paul  s<x'iety.  which  s<Mm  ha<l  c<mf»'rences  in  the
princifMil  towns.  In  18.')7  he  foundi^l  the  Anx-rican
college  in  liouvain.  which  up  to  1ks4  has  M-nt  301
priests  to  the  missions  of  the  United  States.  At
the  beginning  of  the  Know-Nothing  movement  he
l)ecame  involve«l  in  a  controversy  with  George  D.
Prentice,  and  during  the  riots  in  Ijouisville  in  185A
he  showed  great  prudence,  his  influence  probably
preventing  the  disturl>ances  from  assuming  larger
pro|K)rtions.  Bishop  S[uilding  «lid  much  to  secure
hospital  accommodations  for  the  sick  of  the  Na-
tional troops  that  were  encamf»e«l  around  Ijouis-
ville in  the  first  year  of  the  civil  war.  On  the
death  of  Archbishop  Kenrick  in  June,  18<M,  Bishop
Spalding  was  tnmsferred  to  the  see  of  lialtimore
and  installed  as  archbishop  on  31  Julv.  He  foundeil
the  House  of  theG(K)<l  Shenhenl  in  Baltimore,  and
l>egan  a  lioys'  protectory,  wnich  he  placed  in  charge
of  the  Xaverian  Brothers.  In  1805  ho  wa-*  ap|iointe<l
administrator  of  the  ditx?ese  of  CharlestfUi.  the
bishop  of  which  was  unable  to  return,  and  made
succ-essful  appeals  to  the  Roman  Catholics  of  the
north  in  aid  of  their  southern  brethren.  He  abo
secured  imjMirtant  contributions  for  the  American
college  at  Itome.  In  18<J0  he  presidwl  over  the
st-i-ond  plenary  council  of  Baltimore,  the  largest
assembly  of  the  kind  since  the  ci'neral  council  of
Trent.  "The  work  that  this  UKly  i»erforme«l  waa
entirely  planniil  by  Archbishop  S(^lding.  In  1867
he  was' present  in  Rome  at  the  18th  centenary  of
the  martyrdom  of  .St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  and
again  in  184]9-'70  as  a  inemlier  of  the  ax.'umenical
council  of  the  Vatican.  He  was  at  first  opfMwed
to  the  definition  of  the  dogma  of  the  |K>|>»'"!t  infalli-
bility on  the  ground  that  it  was  inopportune,  but


620


SPALDING


SPALDING


eraduallv  became  convinced  of  its  necessity.  Dur-
ing the  deliberations  of  the  council  his  scholarship
and  theological  ability  produced  a  marked  impres-
sion. After  his  return  to  Baltimore  in  1870  he
made  a  visitation  of  his  diocese,  delivered  lectures
for  the  benefit  of  local  charities,  built  fine  parochial
schools^ear  his  cathedral,  and  began  the  Church  of
St.  Pius.  Archbishop  Spalding  acquired  great  repu-
tation as  a  lecturer  and  pulpit  orator.  He  con-
tributed largely  to  the  Roman  Catholic  literature
of  the  country,  and  takes  high  rank  as  a  reviewer.
He  was  for  some  time  one  of  the  editors  of  the
"  United  States  Catholic  Magazine."  His  prin-
cipal works  are  "  D'Aubigne's  History  of  the  Ref-
ormation Reviewed "  (Baltimore,  1844,  London,
1846;  Dublin,  1846);  "Sketches  of  the  Early
Catholic  Missions  in  Kentucky  1787-1826-7"
(Louisville,  1846) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  General  Evi-
dences of  Christianity  "  (1847 ;  4th  ed.,  Baltimore,
1866) ;  "  Life,  Times,  and  Character  of  the  Rt.  Rev.
B.  J.  Flaget"  (Louisville,  1852);  "Miscellanea:
comprising  Reviews,  Lectures,  and  Essays  on  His-
torical, Theological,  and  Miscellaneous  Subjects "
(1885):  and  "History  of  the  Protestant  Reformation
in  Germany  and  Switzerland,  and  in  England,  Ire-
land, Scotland,  the  Netherlands,  France,  and  North-
ern Europe  "  (2  vols.,  1860).  He  also  edited,  with
an  introduction  and  notes.  Abbe  Darras's  "  General
History  of  the  Catholic  Church"  (4  vols..  New
York,  1866).  The  life  of  Archbishop  Spalding  has
been  written  by  his  nephew,  John  Lancaster  Spal-
ding, bishop  of  Peoria  (New  York,  1872). —  His
brother,  Benedict  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ma-
rion countv,  Kv.,  15  April,  1812;  d.  in  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  '4  Aug.,  1868,  studied  at  St.  Mary's
college,  "and  entered  the  diocesan  seminary  in
Bardstown,  Ky.  In  1832  he  went  to  the  College  of
the  propaganda,  where  he  was  graduated  five  years
later,  and  then  entered  the  priesthood  of  the  Ro-
man Catholic  church.  On  his  return  to  the  United
States  in  1837  he  taught  for  a  time  in  the  theo-
logical seminary  of  St.  Thomas,  and  was  afterward
made  agent  of  iSt.  Joseph's  college.  In  1840,  with
the  Rev.  John  Hutchins,  he  established  a  seminary
for  boys  in  Breckinridge  county,  which  they  car-
ried on  for  two  years.  Mr.  Spalding  returned  to
Bardstown  in  1842  to  accept  the  vice-presidency
of  St.  Joseph's  college,  and  continued  in  that  place
until  1844,  when  he  was  made  pastor  of  the  church
of  St.  Joseph,  in  Bardstown.  In  1847  he  was  called
to  the  charge  of  the  cathedral  church  in  Louisville,
and  was  appointed  vicar-general  of  the  diocese.
These  oflQces  he  held  until  his  death,  with  two  ex-
ceptions, when  during  the  vacancy  of  the  see  he
was  invested  by  his  superiors  with  the  administra-
tion of  the  bishopric.  He  received  no  salary  be-
yond his  food  and  clothing,  but  gave  largely  of  his
own  private  fortune  to  those  that  were  in  need.
Father  Spalding  was  greatly  beloved  by  both  Ro-
man Catholics  and  Protestants  for  his  blameless
life,  his  liberality,  and  his  self-sacrificing  disposition.
—His  nephew,  "John  Lancaster,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Lebanon,  Ky.,  2  June,  1840,  was  educated  in  the
United  States  and  in  Europe,  ordained  in  1863,
and  attached  to  the  cathedral  of  Louisville  as
assistant.  In  1869  he  organized  a  congregation  of
colored  people  and  built  for  their  use  the  Church
of  St.  Augustine,  of  which  he  was  appointed  pastor.
He  was  soon  afterward  made  chancellor  of  the
diocese  and  secretary  to  the  bishop.  He  left
Louisville  in  1873  and  came  to  New  York,  where
he  did  missionary  work  in  the  parish  of  St.
Michael's,  becoming  noted  as  an  eloquent  preacher
and  lecturer.  When  the  diocese  of  Peoria  was
created  in  1877  his  appointment  was  recommended


to  the  pope,  and  he  was  accordingly  consecrated
bishop  of  the  new  see  on  1  May  by  Cardinal  Mc-
Closkey  in  the  cathedral  of  New  York.  His  admin-
istration has  been  marked  by  energy,  and  he  has
had  signal  success  in  developing  the  resources  of
his  diocese.  In  1877  it  contained  75  churches,  51
priests,  and  about  45,000  Roman  Catholics.  In
1887  there  were  163  churches,  113  priests,  12  cleri-
cal students,  32  religious  institutions,  9  academies,
41  parochial  schools,  an  orphan  asylum,  and  5  hos-
pitals. Bishop  Spalding  has  given  much  attention
to  the  question  of  emigration,  and  his  efforts  have
attracted  numerous  emigrants  to  the  west.  He
has  also  labored  successfully  to  establish  a  Roman
Catholic  university  in  the  United  States,  and  his
plans  for  carrying  out  this  enterprise  were  adopted
Dy  the  council  of  Baltimore  in  1884.  He  is  a  con-
tributor to  Roman  Catholic  periodicals  and  reviews
and  the  author  of  a  "  Life  of  Archbishop  Spalding  "
(New  York,  1872) ;  "Essays  and  Reviews"  (1876);
"  Religious  Mission  of  the  Irish  People  "  (1880) ;
and  "  Lectures  and  Discourses  "  (1882). — Their  kins-
woman, Catherine,  first  superior  of  the  Sisters
of  Charity  of  Nazareth,  b.  in  Charles  county,
Md.,  23  t)ec.,  1793;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  20
March,  1858,  was  left  an  orphan  at  the  age  of
four,  and  was  brought  up  by  an  aunt  in  Ken-
tucky. In  1813  she  became  a  member  of  a  new
society  of  Sisters  of  Charity,  which  had  been  insti-
tuted the  year  before  by  Bishop  David.  She  was
made  superior,  and,  under  the  patronage  of  the
bishop,  opened  the  convent  of  Nazareth.  In  1814
she  established  a  boarding-  and  day-  school  near
the  convent,  which  increased  rapidly  in  numbers
and  reputation.  In  1816  the  order  was  regularly
organized,  and  Mother  Spalding  and  two  of  her
associates  were  allowed  to  take  the  ordinary  vows.
In  1819  she  sent  a  colony  of  sisters  to  Bardstown,
who  established  the  Bethlehem  day-school,  and  in
1820  St.  Vincent  convent  was  founded  in  Union
county.  She  opened  St.  Catherine's  school  in  Scott
county  in  1823.  It  was  afterward  removed  to
Lexington,  where  it  still  exists,  and  is  regarded  as
one  of  the  community's  most  flourishing  establish-
ments. The  Academy  of  the  Presentation  was
opened  in  Louisville  in  1831,  of  which  Mother
Spalding  took  personal  charge.  She  also  began
the  founding  oi  St.  Vincent's  orphan  asylum,  in
which  afterward  provision  was  made  for  200  or-

Ehan  girls,  and  opened  an  infirmary.  The  rest  of
er  life  was  spent  principally  in  caring  for  the
wants  of  orphan  children,  or  in  visiting  the  poor
and  sick  of  the  city.  The  illness  of  which  she  died
was  contracted  while  she  was  hastening  through,
the  snow  to  aid  a  poor  family  that  lived  at  some
distance  from  the  asylum.  Slother  Spalding  be-
longed to  a  family  that  is  distinguished  in  the  an-
nals of  the  Roman  Catholic  church  in  the  Ignited
States.  She  was  nearly  related  to  Archbishop
Spalding  and  Archbishop  Elder.

SPALDING,  Rnfus  Paine,  jurist,  b.  in  West
Tisbury,  Martha's  Vineyard,  Mass.,  8  May,  1798;  d.
in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  29  Aug.,  1886.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1817,  and  subsequently  studied  law
under  Zephania  Swift,  chief  justice  of  Connecticut,
whose  daughter,  Lucretirt,  he  married  in  1822.  In
1819  he  was  admitted  to  practice  in  Little  Rock,
Ark.,  but  in  1821  he  went  to  Warren,  Ohio.  Six-
teen years  later  he  moved  to  Ravenna,  Ohio,  and  he
was  sent  to  the  legislature  in  1839-40  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  as  speaker  in  1841-'2.  In  1849  he
was  elected  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Ohio
for  seven  years,  but  when,  tliree  years  later,  the
new  state  constitution  was  adopted,  he  declined  a
re-election  and  began  practice  in  Cleveland. In


SPALDING


SPA KK MAN


031


1888  he  enterod  political  life  as  a  Pree-aoiler.  and
he  WM  one  of  the  orf^nizom  of  the  Republican
parly.  He  was  a  member  of  con(;rww  in  1863-'ti,
where  he  served  on  iin[K)rtant  (nmraitteeM,  but  he
subkHjuently  decline<l  all  (M)litii>«l  honoRt.  Judf;e
Spalding  exercise*!  an  im(Mirtant  influence  in  re-
st-orinj;  the  Masonic  order  to  its  former  footing
after  the  disa|>j>eaninco  of  William  Morgan.

SPALDIN<;,  Simon,  soldier,  b.  in  IMainfleld.
Conn..  10  Jan..  1742 :  d.  24  Jan..  1H14.  He  re-
mot-etl  to  Wyoming,  Fa.,  in  1772.  and  was  a  soldier
in  the  Kevolutionary  army,  becoming  a  lieutenant,
28  Aug..  1770,  and  Ijeing  promote<l  to  captain,  24
June,  1778.  He  was  |)resent  at  the  action  of  Ik>und
Brook,  N.  J.,  VI  .April.  1777,  and  the  escape  of  the
Americans  with  slight  loss  was  largely  due  to  his
personal  efforts.  He  served  until  the  close  of  the
war,  and  he  was  in  the  Sullivan  campaign,  during
which  he  and  his  company  won  honor  for  herf)ic
service.  On  30  May.  178^1,  he  removed  to  Shesie-
quin.  Hratlfonl  co..  Pa.,  the  up[)er  part  of  the
Wyoming  settlement,  where  he  rose  through  the
various  grades  to  general  of  militia.  He  was  a
large  man.  of  fine  and  imposing  apin-arance.

SPANUENBEKU.  Angnstiis  OottUeb,  Mora-
vian bishop,  b.  in  Klettenlierg.  Prussia,  15  July,
1704;  d.  in  Berthelsdorf,  near  Hermhut,  Saxony,
18  Sept.,  1792.  He  was  graduated  at  Jena,  and
then  l)ecame  an  assistant  professor  in  the  university
there.  Subsequentlv  he  was  appointed  to  a  pro-
fessor's chair  at  Halle,  but  his  jissociation  with  Zin-
zendorf  and  the  Moravians  gave  such  offence  that
he  was  dismissed  from  the  university,  and  joined
their  church.  In  1735  he  put  himself  at  the  head
of  a  body  of  Moravian  immigrants,  and  establishetl
a  colonv  at  Savannah.  Ga.  Thither  came  Hishop
David  Nitschmann,  who  ordaine<l  Spangenberg  a
presbj'ter  of  the  church,  and  sent  him  to  Pennsyl-
vania, where  he  labored  among  the  German  sects.
Snch  work  was  interrupted  by  a  visit  that  the  bishop
commissioned  him  to  undertake  to  the  mission  in  St.
Thomas.  After  his  return  he  resumed  his  labors  in
Pennsylvania,  went  to  Savannah  in  order  to  cheer
his  bn'thren,  who  were  in  distress  on  account  of  the
war  impending  l)etween  England  and  Sjwiin,  and
finally  sailed  for  Europe  in  1739.  Having  l)een  ap-
jK)inted  to  preside  over  the  Moravian  churches  m
this  country,  he  was  consecrated  to  the  episco])acy.
15  June,  1744,  at  Herriihaag.  He  arrived  at  IJeth-
lehem.  Pa.,  in  the  autumn  of  the  same  year,  and,
with  the  exception  of  a  brief  periotl  from  1749  till
1751,  which  he  spent  in  Europe,  ruled  the  church
until  1701  with  singular  ability.  The  settlers  at
Bethlehem,  Nazareth,  and  other  Moravian  stations
were  poor  and  had  heavy  financial  engagements  to
meet,  but  Spangenberg  provided  for  them  with
such  care,  and  managed  the  affairs  of  the  entire
colony  so  successfully,  that  his  brethren  gave  him
the  honorary  name  of  "  Joseph."  This  name  he  ac-
cepted, and  used  it  in  signing  his  letters,  and
occasionally  even  official  documents.  In  the  year
after  his  arrival  at  liethlehem  he  undertook  a  visit
to  Onondaga,  the  capital  of  the  Six  Nations,  with
whom  he  concluded  a  treaty  that  ha<l  in  view  the
establishment  of  a  mission  among  them.  On  this
journey,  which  proved  to  be  very  anluous  and  full
of  dangers,  ho  wa-s  a<lopted  into  the  Inxjuois  con-
fe<leracy,  receiving  the  name  of  Tgirhitontie,  or  a
Row  of  Trees.  In  1752,  accom pan ie<l  by  five  asso-
ciates, ho  made  his  way  into  the  wilds  of  North
(.'arolina,  where  he  superintended  the  survey  of  a
large  tract  of  land  that  the  chun'h  had  l>ought  of
Lord  (ininville.  It  wtis  a  hazardous  and  difficult
undertaking.  In  the  following  year  ho  visit««l
Europe  and  reported  to  Count  Zinzi-ndorf  on  the


rrogrww  of  the  American  w«>rk,  returning  in  1754.
>uring  the  French  and  Indian  war,  and  ei»|ircially
after  the  nuutmore  of  the  mijwionarieti  on  the
.Mahony.  near  what  is  now  .Mauch  Chunk,  Pa.,  24
Nov.,  1755,  he  display<*<l  no  little  courage*.  I*clh-
lehem  l»e<'ame  the  fmntier  town  in  the  dirn-tion  of
the  Indian  country,  was  surrounded  withart'M-kade,
an«l  <-arefully  guanhsi  against  attacks  fn>m  the
savages.  S|MingenlM'rg  was  in  statwl  corre*|iond-
ence  with  the  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  who
acknowletlgeil  the  great  tieneflt  the  bishop  was  cYin-
ferring  up<jn  the  whoh?  colony  bv  thus  holding  his
town.  After  the  conclusion  of  the  war  he  n-<«unie<i
tluMc  visits  to  the  Indian  countr>'  in  which  he  ha<l
always  taken  a  particular  delight,  an«l  >Miittiz«-<l
several  converts.  In  1700  Zinz<!ndorf  died  and
Spangenberg  was  called  t^i  Euro(H>  in  onler  to  as-
sist in  the  government  of  the  Unitas  Kratrum
according  to  the  new  constitution.  lie  t<H>k  his
seat  in  the  chief  executive  iKianl,  of  which  body  he
was  the  president  for  tw^enty-three  years.  He
lived  t^)  \h?  eightyH'ight  years  of  age,  an«l  his  epis-
copite  continued  for  forty-«Mght  years,  S|wn-
genl>erg  was  a  learne<l  th<Hi|ogian  and  a  man  of
great  |x)wer,  and  yet  as  a  Christian  humble  as  a
little  child.  His  presence  was  cfimmanding ;  his
countenance  showe«  the  nobility  of  his  character
and  the  love  of  an  overflowing  heart.  Among  his
numen)us  works  the  most  imi>ortant  are  "Idea
Fidei  Fratrum  "  (Barby,  1782 ;  translated  into  Eng-
lish by  Ija  Tn)l)e  under  the  title  "Ex|HM<ition  of
Christian  iKx-trine,"  Ii<»ndon,  1784):  "  Darlepmg
richtiger  Ant worten  "(Ijeijisic,  1751 ).  and  "  Schluss-
Schrift"  (1752):  two  {>olemical  works  in  defenc*'  of
Zinzendorf;  and  "  IjcIjcu  des  Grafen  von  Zinzen-
dorf  "  (3  vols..  Barby.  17?2-'4;  abridge*!  English
translation,  Lon«lon,' 18118).  There  are  two  biogra-
phies of  SpangenU'rg,  Jeremiah  liisler's  "  iielien
Spangenljcrgs  "  (Barby,  1794),  and  Carl  F.  Ixnlder-
hose's  "  Lebc'U  -\.  (t.  S|)angenl>ergs.  Bisc-hofs  der
BrQdergemeinde"(Heiden)«>rg,  1840:  French  trans-
lation. Ton  lous<\  18.'»0;  English,  London.  IKW).

SPARHAWK,  FranceH  Campl>elL  author,  b.
in  Amesburv,  Mass.,  alK>ut  1858.  Her  e<lucation
was  received  in  private  schools.  The  poet  Whittier
was  an  early  and  intimate  friend  of  her  father.  Dr.
Thomas  .Sjmrhawk.  She  has  ]>ublish(Hl  a  large
numl)er  of  serial  stories  in  '*  The  Christian  L'nion  "
and  "The  liay  State  Monthly."  Her  nu>st  impor-
tant contribution  to  serial  fiction  is  entitled  "  Eliza-
l>eth,"  a  nimance  of  colonial  davs,  and  descril>es
New  England  and  the  siege  of  1x>uisburg.  This
anpeareil  in  "  The  Bay  State  Monthly."  She  is  also
the  author  of  "A  I^v  Man's  Work  "(New  York.
1881):  "Little  Pollv  Blatchley "  (Boston,  1887):
and  "  Miss  West's  Class  in  (nM)graphy"  (1887),

SPARKMAN.  JaniPH  Truslow,  reformer,  b.
in  Bnxiklvn,  N.  Y..  27  Sep..  1H42.  He  was  e<lu-
cateil  at  Brooklyn  |)olytechnic  institute  and  at
Tarrytown  institute,  after  which  he  followed  a
s|x>cial  course  of  commercial  training.  In  1801  he
entered  into  business  with  his  father,  James  D.
Sparkman,  who  was  a  large  im|K)rting  menhant.
with  whom  ho  continuetl  until  after  the  civil  war.
Mr.  Simrkman  luis  Ikh'Ii  active  in  jwlitics,  although
not  hoMing  offlcv,  aiwl  his  opinion  and  counsel  are
valued  by  the  leailers  of  the  IK'mocratic  party.
In  recent  vears  he  has  a<lvocated  various  meas-
ures of  reJorni.  notablv  the  lal»«»r-day  bill,  the
half-holiday  bill,  the  sn>all-parks  bill,  and  the  tene-
ment-house reform  bill,  and  has  IxtMi  unifonnly
siiccessful  in  pro<'uring  the  passage  of  nu-asures  of
reformatory  legislation.  He  secured  the  wmmuta-
tion  of  the  M-nteiu-e  of  the  Theiss  b«»ycottors  wht»
were  imprisoned  f<»r  a  long  jwrioil  at  a  time  when


622


SPARKS


SPARKS


public  feeling  was  bitter  against  them.  Mr.  Spark-
man  has  contributed  to  various  periodicals.

SPARKS,  Jared,  historian,  b.  in  Willington,
Conn.,  10  May,  1789;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  14
March,  186(!.  He  obtained  in  1809  a  scholarship
in  Phillips  Exeter  academy,  through  the  influence
of  Rev,  Abiel  Abbott,  and,  after  remaining  two

years,  entered  Har-
vard, where  he  was
also  given  a  scholar-
ship, which  he  sup-
plemented by  teacn-
mg  during  a  part  of
the  year.  While  em-
ployed in  a  private
school  at  Havre  de
Grace,  Md.,  in  1813,
he  served  in  the
militia  against  the
British,  who  cap-
tured and  burned
the  town.  After  his
graduation  in  1815
he  taught  a  classi-
cal school  at  Lan-
p,  r  /J  caster,  Mass..  but  he

w^ .  /.  /# Uw  /4U  t returned  to  the  uni-

M/)UJA0 mh^tyiVZd versity in 1817 to
"  '  study  divinity,  and

for  the  two  years  that  he  was  there  he  was  tutor  in
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  the  college
and  acting  editor  of  the  "  North  American  Review."
In  May.  1819,  after  the  completion  of  his  theologi-
cal studies,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  a  new  Unita-
rian church  in  Baltimore,  Md.  He  took  part  in  the
doctrinal  controversy  with  orthodox  theologians.
In  1831  he  was  chosen  chaplain  of  the  National
house  of  representatives.  lie  edited  in  1821-'3  a
monthly  periodical  called  the  "  Unitarian  Miscel-
lany and  Christian  Monitor,"  in  which  he  printed
letters  addressed  to  Rev.  Samuel  Miller  on  the
•'Comparative  Moral  Tendency  of  Trinitarian  and
Unitarian  Doctrines"  that  were  afterward  expand-
ed and  republished  in  a  volume  (Boston,  1823).  He
resigned  his  pastorate  in  Baltimore  in  1823  on  ac-
count of  impaired  health,  and,  after  a  journey  in  the
western  states,  returned  to  Boston  and  purchased
the  "  North  American  Review,"  which  he  conducted
from  January,  1824,  till  April,  1831.  He  undertook
in  1825  the  task  of  collecting  and  editing  the  writ-
ings of  George  Washington,  and,  after  examining
the  papers  in  the  public  archives  of  the  thirteen
states  of  the  Continental  federation,  he  secured
possession,  through  an  arrangement  with  Bushrod
Washington  and  Chief-Justice  John  Marshall,  of
the  papers  of  Gen.  Washington  that  were  preserved
at  Mount  Vernon.  In  1828  he  went  to  Europe  for
the  purpose  of  transcribing  documents  in  the  gov-
ernment archives  at  London  and  at  Paris.  Several
years  later  he  made  a  second  journey  to  Europe,
and,  in  his  renewed  researches  among  the  French
archives,  discovered  the  map  with  the  red  line
marked  upon  it,  concerning  which,  and  the  use
made  of  it  in  settling  the  question  of  the  north-
eastern boundary  in  1842,  there  was  much  debate,
both  in  this  country  and  in  England.  Mr.  Sparks
was  the  originator  and  first  editor  of  the  "  Ameri-
can Almanac  and  Repository  of  Useful  Knowl-
edge" (Boston,  1830-*61).  He  was  professor  of
ancient  and  modern  history  at  Harvard  from  1839
till  1849,  and  president  of  the  college  from  Febru-
ary, 1849,  till  February,  1853,  when  he  resigned  on
account  of  failing  health.  He  devoted  his  last
years  to  a  work  on  the  "  History  of  the  American
Revolution,"  which  he  left  unfinished. He re-


ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard  in  1848,
and  was  a  member  of  manv  learned  societies.  The
first  volume  that  Dr.  Sparks  published  was  "  Let-
ters on  the  Ministry,  Ritual,  and  Doctrines  of  the
Protestant  Epi.scopal  Church,"  in  reply  to  a  sermon
of  Rev.  William  E.  Wyatt  directed  against  Unitari-
an doctrines  (Baltimore,  1820).  His  sermon  before
the  house  of  representatives  on  the  death  of  Will-
iam Pinkney  was  printed  (Washington,  1822).  He
began  in  Baltimore,  and  continued  in  Boston,  the
publication  of  a  "  Collection  of  Essays  and  Tracts
m  Theology  from  Various  Authors,"  with  bio-
graphical and  critical  notices  (6  vols.,  1823-*6).  In
1827  he  published,  in  the  form  of  two  letters  to
Judge  Jo.seph  Story,  an  account  ot  the  Washington

f)apers  at  Mount  Vernon,  with  a  plan  for  their  pub-
ication.  His  first  biographical  work  was  a  "  Life
of  John  Ledyard"  (Cambridge,  1828),  which  was
translated  into  German  (Leipsic,  1829).  While  en-
gaged in  collecting  the  public  and  private  writings
of  President  Washington,  Sparks,  by  authority  of
congress,  gathered  and  edited  "The  Diplomatic
Correspondence  of  the  American  Revolution,  being
the  Letters  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  Silas  Deane,  John
Adams,  John  Jay,  Arthur  Lee,  William  Lee,  Ralph
Izard,  Francis  Dana,  William  Carmichael,  Henry
Laurens,  John  Laurens,  and  others,  concerning  the
Foreign  Relations  of  the  United  States  during  the
Whole  Revolution ;  together  with  the  Letters  in
Reply  from  the  Secret  Committee  of  Congress  and
the  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs;  also  the  Entire
Correspondence  of  the  French  Minister  Gerard
and  Luzerne  with  Congress"  (12  vols.,  Boston,
J829-'30).  He  also  wrote  at  this  time  "  The  Life
of  Gouverneur  Morris  "  (3  vols.,  1832).  After  nine
years  of  preparatory  labor  he  began  the  publication
of  "  The  Writings  of  George  Washington,  being  his
Correspondence,  Addresses,  Messages,  and  other
Papers,  Official  and  Private,  selected  and  published
from  the  Original  Manuscripts,  with  a  Life  of  the
Author,  Notes,  and  Illustrations  "  (12  vols.,  1834-'8).
The  first  volume,  containing  the  "  Life  of  Wash-
ington," appeared  in  1837,  and  was  reissued  sepa-
rately (Boston,  1839).  An  abridgment  by  the  au-
thor was  also  published  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1843).
Those  parts  of  the  correspondence  that  were  of  in-
terest to  the  French  public,  with  the  biography  in
full,  were  translated  and  published  under  the  title
of  "Vie,  correspondance,  et  ecrits  de  Washington,"
with  an  introductory  discourse  by  Fran9ois  P.  G.
Guizot  on  the  influence  and  character  of  Washing-
ton in  the  American  Revolution  (6  vols,  and  atlas,
Paris,  1839-'40).  The  first  volume  of  the  corre-
spondence was  reprinted  in  London,  but  found  no*
sale.  An  English  publisher  issued  the  "  Personal
Memoirs  and  Diaries  of  George  Washington,"  with
the  name  of  Jared  Sparks  on  the  title-page,  though
without  his  authorization  (2  vols.,  London,  1839).
Friedrich  von  Raumer  made  a  German  translation
of  the  biography,  with  extracts  from  the  writings
(Leipsic,  1839).  Historians  and  critics  generally
accorded  praise  to  Sparks  for  the  thoroughness  an<l
accuracy  of  his  worfc;  yet  his  manner  of  refining
the  language  of  the  letters  and  diaries  and  sup-
pressing objectionable  wprds  and  passages  drew
upon  him  the  unfriendly  criticism  of  Lord  Mahon,
who  charged  the  editor  not  only  with  omissions,
but  with  substituting  and  interpolating  passages,
afterward  withdrawing  the  latter  part  of  the
charge.  Mr.  Sparks,  in  a  "  Reply  to  Lord  Mahon
and  Others  "  (1852),  defended  his'mode  of  editing.
The  letters  of  Washington  to  Joseph  Reed  that
were  referred  to  in  the  controversy  were  reprinted
in  their  original  form  (Philadelphia,  1852),  eliciting
from  Sparks  "  Remarks  on  a  Reprint  o^  Washing-


SPARKS


SPALLlil.NU


038


ton's  Ijettcrs"  (1*58).  Sparks  was  the  editor  of
"The  Library  of  American  Bin^jraphy"  (10  vol*.,
Bo^^ton,  1H;J4-*8),  containinK  twenty-six  lives,  to
which  a  seconil  series  of  thirty- four  fives  was  wMetl
(15  vols.,  184-t-'7).  This  work  p<isse<l  throi]);li
many  e<litions.  Of  the  lives  he  wn)te  those  of
Ethan  Alien,  lienetlict  Arnold,  Father  Mnrquette,
Ija  Salle,  Count  Pulaski,  John  Hibault,  Charles  Lee,
and  .John  IxHlyard,  the  latter  lieinjj  reiirinted  from
his  previouslv'published  work.  He  e«nte<l  als4>  the
"  Works  «)f  Itenjamin  Franklin,  with  Notes  and  a
Life  of  the  Author"  (10  vols.,  lH;iO-*40).  The  first
volume,  containing  Franklin's  "  Autobiopraphy."
with  notes  and  a  continuation  by  Mr.  S|)arks,  was
issued  separately  (1844).  Besides  '*  liemarks  on
American  History"  (Boston,  18.37),  lulditions  to
William  Smyth's  "  Lectures  on  Mo<lem  Hi.story"
(Boston,  1841),  and  other  minor  works,  his  only
other  publication  was  *' Corresix>ndence  of  the
American  Revolution,  being  Letters  of  Eminent
Men  to  George  Washington  from  the  Time  of  his
taking  C'ommand  of  the  Army  to  the  End  of  his
Presidency"  (4  vols.,  1853).  He  left  manuscript
journals  containing  reminiscences  of  Thomas  Jef-
ferson, James  Madison,  and  other  eminent  men,
and  recorded  conversations  with  many  of  them.
His  manuscript  collection  of  original  materials  for
American  diplomatic  history  was  given  to  Harvard
college.  See  a  "  Memoir  of  Jared  Sparks,"  by
firantz  Mavcr  (Baltimore,  1867),  and  one  bv  George
E.  Ellis  (CanihridL'o.  186}».

SPARKS,  >Villiam  Henry,  author,  b.  on  St.
Simon's  island,  Ga.,  16  Jan.,  1H()0;  d.  in  Marietta,
Ga.,  13  Jan.,  1882.  He  was  taken  in  infancy  to  his
father's  plantation  in  Greene  county,  and' in  his
eighteenth  year  was  sent  to  complete  his  education
»  in  Litchfiefd,  Conn.,  where  he  subsequently  stud-
ied law.  On  his  return  to  Georgia  lie  practised
his  profession  and  was  a  member  of  the  legislature.
In  1830  he  removed  to  Natchez,  Miss.,  engaged
largely  in  sugar-planting,  and  about  1850  entered
into  a  law  partnership  with  Judah  P.  Benjamin  in
New  Orleans,  which  was  dissolvetl  ten  years  later.
He  declined  many  public  offices,  once  only  accept-
ing the  nomination  for  U.  S.  senator  from  Louisi-
ana, but  withdrawing  in  favor  of  his  friend,  Alex-
ander Barrow.  He  contributed  largely  to  south-
em  publications,  and  among  other  verses  wrote
•'Somebody's  Darling,"  "The  Dving  Year,"  an<l
"The  Old  Church  -  Bell."  He  "publishetl  "The
Memories  of  Fifty  Years  "(Philadelphia,  1870;  4th  i
ed.,  1882),  and  left  ready  for  the  press  a  second  !
volume;  also  "  Father  Anselmo's  Ward,"  "Chi-
lecah,"  "  The  Woman  with  the  Iron-Gray  Hair,"  '
and  other  manuscrijits.

SPARROW.  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Charles-  I
town,  Mass.,  12  March,  1801 ;  a.  in  Alexandria,  Va,,
17  Jan.,  1874. He  was  taken  by  his  father  to  Ire-  (
land  in  1805,  where  he  remained  until  1817. His
education  was  obtained  j^rtlv  in  that  country,  and  |
was  completed  in  his  native  land. Heentennl  Co-  ^
lumbia  in  1819,  and  remained  for  three  years,  but  \
was  not  graduated  with  his  class. In  1822  he  re-  j
joined  his  father's  family  in  Ohio. He  engaged  in  i
teaching,  first  in  Worthington,  Ohio,  then  in  Cin-  i
cinnati,  in  Miami university  as  professor  of  an-  I
cient  languages,  and  in 1825  as  profes.sor  in  the
same  denartment  in  Kenyon  college,  Ohio, He  was
ordaineu  deacon  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  7  June,  1826,
by  Bishop  Philander  Chase,  and  priest,  11  June,
1826,  in  Worthington,  Ohio,  by  the  same  bishop.
Prom  this  date  onward  he  was  occupied  in  paro-
chial work  in  different  parishes  in  Ohio,  in  editing
a  church  pa|>cr,  and  in  the  duties  of  theological
professor in Kenyon college. In 1840 he n>-


moved  to  Virginia  and  beoatne  profMaor  in  the
Bpisoopal  theological  aeminaiy  at  Alexandria^
which  post  he  held  during  the  remainder  of  hia
life.  lie  n'c<'iv«Hl  the  degree  of  I>.  1).  from  Ken-
yon college  in  \KiH.  I)r.  .Sfiarrow  wa>«  evanselioal
after  the  i>atteni  of  Charles  .SJnwHin,  Hii^hopa  Heada
and  Mcltvaine,  and  I)r.  Stephen  II.  Tyng.  He
was  an  able  and  successful  teacher  and  was  a  wr-
monizer  of  ran'  excellence*.  He  published  numer-
ous a4ldres.<*es,  sermons  on  special  cHvanions,  tmr-
tateson  im|)ortant  topics,  anu  the  like.  Two  vear*
after  his  death  a  volume  was  publi<the<i  ciintaining
his  "Life  an«l  Corn-snondence  "  (I'hilwlejphia,
1876),  together  with  "  I*  ragments,"  s«le<-ted  from
his  manus<-ri]its.

SPAl'LUlNti,  Edward,  inventor, b.  in  Milford.
N.  H.,  3  Sent.,  1824.  He  was  inlucatefl  at  the  pub-
lic school  of  his  native  town,  and  hajt  since  followed
the  trade  of  a  blacksmith  and  machinist.  Mr.
S|>auldin^  has  invente«l  a  graduated  elliptic  spring
for  carrying  heavy  |o8«ls  that  is  applicable  to  horse-
cars  or  to  freight -cars  for  which  he  re<five<l  in
1880  a  medal  of  excellence  at  the  American  insti-
tute fair  in  New  York  city.  He  has  also  f«tente<l
a  wrought-iron  shackle  which  is  use<l  in  conjunc-
tion with  his  spring,  and  a  magnetic  and  electric
ear  telephone  for  enabling  the  deaf  to  hear  more
readily.  Among  his  other  inventions  is  a  pmceea
for  keeping  citler  sweet  in  any  climate  without
Ixjttling  or  preserving  in  a  cool  place.  He  has  taken
out  al)out  ten  [talents  in  the  United  Statra  and
eleven  in  various  foreign  count rie.s.

SPAVLDIXG.  El  bridge  Gerrj.  Imnker,  b.  in
Summer  Hill,  Cayuga  co..  N.  Y.,  24  Feb.,  1H09.
He  is  a  lineal  descendant  in  the  s<?venth  generation
of  Edward  Spaiilding,  who  came  from  England
and  settled  in  Ma-ssacnusetts  soon  after  the  arrival
of  the  Puritans  in  the  "Mayflower."  His  father.
PMward,  was  a  pioneer  from  }^ew  England  to  central
New  York.  The  s<^)n  studied  law  in  I^itavia  and
Attica,  N.  Y.,  was  admitted  to  practice  in  (tenesee
county,  and  soon  afterwanl  removetl  to  Buffalo,
N.  Y.  He  was  asso(;iate<l  in  practice  with  Heroan
B.  Potter,  George  R.  lialK-fx-k,  and  John  Ganson.
After  accumulating  a  fortune  in  the  practice  of  the
law  he  gave  his  attention  to  Iwnking,  in  which  he
has  been  equally  successful.  He  was  instrumental
in  causing  the  removal  of  the  Farmers'  and  me-
chanics' Ijank  of  Batavia  to  Buffalo,  and  .soon  there-
after l)ecame  its  president.  rj>on  the  passage  of
the  Federal  l>ankin^-law  the  bank  was  reorgan-
ized under  its  provisions  with  the  name  of  the
Farmers'  and  mechanics'  national  bank,  and  Mr.
Spaulding  as  president  and  princi|)al  owner.  He
has  been  largely  identified  with  public  affairs.
He  was  mayor  in  1847  and  assemblyman  in  IH4H,
was  a  representative  in  congress  in  1S41)-'51.  hav-
ing been  chosen  as  a  Whig,  was  state  treasurer  in
lii5S,  and  again  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republi-
can in  1858,  serving  till  1863.  During  his  last
term  in  congress  ^lr.  Spaulding  achieved  a  wide
reputation.  He  was  a  member  of  the  wars  and
means  committee,  and  chairman  of  the  sub-oom-
mittee  that  was  intrustAl  with  the  duty  of  pre-
paring legislative  measures.  The  n'siilt  was  the
presentation  and  passage  of  the  Greenlwck  or  I^e-
gal-Tender  act,  and  the  National  currency  (>ank
bill.  Both  of  these  were  drawn  by  .Mr.  Sjiaulding.
They  were  offennl  and  urginl  as  war  measures,  and
are  claimed  to  be  the  liest  financial  system  that  was
ever  conceived  or  a<loi>led  by  any  government.  Mr.
Spaulding  is  entitled  to  the  credit  of  formulating
these  measures  and  securinc  their  adoption.  By
rea.son  of  his  coniux;tion  with  this  imtH>rtant  legis-
lation he  has  been  called  the  "  Father  of  (}r»«en-


624


SPAULDING


SPKAR


backs."  Mr.  Spaiikling  prepared  a  "  History  of  the
.Legal-Tender  Paper  Money  used  during  the  Gre^t
Reljellion  "'  (Buffalo.  1869),  which  is  regarded  as
standard  authority  on  the  subject.  He  was  chosen
to  deliver  the  a<ldress  before  the  Banking  associa-
tion at  the  Centennial  exposition,  in  which  he  gave
a  review  of  ••  One  Hundred  Years  of  Progress  in
the  Business  of  Banking."

SPAULDING,  Levi,  missionary,  b.  in  Jaffrev,
N.  H.,  23  Aug.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Ceylon,  18  June,  1873.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1815,  finished
his  theological  course  at  Andover  seminary  three
years  later,  and  soon  afterward  was  ordained  at
Salem.  Mass.  In  1820  he  arrived  as  a  missionary
of  the  American  board  at  Jaffna,  Ceylon,  where  he
labored  fifty-four  years,  making  but  one  visit  to
the  United  States  during  that  period.  In  addition  to
his  missionary  lalxtrs,  he  superintended  the  Oodoo-
ville  boarding-school  for  girls  and  prepared  tracts,
hymns,  and  school-books  in  the  Tamil  language,
many  of  the  best  lyrics  in  the  vernacular  hymn-
book  being  from  his  pen.  Among  his  principal
works  are  a  translation  of  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,  a
"  Scripture  History,"  a  Tamil  dictionary  (Madras,
1844),  an  enlarged  edition  of  an  English  and  Tamil
dictionary,  "  Notes  on  the  Bible,"  and  a  revision
of  the  Scriptures  in  Tamil.  He  was  one  of  the
most  accurate  Tamil  scholars  in  southern  India,
using  the  language  with  great  facility  and  power.
Ten  days  before  his  death  "  Father  Spaulding,"  as
he  was  called,  celebrated  the  fifty-fourth  anniver-
sary of  his  embarkation  at  Boston  for  Ceylon,  at
which  time  he  was  the  oldest  missionary  of  the
American  board.

SPAL'LUING,  Nathan  Weston,  inventor,  b.  in
the  town  of  North  Anson,  Me.,  24  Sept.,  1829.  At
the  age  of  thirteen  he  began  to  learn  the  trade  of  a
carpenter  and  builder  under  the  tuition  of  his
father,  who  was  both  a  school-teacher  and  a  prac-
tical mechanic.  Afterward  learning  the  trade  of
a  millwright  from  an  uncle  and  spending  a  year  in
a  saw-factory,  he  had  become  at  twenty  the  chief
mechanic  of  his  neighborhood.  Going  to  California
in  1851,  he  went  at  once  to  the  mines,  but  did  not
succeed,  and  was  employed  as  superintendent  of
the  construction  of  one  of  the  first  quartz-mills  in
the  state.  Its  success  led  to  the  erection  of  a  sec-
ond on  the  same  stream — Mokelumne  river.  In
1859  he  opened  a  saw-manufactory  in  Sacramento,
where  he  began  to  develop  an  inventive  talent  in
the  line  of  his  business  and  devised  the  adjustable
saw-tooth  that  has  made  him  widely  known.  The
demand  for  these  teeth  became  so  great  that  Mr.
Spaulding,  finding  it  difficult  to  supply  them  in
sufficient  quantities,  was  compelled  to  contrive
other  devices,  and  finally  brought  out  the  chisel-
bit  saw-tooth.  He  has  also  completed  and  pub-
lished a  scale  for  the  measurement  of  logs,  which
has  been  adopted  as  the  legal  standard  in  Califor-
nia and  other  states,  as  also  in  several  territories.
It  is  known  as  the  Spaulding  log-scale.  In  1861
he  removed  his  factory  to  San  Francisco,  and  he
has  since  taken  part  in  the  industrial  development
of  California.  In  1881  he  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Gai-fleld  to  be  assistant  U.  S.  treasurer  at  San
Francisco,  which  office  he  held  until  20  Aug.,  1885.
During  that  period  he  received  and  disbursed,  or
safely  kept  and  transferred  to  his  successor,  more
than  $320,000,000  without  loss.  He  has  twice
served  as  mayor  of  Oakland,  where  he  resides,  and
has  been  selected  by  Leland  Stanford  as  a  trustee
of  the  Leland  Stanford,  Jr.,  university.

SPAULDING,  Solomon,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ash-
ford,  Conn.,  in  1761 ;  d.  in  Amity,  Washington  co..
Pa..  20  Oct.,  1816. After  serving  in  his  youth  in


the  Revolutionary  army,  and  beginning  to  study
law.  he  was  gratluated  at  Dartmouth  in  1785,  stud-
ied for  the  ministry,  and  preached  in  New  Eng-
laiul.  In  1795  he  settled  in  Cherry  Valley,  N.  Y.,
where  he  entered  inU)  business  with  his  brother,
and  four  years  later  in  Richfield,  N.  Y.  In  1809  he
removed  to  New  Salem  (now  Conneaut),  Ohio,  and
established  an  iron-foundry  with  Henry  Lake.  This
enterprise  proving  unprofitable,  on  account  of  the
war  with  Great  Britain,  he  went  to  Pittsburg,  and
afterward  to  Amity.  Pa.,  where  he  died.  While
residing  at  Conneaut,  he  wrote  a  romance  entitled
"The  Manuscript  Found,"  purporting  to  be  an  ac-
count of  the  original  people  of  this  continent,  their
customs,  and  conflicts  between  the  different  tribes.
It  pretended  to  be  taken  from  a  manuscript  that
had  been  discovered  in  an  ancient  mouna.  Mr.
Spaulding  read  his  manuscript  to  some  of  his
friends  in  1811-'12,  and  tried  to  get  it  published,
but  without  success.  In  1830  Mormon  elders
preached  in  northeastern  Ohio,  and  their  account
of  how  the  golden  plates,  from  which  the  "  Book  of
Mormon  "  was  made,  had  been  found,  brought  to
mind  the  story  written  by  Spaulding  twenty  years
before.  A  suspicion  was  raised  that  the  "  ftook  of
Mormon  "  might  have  been  an  outgrowth  from  the
latter.  This  suspicion  ripened  into  a  general  be-
lief, and  in  time  became  the  accepted  theory  of  the
origin  of  the  "  Book  of  Mormon."  It  is  alleged  that
Joseph  Smith  and  Sidney  Rigdon  compiled  the
"  Book  of  Mormon  "  from  Spaulding's  manuscript
story,  Rigdon  having  stolen  it,  or  a  copy  of  it,  from
a  printing-office  in  which  he  worked  in  Pittsburg.
In  1834  Dr.  P.  Hurlbut,  who  had  been  expelled
from  the  Mormon  church,  obtained  from  the  widow
of  Solomon  Spaulding,  Mrs.  Matilda  Davison,  of
Monson,  Mass.,  what  was  supposed  to  be  the  origi-
nal copy  of  the  Spaulding  story,  and  the  same  year
Eber  D.  Howe,  editor  of  the  Painesville  "Telegraph,"
compiled  a  book  entitled  "  Mormonism  Unveiled,"
which  was  a  severe  criticism  on  the  "  Book  of  Mor-
mon "  and  its  believers.  This  book  was  reproduced
in  1840.  Upon  the  title-page  and  in  the  last  chap-
ter is  suggested  the  "  probability  that  the  historical
part  of  the  '  Golden  Bible '  was  written  by  Solomon
Spaulding."  From  the  time  Mr.  Hurlbut  obtained
the  manuscript  story  in  1834  up  to  1884  its  where-
abouts was  unknown  to  the  world.  In  1884  Presi-
dent James  H.  Fairchild,  of  Ol^erlin  college,  visite<l
his  old  anti-slavery  friend,  Lewis  L.  Rice,  of  Hono-
lulu, Hawaiian  islands.  Mr.  Rice  in  1839-'40  suc-
ceeded Mr.  Howe  in  the  office  of  the  Painesville
"  Telegraph,"  and  the  books  and  manuscripts  came
into  his  possession.  President  Fairchild  asked  Mk.
Rice  if  he  had  among  his  old  papers  anything  relat-
ing to  the  early  anti-slavery  movement  which  he
would  contribute  to  the  Oberlin  library.  When  ex-
amining for  these  he  came  upon  "  an  old  worn  and
faded  manuscript  of  about  175  pages  of  small
quarto,"  which  proved  to  be  the  long-lost  manu-
script of  Solomon  Spaulding.  Comparisons  were
made  with  the  "  Book  of  Mormon,"  and  President
Fairchild  says:  "The  manuscript  has  no  resem-
blance to  the  '  Book  of  Mormon '  except  in  some
very  general  features.  There  is  not  a  name  or  an
incident  common  to  the  two."  A  verbatim  copy  of
the  manuscript  has  been  issued  by  the  Mormons  at
Lamoni,  Iowa  (1885).  See  "  Who  wrote  the  '  Book
of  Mormon,'"  by  Robert  Patterson  (Pittsburg,
1882);  "New  Light  on  Mormonism,"  by  Ellen  E.
Dickinson  (New  York,  1885);  and  "Early  Days  ot
Mormonism,"  by  J.  H.  Kennedy  (New  York,  1888).
SPEAR,  Charles,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  1  May,  1801 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  18
April,  1863. He  became  a  Universalist  minister,


SPEAR


8PKKD


025


and  was  spltlwl  over  socletjps  in  Brewster  and
l{<>ck|)<>rt,  Mass..  hut  afterwanl  reinov«Ml  to  Ikwton.
where  h«  dt*v<>t«^I  iiiuny  years  to  prison-roforiii,
urf^inK  iijxMi  lepislatiifps  the  adoption  of  niea«un*.s
for  the  Itent'flt  and  reformation  of  convicta.  He
also  %'isite<l  prisons  and  trxtk  disoharf^xl  eonviets
t«)  his  own  home.  S4)metimes  six  at  a  time,  keeping
them  till  they  found  emnloyinent.  During  his
last  efforts  in  behalf  of  tlie  prisoners  of  war  in
Washington  he  oontraotiNl  a  dlM'use  which  resulte<l
in  his  death.  His  secoml  wife.  Catharine  Swan
Brown,  is  now  (18HH)  writing  his  life.  He  pul>-
lishe<i  "  Names  and  Titles  of  Christ "  (Boston.
1842) ;  "  Essays  on  the  Punishment  of  Death "
(1844);  "Plea  for  Disc-hargwl  Convicts"  (1844);
and  "  Voices  from  Prison."  a  selection  of  poems
(1849).  He  edited  "  The  Prisoner's  Friend  "  (Bos-
ton. 1848- '54),  a  monthly  |K'rio<lical,  and  was  con-
nected with  .several  religious  news[)a|H»rs.  —  His
brother.  John  M.,  also  devoted  himself  to  the
cause  of  prison  -  reform  near  Boston,  and  wrote
"  Ijalnirs  for  the  Pri.soner  "  (Boston,  1848) ;  "  Mes-
sa^s  from  the  Superior  State  "  (1852) ;  "  Twelve
Discourses  on  Government"  (1853);  and  "The
Educator  "  (vol.  i..  1857).

SPK.\R,  Ellis,  commissioner  of  patents,  b.  in
Warren,  Knox  c<j..  Mc..  15  Oct.,  1834.  He  was
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1858,  entered  the  Na-
tional army  in  August,  1802.  as  a  captain  of  Maine
voluntJHjrs,  was  promotwl  through  the  intermedi-
ate grades  to  colonel,  and  from  October,  1863,  till
February,  1865,  commanded  a  regiment  in  the
Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  brevetted  for  his
services  at  Peebles  Farm,  whore  he  was  in  com-
mand of  a  brigade  while  holding  the  rank  of  major,
subsetiuently  received  the  brevet  of  c<ilonel  for  gal-
liintry  in  action,  and  on  9  April,  1865,  that  of
brigatlier-general.  He  serve<i  lor  a  short  time  as
msjjector  of  division,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war
was  in  command  of  a  brigade.  He  was  mustered
out  in  July,  1865.  In  Novemljcr  of  that  year  he
became  an  assistant  examiner  of  raihvav  and  civil
engineering  in  the  U.  S.  patent-office,  tie  was  ap-
pointed examiner  in  1868,  examiner-in-chief  in  the
same  bureau  in  1872.  and  assistant  commissioner
of  patents  in  1874.  In  1876  he  resigned  and  en-
gaged in  private  business  till  January,  1877,  when
he  was  appointeil  commissioner  of  patents.  He
iield  this  omce  till  November,  1878,  when  he  again
resignetl.  He  has  since  been  in  practice  as  an  at-
torney and  solicitor  in  patent  cases.

SP"EAR,  Saiiinel  P.,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston.  Mass..
in  1815;  (i.  in  Now  York  city,  5  May,  1875.  He
enlisted  in  tlie  U,  S.  army  in  18J33,  and  served  in
the  2«1  dragix)ns  in  the  Seminole  war  and  through
the  Mexican  c^iinpaign,  in  which  he  was  wounded
at  Cerro  Gonlo.  Subsequently  he  servc<l  on  the
plains  against  hostile  Indians  and  in  the  Utah
exjMHlition,  and  was  long  sergeant-major  of  his
regiment.  In  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he
entered  the  v<»lunteerarmy  as  lieutenant-colonel  of
*  the 11th Pennsylvania cwvalrv, his  commission

dating  from  25  Sept.,  1861.  *rhe  regiment  was
raised  as  an  independent  bo<ly  for  scouting  service,
under  authority  of  the  secretary  of  war,  but  in
November,  1861,  was  incorporated  in  the  Pennsyl-
vania state  organization.  Spear  Uvame  its  colonel
on  25  Au^.,  1862.  He  commandod  several  exjiedi-
tions  during  the  war,  was  brevetted  brigadier-gen-
eral on  13  March.  1H(V).  receive<l  severe  wounds  at
Five  Forks,  hikI  resigned  on  9  Mav,  1865.

SPEAR,  Samuel  Thayer,  cfergvman,  b.  in
liallston  S|)a,  N.  Y.,  4  March.  1H12.  He  was  gradu-
ate<i  at the  College  of  physicians  and surge<ms,

[New  York,  in  18:^.  then  studied  fur  the  ministry
....


I  in  Troy.  N.  Y..  and  wan  nnlainml  in  188A.  In  Um
following  year  he  wan  installed  over  the  2d  Pres-
byterian church  of  Ijansingburg,  N.  Y..  from
which  ho  waM  calle«l  in  1843  to  the  South  Prwtbjr-
ferian  church  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  holding  that
(lastorate  till  IH71.  since  which  time  he  han  \mtn
onnei't^l  editorially  with  the  "  Inde|M'ndent."  He
has  pulilishe«l  "  Family  Power"  (NfW  York.  184ff):
"  Keligion  and  State"  (1876);  "<'onf«titutinnalitjr
of  the  lii'gal-Tonder  Acts "  (revi««e«I  e«i..  1877);
"The  liaw  of  the  Federal  Judiciary  "  (I8H3>:  "The
Iwiw  of  Extradition  "(revised  wl..  1884);  ami  ""The
Bible  Heaven"  (1886).  He  also  i.ubli^hwl  in
I  tarn  ph  let -form  eighteen  sc>rinons  on  the  reljellion.
deli\-ere<l  during  the  civil  war,  and  ten  essays  con-
tribute<I  to  p«>ri<Nlicals.  He  has  receivwl  the  de-
gnH>  of  D.  D.  from  l'ni«)n  college  in  1H51.

SPEECE,  Courad,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Lon-
don, Va..  7  Nov.,  1776;  (l' in  Staunton,  Va.,  15
Feb.,  1836.  He  labored  on  his  father's  farm  till  he
was  sixteen  years  old,  then  attended  a  grammar-
school  near  his  home,  and  finished  his  education
at  Ijil)erty  Hall  (afterwani  Washington  college).
He  studied  divinity,  and  while  a  tutor  in  Ilamp-

j  den  Sidney  college in 1799 Ixn^ame a Baptist

'  pn-m-her.  but  he  was  license<I  in  IHOl  by  the  presby-
tery of  Hanover.  He  was  apfKjintJMf  to  mission-
ary work,  with  occasional  pastoral  charges,  in  east-
ern Virginia  and  Maryland  and  in  the  valley  west
of  the  Blue  Ridge  till  1813,  when  he  became  {>astor
of  Augusta  church,  near  Staunton,  Va,  Here  Dr.
.Speece  spent  the  remaining  twenty-two  years  of
his  life.  He  was  among  the  eminent  |ireachers  of
the  day,  and  of  great  influence  in  his  denomina-
tion. He  was  also  nottnl  for  his  U'uefactions,  and
especially  for  his  strenuous  efforts  to  promote  the
temperance-reform.  He  receivKl  the  degnv  of
I).  I).  fn>m  Princeton  in  1820.  He  publishe<l  "  The
Mountaineer."  a  volume  of  es.says  written  in
18i;i-'16  after  the  manner  of  "  The  .Sj^ftator."
single  sermons  (1810-'32) ;  and  hymns,  the  most
imjMirtant  of  which  is  "The  Cross  of  Christ,"  in
the  gonoral  asseinbly's  collection.

SPEED.  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Jeffers<in  county,
Ky.,  11  March.  1^12  ;  d.  there,  25  June.  1887.  He
was  gniduated  at  St.  Joseph's  college.  Bardstown.

I  Ky..  in  182H.  studied  law  at  Transylvania,  and
iK'gan  practice  at  Louisville.  His  ancestors  were
identified  with  that
state  from  pioneer
days,  and  were  ac-tive
participants  in  the
t>est  political  life  of
the  young  common-
wealth. Inheriting  a
repugnance  to  every
form of oppression

I  and  injustice,  he  was
natunilly  opposed  to
slavery,  and  iiis  well-
known  opinions  on
that  subject  prevent-

I  ed  his  taking  anv
prominent  twrt  in  po(-

!  itics  until  tneoi»ening

'.  of  the  civil  war.  He
was  then  nearly  fifty

years  old,  but  he  had  established  his  rt>putation  as
a  jurist,  and  was  recognizetl  even  by  those  wholly
oppt)sed  to  him  on  the  issues  of  the  time  as  able,

'  consistent,  and  upright.  He  also  held  at  this  time
a  chair  in  the  law  deimrtment  of  the  I'niversity  of
Ix)uisville.  A  {K»werful  element  in  Kentucky
strove  to  commit  the  state  to  the  disunion  cause,

I  and  against  that  element  he  exercised  all  his  tai-


^CL/UvojLO  S^\jutM\


626


SPEER


SPELMAN


ents  and  influence.  To  hira  as  much  as  to  any  one
man  is  ascribed  the  refusal  of  Kentucky  to  join  the
Confederacy.  He  became  in  early  manhood  a
friend  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  and  their  subsequent
relations  continued  to  be  intimate.  When  the
war  came,  ho  promptly  yielded  to  the  president's
urgent  request  that  he  should  assist  in  organizing
the  National  troops  in  his  native  state,  and  he  de-
voted himself  to  the  cause  of  loyalty  until  1804,
when  he  was  made  attorney-general  of  the  United
States.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in
1847,  and  in  1849  was  Emancipation  candidate  for
the  State  constitutional  convention,  but  was  de-
feated by  James  Guthrie,  Pro-slavery.  He  was  a
Unionist  state  senator  in  1861-'3,  mustering  officer
of  U.  S.  volunteers  in  1861  for  the  first  call  for
75.000  men,  and  U.  S.  attorney-general  from  1864
till  1866,  when  he  resigned  from  opposition  to
Andrew  Johnson's  administration.  He  was  also  a
delegate  to  the  Republican  conventions  of  1872
and  1876.  His  last  appearance  in  public  was  in
delivering  an  address  on  Lincoln  before  the  Loyal
league  of  Cincinnati,  4  May,  1887.  In  1875  he
returned  to  his  law  professorship. — His  brother,
Joshua  Fry,  merchant,  b.  in  Jefferson  county,
Ky.,  14  Nov.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  29  May,
1882,  was  educated  at  the  local  schools  and  at  St.
Joseph's  college,  Bardstown.  After  leaving  col-
lege lie  spent  some  time  as  a  clerk  in  a  wholesale
mercantile  house  in  Louisville.  He  next  went  to
Springfield,  HI.,  where  he  kept  a  country  store  for
seven  years,  and  formed  a  close  and  lasting  friend-
ship with  Abraham  Lincoln,  then  a  young  man.
He  took  a  warm  interest  in  public  affairs,  and  for
a  time  assisted  in  editing  a  newspaper,  and  had
intimate  association  with  men  of  widely  different
politics  and  opinions.  He  returned  to  Kentucky
m  1842  and  engaged  in  farming  in  Jefferson  county.
In  1848  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,  but  was
never  again  willing,  though  often  solicited,  to  hold
office.  In  1851  he  removed  to  Louisville,  gaining
a  handsome  fortune  in  the  real-estate  business.  In
1861  he  embraced  with  ardor  the  National  cause,
and  was  intrusted  with  many  delicate  and  impor-
tant missions  by  President  Lincoln,  whom  he  fre-
quently visited  in  Washington. — His  nephew,  John
(irilnier,  b.  in  1852,  was  educated  as  a  civil  engi-
neer, and  held  the  office  of  assistant  city  engineer
of  Louisville.  In  1876  he  became  connected  with
the  transportation  bureau  of  the  United  States  at
the  World's  fair  held  in  Philadelphia,  and  later  he
went  to  New  York  city,  where  he  joined  the  staff
of  the  "  World."  and  was  successively  its  managing
editor  and  publisher.  Mr.  Speed  was  commis-
sioner-general of  the  Louisville  American  exhibi-
tion, and  in  1885  became  its  secretary.  He  has
contributed  to  periodicals.

SPEER,  William,  missionary,  b.  in  New  Alex-
andria, Pa.,  24  April,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at
Kenyon  college,  Ohio,  in  1840,  studied  medicine
under  his  father,  a  surgeon  of  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and
divinity  at  the  Presbyterian  theological  seminary,
Alleghany  City.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1846,
and  in  the  same  year  was  sent  with  two  colleagues
by  the  Presbyterian  board  of  foreign  missions  to  es-
tablish their  first  mission  in  Canton,  China.  He  de-
voted himself  specially  to  hospital  work  and  tract
distribution.  In  1850,  having  lost  his  wife  and
child,  and  with  failing  health,  he  returned  home.
In  1^2  he  was  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  Chinese  in
California,  as  the  first  preacher  in  their  own  tongue.
He  soon  established  a  Chinese  school,  opened  a
dispensary,  lectured  on  the  Chinese  in  various
towns,  and  largely  from  the  funds  thus  obtained
built  a  brick  mission-house. He  organized  the  first


Chinese  Christian  church  in  the  New  World.  He
founded,  and  maintained  for  two  years,  "  The  Ori-
ental," a  religious  and  secular  paper  in  Chinese  and
English  devoted  to  the  interests  of  the  emigrants.
He  greatly  influenced  religious  bodies  and  thinking
j  people  toward  throwing  open  to  the  Chinese  the
benefits  of  Christian  civilization.  His  efforts  led  to
the  rei)eal  of  the  legislative  act  of  1854-'5,  designed
to  exclude  the  Chinese  from  the  mines.  After  de-
voting five  years  to  this  mission  he  was  again
obliged  to  go  in  quest  of  health.  In  1865  he  was
called  to  Philadelphia,  to  be  corresponding  secre-
tary of  the  Presbyterian  board  of  education,  which
he  aided  in  reorganizing,  a  measure  that  resulted
from  the  reunion  of  the  two  branches  of  the  church,
which  took  place  in  1869.  In  connection  with  his
duties  on  the  board  of  education  he  prepared  a
series  of  publications,  some  of  which  are  of  per-
manent value.  Relinquishing  his  educational  la-
bors in  1876,  Dr.  Speer  travelled  in  Japan  and
China,  and  has  since  served  the  cause  of  missions
on  both  continents.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
conferred  upon  him  in  1866.  His  works  include
"China  and  the  United  States"  (Hartford,  Conn.,
1870);  "The  Great  Revival  of  1800"  (Philadel-
phia, 1872);  "God's  Rule  for  Christian  Giving"
(1875);  and  sermons,  pamphlets,  and  reviews.

SPEIGHT,  Jesse,  senator,  b.  in  Greene  county,
N.  C,  22  Sept.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Columbus,  Miss..  1  May,
1847.  He  received  a  public-school  education,  was
a  member  of  the  lower  house  of  the  legislature  in
1822,  and  in  1823-7  of  the  senate,  presiding  over
both  bodies.  In  1829-'37  he  sat  in  congress,  hav-
ing been  chosen  as  a  Democrat,  also  serving  in
1835  as  a  member  of  the  convention  to  revise  the
constitution  of  North  Carolina.  Having  moved
to  Plymouth,  Lowndes  co.,  Miss.,  he  represented
that  county  in  the  legislature  in  1839,  serving  as
speaker,  and  in  the  senate  in  1844,  of  which  he  was
made  president.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  elected
U.  S.  senator,  serving  until  his  ^eath.

SPEIR,  Samuel  Fleet,  surgeon,  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  9  April,  1838.  He  was  educated  at  the
Brooklyn  polytechnic  institute  and  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New
York,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1860,  with  three
prizes.  He  also  received  the  prize  essay  gold
medal  from  the  American  medical  association  in
1864.  After  spending  two  yeai-s  in  study  abroad,
chiefly  in  Paris,  he  settled  in  his  native  city,  where
he  still  (1888)  practises  his  profession.  Dr.  Speir
has  been  connected  with  various  hospitals  and  dis-
pensaries, and  during  the  civil  war  served  under
the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission.  He  has  conQrib-
uted  to  professional  literature  and  is  the  inventor
of  a  new  method  of  arresting  surgical  haemorrhage
by  artery-constriction,  for  which  he  received  a
prize  from  the  State  medical  society  in  1871,  and
of  a  new  method  for  the  differential  diagnosis  of
morbid  growths,  based  on  the  examination  of
minute  specimens.

SPELMAN,  Henry,  colonist,  b.  in  England
about  1600:  d.  in  Virginia  in  1622.  He  was  a  son
of  Sir  Henry  Spelman,  the  antiquary,  and  came  to
Virginia  in  1609.  About  1614  he  was  one  of  a
party  under  Capt.  Ratcliff,  a  councillor  for  James-
town, who  had  gone  in  some  small  vessels  in  search
of  food  for  the  colony.  Deceived  by  the  treachery
of  Powhatan,  Ratcliff  and  his  party  were  slain,
two  only  escaping.  Henry,  who  was  saved  by  Po-
cahontas, lived  several  years  among  the  Inc^ians,
when  he  was  rescued  from  Jopassus,  the  brother  of
Powhatan,  by  another  party  tnat  had  sailed  up  the
Potomac  for  corn.  Having  acquired  the  Indian
language  during  his  captivity,  he  was  of  great  use


SPENCE


SPENCER


627


to  his  countrymen  as  interpreter  till  he  was  killed
by  the  savages  in  1622.  He  left  in  manuscript  a
"  Relation  of  Virginia."  It  was  first  owne<l  by
Dawson  Turner,  and  l)ought  bv  Lilly,  the  book-
seller, in  whose  hands  it  renmirxMi  ten  years.  Henry
Stevens  then  lK)ught  it  for  Jamos  F.  fiutinewell,  «>'f
CharU'stown,  Mass.,  who  had  u  small  edition  print-
ed nriviitc'ly  (I<ondon,  1872).

hPENX'E,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Scotland  in
17<MJ;  d.  in  Dumfries,  V'a.,  18  May,  1829.  He  was
educated  in  the  University  of  VMinburgh,  but,
owing  to  impaired  health,  was  not  graduated.  In
1788  no  came  to  this  country,  settling  in  Dumfries,
Va.,  as  a  private  .tutor,  and,  having  regained  his
health,  entered  upon  the  practice  of  medicine  in
1791.  Ho  was  active  in  mtroducing  vaccination
into  the  United  Stales,  and  a<'<iuired  distinction  in
his  profession.  The  University  of  Pennsylvania
gave  him  the  degree  of  M.  I>.  in  182H.  His  corre-
spomlence  with  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush  in  1806  was
published  in  the  "  Me<lical  Museum  of  Philmlel-
phia."  Ho  also  contributed  to  the  "  Medical  Re-
pository "  and  the  "  American  Journal  of  the  Medi-
cal Sciences,"  and  left  several  manuscripts  on
mo(li(^al  subjects. '

SPKNCE,  John  Selby,  senator,  b.  near  Snow
Hill.  Worcester  co.,  Md.,  29  F^eb.,  1788;  d.  near
Berlin,  Worcester  co.,  Md.,  24  Oct.,  1840.  His  an-
cestors came  to  Snow  Hill  from  Scotland  about
1680.  He  was  educated  at  district  schw)ls  in  Wor-
ccjster  and  Somerset  counties,  received  his  medical
degree  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  about
1809,  and  practised  his  profession  in  Maryland  un-
til his  death.  After  serving  in  the  legislature  he
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  serving  i
from  1  Dec,  1823,  till  3  March,  1825.  and  again  1
from  5  Dec,  1831,  till  3  March.  18:i3.  He  waselect-
ed  U.  S.  senator  to  succeed  Robert  H.  GoldslK)r-
ough,  serving  from  11  Jan.,  18vJ7.  till  his  death,
which  occurred  at  the  country-seat  of  his  family
near  Berlin. — His  brother  Ara  served  in  the  legis-
lature, and  was  chief  justice  of  the  4th  judicial  cir-
cuit of  Maryland,  comprising  the  lower  counties;
and  anotluT  brother,  Irvlno,  was  the  author  of
"  F^arly  History  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1838). — His  nephew,  Thomas  Adam,  law-
yer, b.  in  Acconiac  county,  Va..  20  Feb.,  1810 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  10  iiov.,  1877,  was  graduated
at  Yule  in  1829,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  practised  in  Snow  Hill,  Md.  He  was
elected  a  representative  to  congress  as  a  Whig  and
served  from  4  Dec,  1843,  till  3  March,  1845.  In
1872-'7  he  was  assistant  attorney-general  for  the
U.  S.  post-oflice  department.

SPENCE,  Robert  Traill,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  about  1785;  d.  near  Baltimore,
Md.,  26  Sept.,  1827.  He  became  a  midshipman  in
the  U.  S.  navy  in  1800,  and  was  serving  under  De-
catur on  the  captured  Tripolitan  gun-lH)at,  "No.
8,"  when,  on  7  Aug.,  1804,  she  was  blown  up  by  a
hot  shot  that  was  sent  through  her  magazine.  Af-
ter the  explosion,  with  her  stern  blown  to  pieces
and  under  water,  Spence  kept  on  loading  the  long
26-pounder  gun  forward,  fired  it,  and,  with  his
crew  of  eleven  survivors,  gave  three  cheers,  and,
sitting  astride  his  piece  and  waving  his  cap,  went
down  into  the  water,  but  was  rescued.  His  father,
Kieth  Spence,  purser  of  the  U.  S.  frigate  "  Phila-
delphia when  she  grounded  and  was  captured,
as  a  prisoner  in  Tripoli  was  witness  of  his  son's
valor.  RoU-rt  was  made  a  lieutenant  in  1807  and
master-conunandant  in  1813.  He  was  highly  com-
mended by  Com.  Rogers  for  his  promptness  and
ingenuity  in  laying  obstructions  in  the  way  of  the
British  fleet  off  Baltimore,  80  Sept.,  1814.  and  was


made  a  po«t-o«pt«in  in  1815  at  the  ag*  of  twenty*
seTen.  In  1822,  on  the  "  Cyane,"  as  the  senior  Ameri>
can  naval  officer  in  the  West  Indies,  be  ianted  a
protest  against  Francisco  Morales,  who  had  threat-
ened death  to  Americans  in  the  S[)anish  Main — an
act  as  much  applauded  at  home  as  it  was  effectiTe
at  the  time  and  place  of  danger.  In  Africa  be
built  the  first  fort  at  Mesurndo,  in  LilM>ria.  lie  was
ordere<l  to  command  the  West  India  fleet  in  1888,
but  died  Ijefore  sailing.— Capt.  Six-nce's  sons,  Ca«-
ROLL  and  CiiARi.Ks  I^*wkll  Stkwabt,  were  after-
ward in  the  diplomatic  service  of  the  Uniteid
States,  the  former  being  minister  to  Turkey  under
President  Pierce,  and  the  other  secretanr  of  lega-
tion, and  afterward  envoy  to  Persia,  llis  sister
bec'ame  the  mother  of  James  Russell  I»well.

SPENCER,  Asa,  soldier,  b.  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,
in  .SeiiteinlxT.  1747;  d.  in  Fort  Covington.  N.  Y.,
in  1828.  The  first  ancestor  of  the  .S|Knfer  family,
William,  ciiine  from  England  to  Cambridge,  Mass.,
in  1631,  and  again  in  1633  with  his  brothers,
Thomas  and  Jared.  William  and  Thomas  were
among  the  first  settlers  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  the
former  Ymng  a  landed  proprietor,  a  select-man  of
the  town,  and  a  deputy  or  the  general  court  of
Connecticut  in  ltK{9.  tie  prepare*!  the  first  revisal
of  the  laws  of  that  colony,  and  died  in  Hartford  in
1640.  His  descendant  in  the  fifth  generation,  A.sa.
served  throughout  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  and
was  under  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne  at  the  storming
of  Stony  Point.  He  early  esfx>used  the  principles
of  DenuK-racy  under  Thomas  JefTerson. — His  son,
James  Bradley,  soldier,  b.  in  Salisbury,  Conn..
26  April,  1781;  d.  in  Fort  Covington,  N.  Y.,  26
Marcn,  1848,  was  an  early  settler  of  Franklin
county,  N.  Y.,  raised  a  compinv  for  the  war  of
1812.  and  serve<l  as  captain  in  the  29th  U.S.  in-
fantry at  Plattsburg.  Suljsequently  he  was  county
judce  and  surrogate,  and  held  other  local  offices
in  Fort  Covington,  served  in  the  legislature  in
18iJl-'2,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  from  4  Sept.,  1837,  till  3  March.  18:J9.
—Another  son,  Abner  Peck,  settletl  with  his  fa-
ther and  brother  at  Fort  Covington,  was  captain
in  the  29th  U.  S.  infantry  in  1812,  and,  remaining
in  the  army,  was  ai)|H>inte<I  militar}'  governor  of
Arkansas. — James  Bradley's  son,  James  Clark,
jurist,  b.  in  Fort  Covington,  Franklin  co.,  N.  Y.,
29  May,  1826,  studie<l  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1848.  and  practised  in  his  native  town  and  in
Ogdensburg  until  1865,  serving  as  U.  S.  district
attorney  for  four  years.  He  then  remove*}  to  New
York  and  entere<\  into  partnership  with  Charles
A.  Rapallo.  From  1869  till  1872  he  was  a  judge
of  the  suj>erior  court  of  New  York,  afterward  prac-
tising law  until  18823,  when  he  wils  ap{)ointed  an
aqueduct  com!ni.s«ioner. — William's  descendant  in
the  fifth  generation,  Ambrose,  jurist,  b.  in  Salis-
bury. Conn.,  13  Dec,  1765;  d.  in  Lyons.  N.  Y.,  13
March.  1848,  was  educated  at  Yale  and  Harvard,
where  he  was  graduated  in  ITHii.  He  studied  law
under  John  Canfield.  of  .Sharon,  Conn.,  and  settled
in  Hudson.  N.  Y.,  where  .he  was  appointed  city
clerk  in  1786.  He  was  elected  to  the  assembly  in
175>3  and  in  1795  to  the  state  senate,  serving  until
1798,  when  he  was  re-elected  for  four  years.  Ho
was  the  author  of  a  bill,  which  became  a  law,  to
alHilish  capital  punishment  in  all  cas«\<»  except
those  of  treason  and  murder.  sul>stitutii)g  impris-
onment and  hanl  lalx^r.  He  also  secured  the  erec-
tion of  a  state  prison  near  New  York  city.  In  1796
he  was  ap|><Mnted  assistant  attorney -general  of  Co-
lumbia and  Rensselaer  counties,  and  in  1802-'4  he
was  attorney-general  of  the  state.  In  1804  he  be-
came a  justice  of  the  supreme  court,  of  which  he


628


SPENCER


SPENCER


was  chief  justice  from  1819  till  1823.  In  1808  he
was  chosen  by  the  legislature,  with  Peter  J.  Munro,
to  prepare  and  report  such  reforms  in  the  chancery
system  of  the  state  as  they  should  deem  expedient.
Judge  Spencer  possessed  energy,  resolution,  and
high  legal  attainments,  and  was  a  master  of  equity
jurisprudence.  He  served  as  a  presidential  elector
m  1809.  He  was  the  warm  friend  of  De  Witt  Clin-
ton, but  separated  from  him  on  the  question  of  the
war  of  1813,  and  in  that  year  was  active  in  the
struggle  to  prevent  the  charter  of  the  .six-million
bank.  He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  of  1821.  After  he  resumed  the
practice  of  law  in  Albany  he  held  various  local
offices,  and  was  mayor  of  that  city  in  1824-'6.  He
was  then  elected  to  congress,  serving  from  7  Dec,

1829,  till  3  March,  1831,  and  during  his  term  unit-
ed with  William  Wirt  and  other  philanthropists  in
endeavoring  to  arrest  the  injustice  of  the  govern-
ment toward  the  Cherokees.  In  1839  he  removed
to  Lyons,  N.  Y.,  where  he  engaged  in  agriculture.
He  was  president  of  the  Whig  national  convention
in  Baltimore  in  1844.  The  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  IX  in  1819  and
Harvard  the  same  in  1821.  His  last  public  act  was
to  address  a  letter  to  his  fellow-citizens  in  opposi-
tion to  a  proposed  amendment  to  the  constitution
providing  for  an  elective  judiciary  with  brief  terms
of  office.  His  decisions  are  contained  in  the  "  New
York  Supreme  Court  Reports,  1799-1803,"  edited
by  William  Johnson  (3  vols..  New  York,  1808-'12),
and  "  New  York  Chancery  Reports  "  (1814-'23).  See
"Memorial  "  of  Ambrose  Spencer  (Albany,  1849).
— His  son,  John  Canfleld,  lawyer,  b.  in  Hudson,
N.  Y.,  8  Jan.,  1788;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  18  May,
1855,  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1806,  and
in  1807  became  private  secretary  to  (iov.  Daniel

D.  Tompkins.  He
was  admitted  to  the
bar  at  Canandaigua
in  1809,  became  mas-
ter in  chancery  in
1811,  judge-advocate-
general  in  the  army
on  the  northern  fron-
tier in  1813,  postmas-
ter of  Canandaigua  in

1814,  and  assistant
attorney  -  general  for
western  New  York  in

1815.  In  that  year
he  was  also  made  dis-
trict attorney.  He
was  then  elected  to
congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  from  1
Dec, 1817, till 3

March.  1819,  and  during  his  term  was  one  of  a
committee  to  examine  the  affairs  of  the  U.  S.
bank,  and  drew  up  its  report.  Fifteen  years  after-
ward, when  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson  was  using  this
report  against  the  bank,  Mr.  Spencer  was  found
among  its  friends.  In  1820-'l  lie  was  a  member
of  the  state  house  of  representatives,  serving  in
the  first  year  as  speaker,  and  in  1824-'8  he  was  a
member  of  the  state  senate,  being  a  leader  of  the
Clinton  faction.  In  1827  he  was  appointed  by
Gov.  De  Witt  Clinton  one  of  the  board  to  revise
the  statutes  of  New  York,  and  took  an  impor-
tant part  in  that  task.  Joining  the  anti-Masonic
party,  he  was  appointed  special  attorney-general  to
prosecute  those  that  were  connected  with  the  ab-
<luction  of  William  Morgan,  but  resigned  in  May,

1830,  having  involved  nimself  in  a  controversy
with  Gov.  Enos  T.  Throop. In  1832  he  was  again


3.eJ


YvS'-v^x><'V


elected  to  the  legislature,  and  in  1839-'40  he  was
secretary  of  state  and  superintendent  of  common
schools.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  secretary  of  war
on  12  Oct.,  1841,  and  on  3  March,  1843,  was  trans-
ferred to  the  treasury  department,  but,  opposing
the  annexation  of  Texas,  resigned  on  2  May,  184^
and  resumed  the  practice  of  law.  He  served  on
many  state  commissions  and  aided  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  State  asylum  for  idiots.  In  1840  he
was  made  a  regent  of  Union  college,  which  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1849.  He  published
an  edition  of  Henry  Reeve's  translation  of  De
Tocqueville's  "  Democracy  in  America,"  contribut-
ing a  preface  and  notes  (2  vols..  New  York,  1838),
and  also,  with  John  Duer  and  Benjamin  P.  Butler,
a  "  Revision  of  the  Statutes  of  New  York  "  (3  vols.,
Albany,  1840).  See  '•  Review  of  John  C.  Spencer's
Legal  and  Political  Career,"  by  Lucien  B.  Proctor
(New  York,  1886).— Another  son  of  Ambrose,  Will-
iam Ambrose,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New  York  in
1793 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  3  March,  1854,  was  ap-
pointed midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  15  Nov.,
1809,  became  lieutenant  on  9  Dec,  1814,  com-
mander on  3  March,  1813,  and  captain,  22  Jan.,
1841,  and  resigned  on  9  Dec,  1843.  He  was  act-
ing lieutenant  in  Com.  Thomas  Macdonough's  vic-
tory on  Lake  Champlain,  11  Sept.,  1814. — Another
son  of  Ambrose,  Theodore,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hud-
son, N.  Y.,  24  April,  1800;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  14
June,  1870.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  military  academy,
but  left  it  to  study  law,  and,  beginning  to  practise
in  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  became  district  attornev  for  Ca-
yuga county.  Afterward  he  studied  theologv,  was
pastor  of  the  2d  Congregational  church  in  llome,
and  preached  also  in  Utica.  Retiring  from  active
work,  owing  to  impaired  health,  he  was  made  sec-
retary of  the  American  home  missionary  society
for  central  and  northern  New  York.  He  was  the
author  of  "  Conversion,  its  Theory  and  Process
Practically  Delineated"  (New  York,  1854),  and
other  theological  works. — Thomas's  descendant  in
the  sixth  generation,  Ichabod  Smith,  clergyman,
b.  in  Rupert,  Vt.,  23  Feb.,  1798;  d.  in  BrookljTi,
N.  Y.,  23  Nov.,  1854,  was  graduated  at  Union  in
1822  and  was  principal  of  the  grammar-school  in
Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  until  1825,  and  of  an  academy
in  Canandaigua,  N.  Y.,  until  1828.  After  studying
theology  he  was  licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  Ge-
neva in  1826,  and  on  11  Sept.,  1828,  was  appointed
colleague  pastor,  with  the  Rev.  Solomon  Williams,
of  the  Congregational  church  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  remaining  until  1832.  He  then  became  pas-
tor of  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  of  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  which  charge  he  held  until  his  death.  From
1836  till  1840  he  was  professor  extraordinary  of
biblical  history  in  Union  theological  seminary.
New  York,  of  which  institution  he  was  a  founder.
In  1830  he  was  offered  the  presidency  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Alabama  and  in  1832  that  of  Hamilton.
The  latter  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1841.  His  best-known  publication  is  his  "  Pastor's
Sketches,"  which  passed  through  many  editions,
and  was  republished  in  England  and  France  (2
series.  New  York,  1850-'3). After  his  death  ap-

J eared  "  Sermons,"  with  a  memoir  by  the  Rev.
ames  M.  Sherwood  (2  vols.,  1855) ;  "  Sacramental
Discourses"  (1861);  and  "Evidences  of  Divine
Revelation"  (1865).  —  Jared's  descendant  in  the
fourth  generation,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  East  Had-
dam.  Conn.,  in  1714;  d.  there,  13  Jan.,  1789,  joined
the  northern  army  in  1758,  and  was  major  in  the
2d  Connecticut  regiment  under  Col.  Nathaniel
Whiting.  He  served  as  lieutenant-colonel  in  the
two  following  campaigns,  rose  to  the  rank  of  colonel,
and  was  one  of  the  eight  brigadier-generals  ap-


SPENCER


SPENCER


eao


pointed  by  coriCTess  At  thn  instanop  of  Gen.  Wash-
ington  on  23  Juno,  MIH.  Taking  ofTeiu-e  when
GtMi.  Israel  Putnam,  a  yuunf^cerodicer,  was  appoint-
ed over  him,  he  was  aln)ut  to  retire  from  the  army,
but,  diH-iiliiij;  to  remain,  served  near  Boston  until
its  evacuation,  and  then  mareheil  with  his  division
to  the  defence  of  New  York.  On  l*  Aufj.,  1770,  he
wa8  Ap|x)inted  majnr-eeneral,  and  op|H>sed  the
evacuation  of  New  \ork,  Oen.  Sin-ncer  was
oniered  in  177b  to  Uke  command  at  Kliode  Island,
which  was  surrounded  by  Ailmiral  Sir  Peter  Par-
ker. The  British  army  havini;  taken  possession  of
Newport,  Oen.  Spencer  assemoled  a  large  force  at
Proviilence,  but  the  enterprise  proved  a  failure,
and,  after  remuininj;  in  the  vicinity  for  several
weeks,  the  militia  was  dismissed.  Den.  Spencer
was  censured  for  the  failure  of  this  ext)edition,  but
a  court  of  inquiry  attributed  the  result  to  forces  be-
yond his  control.  He  resigned  on  14  June,  1778,
in  consequence  of  an  order  of  congress  to  inquire
into  the  reasons  for  his  failure,  and  afterwara  ap-
peannl  but  little  in  public  life.  —  His  brother.
Elihil,  clergyman,  b.  m  East  Haddain,  Ccmn.,  12
Feb.,  1721 ;  d".  in  Trenton.  N.  J.,  27  L)e<;.,  1784,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1746,  and,  with  a  view  to  be-
coming a  missionary  to  the  Indians  of  the  Six  Na-
tions, studied  their  dialect  and  nreparetl  him.self  j
for  this  oflice  under  the  Kev.  Jonn  Brainerd  and
Jonathan  Edwards,  accompanying  the  latter  to  the  ;
Indian  conference  in  AlVmny  in  1748.  He  was  or-  I
daiueil  on  14  Sept.,  1748,  and,  after  laboring  in  '
western  New  York,  was  apjKiinted  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  Elizalx'th,  N.  J.,  in  1750.
holding  this  charge  until  1756,  when  he  was  calle<l
to  the  Presbyterian  church  of  Jamaica,  L.  I.
About  1758  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.  James  De
Lancey  chaplain  of  the  New  Vork  troops  that
were  forming  for  service  in  the  French  war,  after
which  he  labored  in  the  contiguous  congregations
of  Shrewsbury,  Middletown  Point,  Shark  River,
and  Aml)ov,  N.  J.  In  1764  he  was  sent  by  the
.synod  of  New  York  and  PhiIa<U'lphia  with  the
liev.  Alexander  McWhorter  on  a  mission  to  organ-
ize the  irregular  congregations  of  North  Carolina,
which  district  they  again  visited  in  1775  at  the  re-
que.st  of  the  Provincial  congress  of  that  colony.  As
he  had  contributed  to  the  cause  of  independence,
the  Tories  were  embittered  toward  him,  and  on
one  occjision  burned  books  and  papers  of  his  that
had  fallen  into  their  possession,  hvnm  1769  until
his  death  he  was  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church
in  Trenton,  N.  J.  He  was  fre<juently  called
"Readymoney  Spencer,"  from  his  facility  in  ex-
tempore atldress.  From  1752  until  his  death  he
was  a  guanlian  of  Princeton  college.  The  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1782.  In  1759  he  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Rev.
Ezra  Stiles,  afterward  president  of  Yale,  on  "The
State  of  the  Dissenting  Interest  in  the  Middle
<'olonie3  of  America,"  which  was  published  and
attractwl  attention.

SPENCER,  Anbrer  (Jeorare,  colonial  Anglican
bishop,  b.  in  London,  England,  12  Feb.,  1785;  d.  in
Torquay,  Englaml,  24  Fel).,  1872.  He  was  the
oldest  s<}n  of  William  Robert,  who  was  well  known
in  England  as  a  wit  and  iK>et  of  society,  and  his
brother,  George  Trevor,  was  bishop  of  ^Madras  in
1837-'4y,  and  chancellor  of  St.  Paul's  cathedral,
London,  in  I860.  After  receiving  his  e<Uication
at  Oxford  he  held  several  curacies  m  England,
and  was  ajipointed  archdeacon  of  Bermuda  in  1812,
bishop  of^  Newfoundland  in  WV-K  and  bishop  of
Jamaica,  \V.  I.,  in  1843.  He  publishe<l  a  volume  of
"Sermons  on  Various  Subjects"  (Ijondon,  1827),
and  numerous  fugitive  poems.


SPENCER,  Cornelia  Fhllll|Hi.  author,  b.  in
Harlem,  N.  Y.,  20  .March.  1N25.  She  im  the  daugh-
ter of  the  Rev.  James  Philiipit  (q.  r.),  who  was  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  in  the  University  of  North
Carolina  at  C'haiM'l  Hill.  .She  was  educated  there,
and  married  .lames  .M.  .S|H'n<-<'r,  of  Alaliama,  who
•lied  in  IWl.  -Mrs.  .S|H'iicer  haj«  contributed  to  cur-
rent literature,  and  is  the  author  of  "The  Last
Ninety  Days  of  the  War  "  (New  York.  1867).  She  In
now  (IH8H)  writing  a  "  History  of  North  Carolina."

SPENCER.  FranciH  Eliam  jurit«t,  b.  in  Ticon-
deroga.  Essex  co..  N.  Y.,  25  S-pt.,  IKi4.  When  he
was  twelve  years  of  age  his  |>Arent.<«  remove«I  to
Plaintield.  III.  Hearing  exciting  Hccounts  of  the
wealth  that  was  to  l*e  m-quire<l  in  California,  he  re-
moved to  that  state  in  1K52  and  locate<l  at  San
Jose,  where  he  has  since  resided.  Soon  after  his
arrival  he  began  the  study  of  the  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1858,  and  s<<>n  secured  an  extensive
practice.  In  1861  he  wa-s  electnl  distri«-t  attorney
of  Santa  Clara  county,  which  oHlce  he  filled  until
.March,  1866.  Desiring  to  make  a  s|»e<ialty  of  land
practice,  he  stiidiisl  the  Stwnish  language  and  made
liimself  thonmghly  familiar  with  the  legislation  of
Spain  and  Mexico  reganling  real  proix-rty.  In  1871
he  was  elected  to  the  lower  branch  of  the  legisla-
ture as  a  Republican,  and  was  made  chairman  of  the
judiciar>'  committee.  In  that  capacity  he  was  of
great  assistance  to  his  colleagues  in  shaping  the
cotle  legislation  of  the  session.  At  its  close  he  re-
tired from  political  life.  In  1879  he  waselevatwl  to
the  l)ench  of  the  suj>erior  court  of  Santa  Clara
county,  where  he  still  (1888)  remains.  For  a  num-
ber oi  years  he  was  a  mend)er  of  the  l)oard  of  fund
commissioners  of  the  city  of  San  Jose,  and  was
mainly  instrumental  in  settling  it^i  title  to  the  large
Ixxiy  of  its  Puebla  lands,  lie  has  recently  been
appointed  a  tnistee  of  the  Lcland  Stanford,  Jr.,
university,  California.

SPENCER.  Frederick  R.,  artist,  b.  in  I^nnox,
.Madison  co..  N.  Y..  7  Jan..  180<J ;  d.  in  Wamjwville,
N.  Y..  3  April.  1875.  He  had  some  instruction  at
the  American  aca<lemy.  New  York,  ami  about  1830
settled  in  that  city.  In  is:}7  he  was  elected  an  as-
sociate of  the  National  academy,  and  in  1846  he
became  an  academician.  His  |M>rt raits  were  gen-
erally succ-essful.  and  he  ha«l  many  well-known
sitters,  among  them  Rolx>rt  E.  I^uinitz,  Thomas
Thompson,  and  Za<l(H'k  Pratt.  The  National  acad-
emy owns  his  j>ortrait  of  Etlwin  White.

SPENCER,  (ieorge  Eliphaz,  senator,  b.  in
Jefferson  county.  N.  \  ..  1  Nov.,  18;i6.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Montreal,  t'ana»la,  aiul  after  studying  law
was  mlmitted  to  the  Iowa  bar  in  1856.  Two  years
later  he  was  secretary  of  the  Iowa  senate,  and  in
October.  1862.  he  enteretl  the  National  army  as
assistant  adjutant-general,  with  the  rank  of  cap-
tain. In  the  autumn  of  186:3  he  recruitwl  the  1st
Alaliama  cavalrv,  of  which  he  l)ecame  colonel,  and
during  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman's  march  to  the  sea
he  commanded  a  brigade  of  cavalnt*  under  Gen.
Judson  Kilpatrick  in  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.
He  received  the  brevet  of  briga<lier-general  of  rol-
unteers  on  13  .Marih,  1865,  and  resigned  from  the
army  on  4  July  of  that  year.  In  May.  1867.  he  was
apiMMiiteil  register  in  Itaiikniptcy  for  the  4th  dis-
trict of  Alaltama,  and  he  was  als«j  chosen  U.  S.
senator  from  that  state  as  a  Republican,  sening
with  re-election  fn»m  25  July,  1868,  till  3  March.
1879.  After  he  had  left  the  'senate  he  was  active
in  the  pros*>cution  that  Iwl  to  the  exixtsure  of  the
star-route  frauds,  and  in  furthering  the  legislation
that  rwluctnl  letter  postage  to  two  cents.  In  1881
he  was  ap|Hniiteil  commissioner  of  the  Union  Pacific
railroad,  and  he  has  since  engaged  in  ranching  an«I


630


SPENCER


SPENCER


mining  business  in  Nevatia. — His  first  wife,  Bella
Zilfa,  b.  in  liondon,  England,  1  March.  1840;  d.  in
Tus<ml()<)SH,  Ala.,  1  Aug.,  18<57,  came  to  this  country
in  infancy,  and  married  Gen.  Spencer  in  18G2.  She
published  "Ora,  the  Lost  Wife"  (Philadelphia,
18G4) ;  "  Tried  and  True,  a  Story  of  the  Rebellion  "
(Springfield,  1806);  and  "Surface  and  Depth"
(18(J7). — His  second  wife,  William  Lorlu^,  b.  in
St.  Augustine,  Fla.,  is  a  niece  of  Gen.  William  W.
Loring,  and  daughter  of  Albert  A.  Nufiez.  She  is
called  "  Major,"  perhaps  because  of  her  masculine
name.  She  married  Gen.  Spencer  in  1877.  She
has  published  "  Salt-Lake  Fruit "  (Boston,  1883) ;
"  Story  of  Mary  "  (New  York,  1884 ;  republished  a-s
"Dennis  Day,  Carpet- Bagger,"  1887);  "A  Plucky
One  "  (1887) ;  and  "  Calamity  Jane  "  (1887).

SPENCER,  Jesse  Ames,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hyde
Park.  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  17  June,  1816.  His
father  and  family  removed  in  1826  to  New  York,
where  he  entered  a  printing-office  in  1830,  and  in
two  and  a  half  years  mastered  the  compositor's  art.
For  several  years  he  was  assistant  to  his  father,
who  was  a  city  surveyor.  He  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1837,  and  at  the  Episcopal  general
theological  seminary  in  1840.  While  a  student  he
was  actively  engaged  in  Sunday-school  work  in
what  was  then  a  new  part  of  the  city.  He  was  or-
dained deacon,  28  June,  1840,  by  Bishop  Benjamin
T.  Onderdonk,  and  priest,  28  July,  1841  by  the
same  bishop.  He  was  elected  rector  of  the  church
in  Goshen  in  1840.  After  two  years'  labor  in  his
parish  his  health  failed,  and  he  spent  a  winter  in
Nice,  on  the  Mediterranean.  On  returning  he  was
occupied  in  educational  and  various  literary  pur-
suits. A  return  of  illness  led  to  his  going  abroad
again,  and  in  1848-'9  he  travelled  in  Europe,  Egypt,
and  the  Holy  Land.  He  was  chosen  to  be  secre-
tary and  editor  of  the  General  Protestant  Episcopal
Sunday-school  union  and  Church  book  society  in
1851,  and  served  in  that  capacity  until  1857.  He
accepted  the  rectorship  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Flat-
bush,  N.  Y.,  in  1863,  which  post  he  held  for  two
years.  He  was  elected  professor  of  the  Greek  lan-
guage and  literature  in  the  College  of  the  city  of
New  York  in  1869,  and  discharged  the  duties  of  this
department  for  ten  years  of  active  service,  with  two
years  as  emeritus  professor.  In  1883  he  was  ap-
pointed custodian  of  the  Standard  Bible,  and  has  de-
voted his  time  to  authorship,  editing,  and  teaching.
He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbia
in  1852,  and  from  Trinity  in  1872.  Dr.  Spencer  has
published  "The  Christian  instructed  in  the  Ways
of  the  Gospel  and  the  Church"  (New  York,  1844);
"  History  of  the  Reformation  in  England"  (1846);
"  Tho  East :  Sketches  of  Travel  in  Egypt  and  the
Holy  Land  "  (1850) ;  "  History  of  the  United  States
from  the  Earliest  Period  to  tne  Death  of  President
Lincoln"  (4  vols.,  1856-'69);  "Greek  Praxis"
(1870) ;  "  The  Young  Ruler  who  had  Great  Posses-
sions, and  other  Discourses  "  (1871) ;  "  A  Course  of
English  Reading"  (1873);  "Sketch  of  the  History
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church  in  the  United
States  "  (1878) ;  and  "  Five  Last  Things,  Studies
in  Eschatology"  (1887).  He  edited  "The  New
Testament  in  Greek,  with  Critical  and  Exegetical
Notes  on  the  Gospels  and  Acts  of  the  Apostles"
(New  York.  1847);  "Cassar's  Commentaries,  with
Copious  Notes  and  Lexicon  "  (1848) ;  the  "  Arnold
Series  of  Greek  and  Latin  Books"  (1846-'56);
"  Richard  Chenevix  Trench's  Poems "  (1856) :
"Xenophon's  Anabasis,"  from  the  manuscripts  of
Alpheus  Crosby  (1875);  and  "  Origen's  Works,"
vol.  iv.  in  "  Ante-Nicene  Library  "  (BufiFalo,  1885).

SPENCER,  Joseph  William,  geologist,  b.  in
Dundas,  Canada,  36  Murch,  1850. He  was  gradu-


ated at  McGill  university,  Montreal,  in  1874,  with
first  honors  in  geology  and  mineralogy,  and  then
studied  at  the  University  of  GOttingen,  where,  in
1877,  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  On  his  re-
turn in  1877  he  became  science  master  in  the  Col-
legiate institute  of  Hamilton,  Ontario,  and  in  1880
professor  of  geology  and  allied  subjects  in  King's
college.  Nova  Scotia,  and  vice-president  of  tlie
same.  In  1882  he  was  elected  professor  of  geology
in  the  University  of  Missouri,  which  chair  he  now
(1888)  holds.  The  museum  building  of  this  uni-
versity, which  is  the  largest  west  of  Washington,
I).  C,  was  designed  by  him  and  erected  under  his
supervision,  and  he  also  obtained  the  large  zoologi-
cal collection  and  procured  the  private  cabinets
of  Prof.  Joseph  G.  Norwood  and  rrof.  George  C.
Swallow  for  the  geological  department.  Dr.  spen-
cer's work  has  been  mainly  in  questions  relating
to  surface  and  glacial  phenomena  both  in  America
and  Europe,  and  he  was  one  of  the  pioneers  in  this
country  in  the  department  of  lacustrine  geology.
Dr.  Spencer  is  a  fellow  of  the  Geological  society  of
London,  and  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science,  and  a  member  of  other
scientific  societies  in  the  United  States  and  Canada.
His  scientific  papers  exceed  thirty  in  number.

SPENCER,  Pitman  Curtius,  surgeon,  b.  in
Charlotte  county,  Va.,  in  1790;  d.  in  Petersburg,
Va.,  in  February,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1818,  and  settling  in  Nottoway  county,
Va.,  practised  there  for  fifteen  years,  after  which
he  went  to  Europe  to  pursue  his  studies.  On  his
return  he  settled  in  Petersburg  and  devoted  himself
to  surgery.  He  was  a  successful  lithotomist,  and
claimed  to  be  the  first  to  practise  this  branch  of
surgery  in  this  country.

SPENCER,  Piatt"  Rogrers,  originator  of  the
Spencerian  system  of  penmanship,  b.  in  East  Fish-
kill,  Dutchess  CO.,  N.  Y.,  7  Nov.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Gen-
eva, Ashtabula  co..  Ohio,  16  May,  1864.  His  father,
Caleb,  a  farmer  and  soldier  of  the  Revolution,  died
in  1806,  and  in  1810  the  family  removed  to  JefiFer-
son,  Ashtabula  co.,  Ohio,  then  a  wilderness.  The
son  was  passionately  fond  of  writing.  Paper  being
difficult  to  get,  he  wrote  on  birch-bark,  sand,  ice,
snow,  the  fly-leaves  of  his  mother's  Bible,  and  by
permission  of  a  cobbler,  upon  the  leather  in  his
shop.  In  1815  he  taught  his  first  writing-class.
From  1816  till  1821  he  was  a  clerk  and  book-keep-
er, and  from  1821  till  1824  he  studied  law,  Latin,
English  literature,  and  penmanship,  taught  in  a
common  school,  and  wrote  up  merchants'  books.
In  1824  he  contemplated  entering  college  with  a
view  to  preparing  for  the  ministry,  but,  being  a  vic-
tim of  inherited  alcoholism  aggravated  by  the  preva-
lent drinking  customs,  he  fell  and  his  plans  were
changed.  He  then  taught  in  New  York  and  Ohio.
In  1832  he  became  a  total  abstainer,  and  wjis,  as  he
believed,  the  first  public  advocate  in  this  country
of  that  principle,  for  which  he  labored  during  the
remainder  of  his  life.  Soon  after  his  reformation
he  was  elected  to  public  office,  and  was  county
treasurer  twelve  years.  He  was  instrumental  in
collecting  the  early  history  of  Ashtabula  county,
and  was  deeply  interested  in  American  history.  ti.e
early  engaged  actively  in  the  anti-slavery  move-
ment and  was  an  advocate  of  universal  liberty.
Through  his  work  and  influence  as  a  teacher,  by
his  system  of  penmanship,  through  his  pupils,  and
by  his  public  addresses  and  encouragement,  he  waa
instrumental  in  founding  the  business  colleges  of
the  United  States  and  in  promoting  their  growth
and  development.  In  the  winter  of  1864  Mr.
Spencer  delivered  before  the  business  college  in


SPENCER


SPIELMEIUIBN


681


BnMiklyn,  N.  Y.,  his  laitt  Iwturo,  hihI  gnw  Im.h  ln>i
course  of  IcjiMms  ill  the  Imsiiu-Hs  college  in  Nrw
Y<»ik  city,  llis  first  pulilicatiotiH  on  |ieiimi>ii-liiii
were  issued  in  184iJ  under  the  name  of  *•  ^
and  Rico's  SysU'in  of  I}u!>ines8  and  La4li<  i
mansliip,"  later  publisl)e<l  under  the  title  of  "S|*en-
eerian  or  Semi-Angular  Penmanship."  His  other
pultlicAtions  «>n  |M>ninanship  ap|M'ar(><l  from  lM<Vi
till  1S(W.  The  "New  S{K.>ni-eruui  C'<»mpt'ndium,"
Issued  in  parts,  was  completed  in  1880.

STKNC  KR,  Sara  Andrews,  reformer,  b.  in
Savi.na,  SteuUui  co.,  N.  Y.,  21  Oct,,  18117.  Her
maiden  name  was  Andrews.  After  graduation  at
the  normal  school  of  St.  Ix>uis,  Mo.,  in  1850,  she
taught  until  she  married  Henry  C.  S|>once'r,  a  Hon
of  Piatt  R.S[)encer,  in  1804  and  remove<l  to  Wash-
ington, U.  C.  On  14  April,  1871,  .Mrs.  SjK-nccr  and
seventy-two  other  women  of  Washington  attempted
to  register  and  vote,  but  were  refusetl.  She  then
brought  suit  in  the  supreme  court  of  the  District,
and  Judge  David  K.  Cartter's  decision  that "  women
are  citizens  but  have  not  the  right  to  vote  without
local  legislation  "  was  reanirme<l  by  the  U.  S.  su-
premo court  in  1874.  In  1871-'2  Mrs.  Spencer  de-
feated the  pending  bill  to  license  the  "  social  evil "
in  Washington.  In  1873  she  secure<l  a  bill  fn)m
the  District  of  Columbia  legislature  for  the  reform
of  outcast  girls,  and  she  was  also  the  author  of  a
bill  in  congress  for  a  girls'  reform-school  (1870).  |
From  1874  till  1881  she  was  stK;retary  of  the  Na-  j
tional  woman  suffrage  association,  which  she  repre-  j
senteil  at  the  Republican  presidential  convention  i
in  Cincinnati  in  1870,  ana  dcliverc<i  an  address.
Slie  also  engrossed  and  signed  the  woman's  decla-
ration of  rights,  presented  at  the  Centennial  cele-
bration in  Philmlelphia.  In  1871-'0  she  wjis  presi-
dent of  the  District  of  Columbia  woman  franchise
association,  and  is  general  secretary  of  the  Charity
*orgjinixation  society  of  the  District  of  Columbia.
She  has  published  "  Problems  on  the  Woman  Ques-
tion" (Washington,  1871),  and  "Thirty  Lessons  in
the  Knglish  Language "  (1873).

SPENCER,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Great
Barrington,  Mass..  in  1793;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
30  May,  1857.  From  1835  till  1850  he  was  pro-
fessor of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in
Geneva  (now  Hobart)  college,  N.  Y.,  an»l  subse-
quently he  held  chairs  in  medical  colleges  in  Chicago
and  Philiulelphia.  Dr.  Spencer  served  as  surgeon
in  the  army  during  the  war  with  Mexico.  He  was
president  of  the  New  York  meilical  ass<x'iation,  and
was  the  author  of  "  Practical  Observations  on  Epi-
«leraic  Diarrhoea  known  as  Cholera"  (Utica,  1832);
"Introductory  Lecture  at  Metlical  Institute  of
Geneva  College  "(1842):  '•  I^ectureson  Vital  Chem-
istry, or  Animal  Heat"  (Geneva,  1844-'5):  and  a
pajier  on  "The  Atomic  Theory  of  Life  and  Vital
Heat"  (1853).  See  "Memoir  of  Dr.  Spencer,"  by
Sylvester  D.  Willard.  M.  D.  (All)any,  1858).

SPICER,  WUHam  Francis,  naval  offlc-er.  b.  in
New  York  citv,  7  Felt.,  1820;  d.  in  the  lioston
navv-vanl,  29  Nov.,  1878.  He  enteretl  the  navy  a.s
a  iiiitishipmaii,  21  June,  18:{9,  attended  the  naval
school  at  Philadelphia  in  184ii-'5,  and  U-caine  a
passed  midshipman,  2  July,  1845.  He  cruised  in
the  steamer  "  Vixen  "  during  the  latter  part  of  the
Mexican  war  in  1840- '8,  participating  in  the  cap-
ture of  Tus|>an,  and  was  promoted  to  master.  28
June,  1853.  and.  lieutenant.  25  Veh..  1854.  His  first
service  during  the  civil  war  was  in  the  steam  frigate
"Niagara"  in  1801.  He  was  ct)mmissioned  lieu-
tenant-c»>mmander.  10  July.  18<i2.  and  commander.
2  Jan.,  180:J,  servwl  in  the  North  Atlantic  blixkad-
ing  s(|uadn>n  in  command  of  the  steamer  "Cam-
bridge," and  t4>ok  jiart  in  the  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher


in  1863-*5.  He  waj*  comminkmed  oapUin.  22  April
1H70.  and  cxtmniaiided  tiia  OMiaitor  "Dictator"
III  is74.'5  during  the  threat«n«d  war  with  Stiain
<-ount  of  the  "  VirginiuM**  affair,  after  which
MiA  at  the  rendezvous  at  Boston  in  1875- '0.
He  was  made  commodora,  85  April.  1877,  and  waa
commandant  of  the  Beaton  nnvy-yard  until  bi«
death. He  was  well  known  '  and  musidan.

and  was  the  author  of  -  i'ulnr  ballad*.

among  which  arc  "  Alm-nl  i  ■  i.  n.i-  aiid  vou.  Mary,"
"The  Gale."  "Manhattan's  Dear  Isle.'' "  Ah,  who
can  tell  f  "  "The  Commodore's  Return."  "  I)oath  at
St»a."  "0>ming  Horao,"  "All  Ilandit.  up  Anchor,"
"  The  Old  Relief,"  "  OflT  Scilly's  Isle*."  "  Adeline."
".Maurice."  "The  Norfolk  GirK"  "The  I>at«  of
'39,"  and  "  The  Iia.st  Vovage."

SPIEKER,  Ueorge'FrrdprIrk,  th<-ologian,  b.
in  Klk  Ridge  Landing.  Howard  co..  .Md..  17  Nor..
1844.  He  was  gnuluHte<l  at  Uallimore  city  college
in  18<{3,  ami  studied  in  (Jettysburg  the^ilogical
seminary  and  in  the  Lutheran  S4'minar>'  in  Phila-
delphia, where  he  was  graduattMl  in  1807.  In  the
same  year  he  was  onlaine^l  to  the  ministry  by
the  ministerium  of  Pennsylvania.  He  re(.*eive«l
the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1887  from  Roanoke  c*»llege.
.Salem.  V^a.  In  1804  he  was  callwl  to  the  i>n)feiwor-
ship  of  German  in  the  Phila4lelt>hia  thiHilogical
seminary,  which  post  he  occupietl  till  IHOO.  Im-
metliately  after  his  gnwluation  there  he  was  called
to  the  professt>rship  of  German  in  the  Keystone
state  normal  school,  Kutztown,  where  he  remained
in  1807- '8.  On  his  removal  thither  he  Ix-came  {las-
tor  of  Lutheran  congregations  in  and  near  Kutz-
town, which  he  served  till  18851  Since  October.
1883,  he  has  been  the  ua.stor  of  St.  Michael's  Lu-
theran congregation,  .\llentown.  Pa.  He  has  been
profes-sor  of  Hebrew  in  .Muhlenlx-rg  college,  Allen-
town,  since  1887.  president  of  it.s  board  of  tnistees
since  1880.  and  examiner  in  d<K'trinal  theology  of
the  ministerium  of  Pennsylvania  since  1882.  lie
is  an  oc-casional  contributor  to  |>eriodicals.  an<l  was
assf>ciate  editor  of  the  "  Lutheran  Church  Review."
Philadelphia,  in  l883-"5.  He  ha.s  publishwl  "  Hut-
ter's  ComjKjnd  of  Lutheran  Thi-ology."  translated,
with  Dr.  Henry  K.  Jacobs  (Philadelphia,  1868).
and  "  Wildenhahn's  Martin  Luther,'  translated
from  the  (terinaii  (188;!).

SPIELBERGEN,  iieorg  ran  (speel-bare-Cen).
Dutch  navigator,  b. in Muyden in 1557;  u.  in
Amsterdam  in 1021. He liati acquire<i repuU-
tion  as  a  pilot,  and  commanded  in  1001  an  expe-
dition to  explore  the  coast  of  Afric*  and  the  In-
dies, and  in  1014  he  was  given  charge  of  a  fleet
of  seven  vessels,  with  orders  to  reacn  the  Indies
by  the  Strait  of  Magellan. Sailing  from  Texel,  8
Aug.,  1014,  he  ravaged  the  coast  of  Brazil,  and,  af-
ter several  engagements  with  the  Portuguese,  he
wintered  upon  the  Patagonian  coast. On  7  .March.
1015,  he  sighteil  the  ('a|)e  of  the  Virgin.",  but  was
driven  back  bv  winds  ami  currents,  and  enteral
the  Strait  of  >fagellan.  1  April,  and  the  Pacific  on
0  May,  after  the  loss  of  a  vessel. After  touching
at  Cliilm',  he  landed  on  the  island  of  .Santa  Maria,
i  where he  destroyed the S|»anish  establish  men  Ls.
:  He  attacked  Vali»araisti.  put  to  flight  a  Spanish
'  fleet  of  six  vessels  near  Callao  on  17  July,  and  en-
I  tere«l  that  jnirt  on  21  July,  but  went  to  the  island
of  San  Lorenzo  for  repairs. After  trying  to  bum
I  the  city  of  Paita  in  IW'emlier,  he  sailed  for  the
!  Asiatic  ct>a.st. He  visitwl the  liadrone  archii^el-
I  ago.  and.  after  l>eing  defeatwl  in  the  Philippine
'  islands  by  Admiral  Ronquillo,  he  arrivetl  in  Ba-
!  uvia,  where  he  seized  the  vessel  of  Schouten  and
I  Ijemain>  {q.  v.).  returning  safely  to  Texel  in  Au-
\  gust,  1018. The  jouraal  of  the  voyage  of  Spielber-


632


SPIES


SPINOLA


gen  by  Jabob  Cornel  issen  Maiz,  secretary  of  the
a<liniral,  was  published  under  the  title  "Specu-
lum orientalis,  occidentalisfjue  Indian  navigationis,
quarum  turn  Georgii  a  Spielbergcii,  altera  Jacobi
Lemaire,  auspiciis  directa  est,  annis  1G14  usque
1618"  (Leyden,  1619;  French  translation,  Am-
sterdam. 1621  ;  German  translation,  Frankfort,
1625).  It  is  reprinted  in  Samuel  Purchas's  "  Pil-
grims," and  epitomized  in  James  Burney's  ''Dis-
coveries in  the  South  Sea"  (London,  1803-'17).

SPIES,  August  Vincent  Theodore,  anarchist,
b.  in  Landeck,  Germany,  10  Doc,  1855 ;  d.  in  Chi-
cago, 111.,  11  Nov.,  1887.  In  1871  he  came  to  the
United  States  and  learned  the  upholsterers  tratle  in
Chicago.  In  1876  he  became  interested  in  the  labor
movement,  and  the  next  year  joined  the  Socialists.
He  became  in  1880  publisher  of  the  "  Arbeiter-
Zeitung."  and  in  1884  its  editor  and  business  mana-
ger. He  was  a  ready  writer  and  speaker,  of  good
moral  character,  and  had  great  influence  with
those  of  socialistic  tendencies.  He  first  became
well  known  by  his  connection  with  the  labor
troubles  in  Chicago  in  the  spring  of  1886.  His
paper  advocated  anarchy,  ana  his  speeches,  when
referring  to  the  government  and  the  customs  of
his  adopted  country,  were  bitter,  denunciatory,
and  defiant.  On  3  May  labor  strikes  and  mob
violence  had  closed  most  of  the  machine-shops  and
manufactories  in  Chicago.  A  crowd,  estimated  to
contain  12.000  men,  carrying  the  national  flag  re-
versed, assembled  to  wreak  vengeance  upon  those
that  continued  to  work.  An  attack  was  made
ujx)n  the  latter.  They  were  defended  by  the  po-
lice, who  shot  five  rioters,  arrested  eleven,  and  dis-
persed the  mob,  which  an  hour  before  was  ad-
dressed by  Spies  from  the  top  of  a  freight-car.
Spies  went  to  his  office,  indited  a  "  Revenge  Cir-
cular," which  was  printed  and  cii'culated,  sum-
moniilg  the  workmen  to  arms  to  destroy  the
police.  Another  one,  calling  a  meeting  for  the
next  day  at  Havmarket  square,  urged  workmen  to
come  armed  and  in  full  force.  In  the  evening  a
large  crowd  assembled,  and  were  addressed  by
Spies  and  others,  when  180  policemen  advanced
and  the  crowd  was  ordered  to  disperse,  whereupon  a
bomb  was  thrown  into  the  midst  of  the  police  and
exploded.  Sixty-two  policemen  were  wounded,
one  was  killed  on  the  spot,  some  others  died  of
their  wounds,  and  many  were  maimed  for  life.
Great  excitement  prevailed  in  the  city,  and  many
arrests  were  made  of  those  that  were  supposed  to
be  instigators  of  the  Haymarket  massacre.  All
were  discharged  but  seven — Spies ;  George  Engel,
a  native  of  Hesse,  Germany  (b.  15  April,  1836) ;
Oscar  Neebe,  a  tinner  (b.  2  July,  1850,  and  educated
in  Germany);  Adolph  Fischer,  a  printer,  and
native  of  Bremen,  Germany  (b.  in  1861) ;  Louis
Lingg,  a  carpenter  (b.  9  Sept.,  1864,  at  Carlsruhe,
Germany);  Michael  Schwab,  a  journalist  (b.  in
Bavaria,  9  Aug.,  1853) ;  and  Samuel  Fielden  (b.  in
Throckmorton,  England,  25  Feb.,  1847).  These
were  indicted  by  the  grand  jury,  and  arrain^ned  in
court  for  murder  on  21  June.  Albert  R.  Pareons,
a  native  of  Montgomery,  Ala.  (b.  24  June,  1848),
who  had  been  indicted  but  had  escaped  arrest,

fave  himself  up  to  be  tried  with  his  associates,
'he  trial  continued  till  20  Aug,  All  were  found
guilty  and  all  sentenced  to  death  except  Oscar
Neebe,  who  was  sent  to  the  state-prison.  They
remained  in  Cook  county  jail  till  November,  1887.
Louis  Lingg  committed  suicide  by  exploding  a
dynamite  bomb  in  his  mouth  on  the  9th.  The
death-sentence  of  Schwab  and  Fielden  was  com-
muted to  imprisonment  for  life  on  the  10th,  and
the  remaining  four  were  hanged  on  11  Nov.,  1887.


SPINNER,  Francis  EI  I a.s,  financier,  b.  in  Ger-
man Flats  (now  Mohawk).  N.  Y..  21  Jan.,  1802;  d.
in  Jacksonville,  F'la.,  31  Dec,  IMJK).  His  father.
John  Peter  (b.  in  Werbach,  Baden,  18  Jan.,  1768;
d.  in  German  Flats,  27  May,  1848),  wiv*  a  Catholic
priest,  then  embraced  Protestantism,  married,  emi-
grated to  the  United  States  in  1801,  and  wa.s  pas-
tor of  Reformed  churches  at  Herkimer  and  German
Flats  until  his  death,  preaching  at  first  in  German
alone,  and  afterward  alternately  in  German  and
English.  The  son  was  eduwited  carefully  by  his
father,  who  required  him  to  learn  a  tnvde,  and  ap-
prenticed him  at  first  to  a  confectioner  in  Albany,
and  afterward  to  a  saddler  in  Amsterdam,  N.  Y.
He  engaged  in  trade  at  Herkimer  in  1824,  and
became  deputy  sheriflE  of  the  county  in  1829.  He
was  active  in  the  militia  organization,  and  by  1834
had  reached  the  grade  of  major-general.  In  1835-7
he  was  sheriflf,  and  in  1838-'9  commissioner  for
building  the  state  lunatic  asylum  at  Utica.  When
he  was  removed  from  this  post,  on  political  grounds
alone,  he  became  e&shier  of  a  bank  at  Mohawk,  of
which  he  was  afterward  president  for  many  years.
He  held  various  local  offices,  was  auditor  and  dep-
uty naval  officer  in  the  naval  office  at  New  York
in  1845-'9,  and  in  1854  was  elected  to  congress
as  an  anti-slavery  Democrat.  He  served  on  the
committee  on  privileges  and  elections,  on  a  special
committee  to  investigate  the  assault  maae  by
Preston  Brooks  on  Charles  Sumner,  and  on  a  con-
ference committee  of  both  houses  on  the  army
appropriation  bill,  which  the  senate  had  rejected
on  account  of  a  clause  that  forbade  the  use  of  the
military  againt  Kansas  settlers.  Gen.  Spinner  was
an  active  Republican  from  the  formation  of  the
party.  He  was  twice  re-elected  to  congress,  serv-
ing altogether  from  3  Dec,  1855,  till  3  March,
1861.  During  his  la.st  term  he  was  the  chairman
of  the  committee  on  accounts.  When  the  Lin-
coln administration  was  organized.  Sec.  Salmon
P.  Chase  selected  him  for  the  post  of  treasurer,
which  he  filled,  under  successive  presidents,  from
16  March,  1861,  till  30  June,  1875.  When,  during
the  war,  many  of  the  clerks  joined  the  army,  Gen.
Spinner  suggested  to  Sec.  Chase  the  advisability
oi  employing  women  in  the  government  offices,  and
carried  into  effect  this  innovation,  though  not
without  much  opposition.  He  signed  the  different
series  of  paper  money  in  a  singular  handwriting,
which  he  cultivated  in  order  to  prevent  counter-
feiting. When  he  resigned  his  office  the  money  in
the  treasury  was  counted,  and  when  the  result
showed  a  very  small  discrepancy,  many  days  were
spent  in  recounting  and  examining  the  books  of
accounts,  until  finally  the  mistake  was  discovered.
On  retiring  from  office  he  went  to  the  south  for
the  benefit  of  his  health,  and  for  some  years  he
lived  in  camp  at  Pablo  Beach,  Florida.

SPINOLA,  Francis  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  Stony
Brook,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  19  March.  1821 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  12  April,  1891.  After  an  Eng-
lish education  he  began  business  in  New  York  city,
where  he  was  elected  alderman  and  supervisor.
He  subsequently  served  as  a  member  of  the  assem-
bly and  as  a  state  senator,  and  in  1860  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Democratic  National  convention  at
Charleston,  S.  C.  In  1862  he  raised  the  Empire
brigade  of  New  York  state  volunteers,  and  on  1  Oct.
he  was  commissioned  as  brigadier-general.  He
served  in  the  National  army  till  the  close  of  the
war,  resigning  on  8  June,  i865.  He  was  subse-
quently connected  with  banking  and  insurance
companies  in  New  York  city,  returned  to  the  state
senate,  and  in  1886  was  elected  to  congress  for  the
term  ending  3  March,  1889. He  was  i-e-elected.


SPIliK


8P0PF0RD


SPIRE,  or  SPEIEK,  Ueorf  Ton.  govomor
of  \'ftu*zuelH.  b.  ill  Spirf,  (icriimriy,  altout  14W6;
d.  in  Coru.  Vi>iu-zuola,  in  1540.  IIt>  filtered  u  »
boy  the  tunkiii^-huuM*  of  the  fainoui*  Wvisen,  of
Aujrslnirif.  ami  workt^l  his  way  up  as  their  oonfi-
dential  a);i*nt,  mvoiiipaiiyitijc  in  Iho  lattor  capft*
fity  tlio  tltt'l  thai  wa.s  aniuHl  by  tho  \Vi«l«*rs  in
1.5'ilH.  and  m-nt  undt-r  Ainbronius'  vmi  AHln/iji'r  to
t-onijiaT  Vent'ZiK'la.  Kt-t  limine  to  Kiin)|N<  after
AlfliiKfr's  death.  Spire  obtained  from  Charles  V.
the  aPiKiintinent  of  governor  of  Venezuela,  dewpite
the  claitnM  of  Nicholas  KtMlertnann,  who  had  Inhmi
AlHn^er's  lieutenant.  He  ariiUHl  a  new  ex|iedition
in  Spain  and  the  Canary  islHiKls.  and  on  62  Feb.,
1534,  laiuitHl  at  Coro.  Afjaiii.st  Welwr's  a<lviee.
Spire  hml  ap{M)inted  Federiiiunn  his  lieutenant.
In  the  following  year,  aecninonnietl  by  45()  rejfular
troojw  and  1,5(M)  friendly  Indians,  they  wt  out  on
a  journey  of  exploration  to  the  interior.  After
marc'liing  together  for  aljoiit  200  miles,  they  di-
vide«l  into  two  partit>8.  affreeinp  to  meet  afterwanl.
Spire  ex{K«rienfe«l  fjreat  hanlships  frt)ni  hostile  In-
dians, and  the  soldiers,  uiuuH-ustomed  to  march
under  a  Imrniiij;  sun,  mutinied  »ever«l  times.
When  at  last  they  rea<;he<l  the  ap[M>inte<l  place  of
meetine  without  flndin;;  any  trace  of  FtHlermann.
the  soldiers  were  discoumge<l,  but  Spire  animatetl
them  with  the  hope  of  discoverin>j  the  riches  of  the
**  Kl  Dorado,"  of  which  the  survivors  of  Alflncer's
exjHMlition  had  brought  the  first  re|X)rts.  They
continue<l  the  march  to  the  south,  but,  when  the
rainy  season  set  in,  the  overflow  of  the  rivers  im-
pe<Ied  pro;;rt>ss.  and  the  consMjuent  fevers  deci-
mated their  ranks.  Soire  iK'rsevered  for  a  long
time  in  his  search  for  the  Kl  Dorado,  until  at  last
his  progress  wiuj  arrested  by  a  migtity  river,  prob-
ably the  OriniK-o,  or  its  confluent,  the  Apure,  and
,early  in  bW9  he  returned  to  Coro  with  only  eighty
ragged  and  sickly  men  out  of  the  host  heliaa  leil
forth  more  than  four  years  before.  He  set  out
immediatelv  for  Kurope  to  lav  his  complaint
against  Fedorinann  l)efore  the  W'elsers,  but  heard
in  Santo  Domingo  of  the  fi>rmer's  return  to  S[>ain,
and  was  j>ersuaded  by  the  audiencia  to  return  to  his
government,  where  he  died  soon  afterwanl.  Spire's
narrative  to  Charles  V.,  which  he  sent  from  Santo
Domingo,  is  said  to  have  been  published,  but  no
copy  of  it  is  known  to  exist.  It  is  ho{>e<l  that  the
manuscript  may  Im?  among  the  pajKTs  in  the  ar-
chives at  Simancas,  of  which  the  Spanish  goveni-
inent  has  re<'<>ntlv  undertaken  the  publication.

8PITZKA.  Edward  Charles,  physician,  b.  in
New  York  city,  10  Nov.,  1852.  He  was  e<liicat<Hl
at  the  College  of  the  citv  of  New  York,  and
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  New  York  in  1873,  after  which  he
studie<l  at  the  metlical  schools  in  Ijcipsic  and
Vienna,  serving  in  the  latter  as  assistant  in  the
lal)oratory  of  embrj'ology  and  hist<dogy.  On  his
return  he  settled  in  practice  in  New  York,  making
a  8f>ecialtv  of  the  tn^atment  of  internal  diseases,

Earticularly  of  the  nervous  system.  In  1880-'3
e  was  professor  of  medical  jurisprudence  and  the
anatomy  and  physiology-  of  the  nervous  system  in
the  New  York  p«^st-gra<luate  nuHlieal  school.  He
has  b(M>n  consulting  physician  of  the  Northeastern
dis{)ensary  since  \HH4.  t)r.  Spitzka  has  made  origi-
nal inve-stiifations  in  the  anatomy  of  the  nervous
system,  and  has  dis<-overe<l  the  intemptic  loltes  of
saurians,  the  absence  of  pyramid  tracts  in  the  ce-
tacea,  and  numerous  fact-s  in  the  anatomy  of  the
human  brain.  He  has  been  fre(|uently  consulted
as  a  medical  expert  in  cases  where  insanity  or  in-
iury  to  the  brain  or  spinal  conl  was  a  sufnect  of
litigatiim. Conspicuous  among  these  was  his  atti-


tude in  the  trial  of  Pn^niilent  (iarfleld'n
whore  Uith  prosecution  and  defence  ondeavorod  to
rotain  his  iterviceM.  but,  failing,  secured  his  attcod*
ance  through  an  attachment.  Ho  th«o  tcstiflcd
to  the  prisoner's  inaaoity,  and  waa  the  onljr  ei-
pert  that  did  so.  Dr.  I>pitzka  is  a  member  of
various  MK'ieticti,  has  been  he<-n-tarT  of  the  Sodatjr
of  me<lical  jurisprudence  and  imtiii-ine  xinoe  iSSi,
and  was  vice-president  of  the  sec-tion  in  ueurolocjr
at  the  Ninth  inteniational  inedioal  oongre«  In
1H87.  In  1877  his  essav  on  the  somatic  •tiolon'^
of  insanity  gained  the  VJ".  and  .S.  Tnke  prize,  which
is  given  iii  international  com|N>tition  by  the  Hrit-
ish  medico-physinlogical  asMs-iat ion,  and  in  1H78.
by  his  iiaf»er  on  the  m-timi  of  strychnine,  he  won
the  William  A.  Hammond  prize,  which  is  awartlevl
t»y  the  Ameriiiui  neurological  asj^K-iatiiin.  He  is
the  author  of  numerous  contributions  to  mnlical
journals,  and  was  one  of  the  eciit^irs  of  the  "Amer-
ican Journal  of  Neurology"  in  I881-'4.  The  sec-
tions on  diseas«>s  of  i\h'  spinal  corti  an<l  on  inflam-
mation, ana>inia,  and  hyiMTieniia  of  the  brain  in
William  IVjt|)er'«  "System  of  .Me«liciiie"  (  Phila-
delphia. 1SH7)  weri'  written  by  him,  and  he  has
published  "Treatise  (»n  Insaiiitv  "(New  York,  1H83).

SFOPFOKI).  Harriet  Pretwott.  auth<»r.  b.  in
Calais,  .Me.,  3  April,  IKW.  .She  is  the  daughter  of
Joseph  N.  Prescott  and  elder  sister  of  Mary  N.  Pres-
cott.  She  was  taken  in  youth  by  her  |«rents  to
Newburvjiort,  Ma.«s.,  which  has  ever  since  been  her
home,  though  she
has  s|)cnt  maiiv  of
her  winters  in  tu>s-
ton  and  Washing-
ton. She  attend-
ed the  Putnam
free  sch<x)l  in  her
adopted  city,  and
later  the  Pinkerton
academy  at  Der-
rv,  N.  H.,  where
she  was  graduated
at  seventei'n  years
of  age.  At  New-
buryport  herjirize
essay  on  Hamlet
drew  the  attention
of  Thomas  Went-
worth  Higginson,
who  soon  ije<'ame
her  friend,an<l  gave
her  counsel  and  encouragement.  Her  father  was
attacked  with  slow  (taralvsis  alMiut  1850,  which  ren-
dennl  him  incapable  oi  exertion  during  the  re-
mainder of  his  life.  This  misfortune  pr»'ye<l  ii|x>n
the  mind  of  her  mother,  and  rendere«l  her  a  c-on-
firmed  invalid.  As  Harriet  was  the  eld»»st  child,
she  felt  the  netnl  of  making  her  talents  availalile,
and  l)egan  courag«Hiusly  to  work,  contributing  to
the  story-pajK>rs  of  Ik),ston.eaniing  small  |my  with
a  great  deal  of  lalK>r.  She  once  wrote  flfleeii  hours
a  day,  and  continue*!  her  toil  for  years.  These  earlv
stories  have  never  l»een  iu*knowle«lge<l  or  <M)llecte<L
In  the  "Atlanti*-  Monthly."  in  lK'i».  ap(»eari>d  a
sparkling  story  of  Parisian  life.  U>aring  the  title
"In  a  Cellar.""  James  Kussell  I^)Well.  then  wlitor
of  the  magazine,  mlmire*!  it.  but  refrainwl  fr<«n
publishing  it.  under  the  U'lief  that  it  must  be
a  translation  from  the  French,  until  he  was  as-
sured that  it  was  written  by  Harriet  Prescott,
The  8tor>-  matle  her  reputation,  anil  she  l*ecame
from  that  «lay  a  welcome  contributor,  both  of
prose  and  noetr)-,  to  the  chief  t»«>ritHlicals  of  the
countr>'.  Her  fiction  has  very  little  in  common
with  what  is ri'garded as representative  of  the


^L^i^vJ^  ^fi^^^y^^^


634


SPOFFORD


SPOON ER


New  England  mind.  It  is  ideal,  intense  in  feel-
ing, and  luxuriant  in  expression.  In  her  descrip-
tions and  fancies  she  revels  in  sensuous  delights
and  every  variety  of  splendor.  In  1865  she  mar-
ried Richard  S.  Spofford.  a  lawyer  of  Boston,  cousin
of  Henry  M.  Spoflford,  mentioned  below.  Their
home  is  now  on  Deer  island,  in  Merrimack  river,
in  the  suburbs  of  Newburyport.  Mrs.  Spoflford's
books  are  "Sir  Rohan's  Ghost"  (Boston,  1859);
"The  Amber  Gods,  and  other  Stories"  (Boston,
1863);  "Azarian"  (1864);  "New  England  Le-
gends" (1871);  "The  Thief  in  the  Night"  (1872);
"Art  Decoration  applied  to  Furniture"  (New
York,  1881) ;  "  Marquis  of  Carabas "  (Boston,
1882);  "Poems"  (1882);  "Hester  Stanley  at  St.
Mark's"  (1883);  "The  Servant-Girl  Question"
(1884) ;  and  "  Ballads  about  Authoi-s  "  (1888).

SPOFFORD,  Henry  Martyii,  jurist,  b.  in
Gilmanton.  N.  11.,  8  Sept.,  1821;  d.  in  Red  Sul-
phur Si)rings,  W.  Va.,  20  Aug.,  1880.  He  was
graduated  at  Amherst,  at  the  head  of  his  class,  in
1840,  was  tutor  there  in  1842-'4,  and  after  remov-
ing to  Louisiana,  where  he  taught  and  at  the  same
time  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  that
state  at  Monroe  in  1846,  and  practised  in  Shreve-
port.  He  rose  rapidly  in  his  profession,  was
elected  a  district  juage  in  1852,  and  from  1854  till
his  resignation  in  1858  sat  on  the  supreme  bench
of  the  state.  He  then  practised  in  New  Orleans,
where,  after  the  civil  war.  he  was  in  i)artnershin
with  John  A.  Campbell.  After  1870  he  spent  much
of  his  time  in  Pulaski,  Tenn.,  engaged  in  adminis-
tering the  estate  of  his  father-in-law.  In  1877  he
was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Louisiana  by  the
"Nicholls"  legislature,  but  the  senate  admitted
Wiliiain  P.  Kellogg,  who  had  been  chosen  by  the
rival,  or  "  Packard  "  legislature.  Judge  Spofford
was  seeking  to  recover  health  at  Red  Sulphur
Springs  at  the  time  of  his  death.  Amherst  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1877.  His  judicial
decisions  are  contained  in  vols,  ix.-xiii.  of  the
Louisiana  reports.  He  was  co-author  of  "  The
Louisiana  Magistrate  and  Parish  Official  Guide  "
(1847).— His  brother,  Ains»'ortll  Rand,  librarian,
b.  in  Gilmanton,  N.  11.,  12  Sept.,  1825.  received  a
classical  education  by  private  tuition,  but  when  he
was  alx)ut  to  enter  college  his  health  failed,  and  he
emigrated  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  where  he  established
himself  as  a  bookseller  and  publisher.  In  1859  he
Ix'caine  associate  editor  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Daily
t'ommercial,"  and  in  1861  he  was  appointed  first
assistant  librarian  in  the  library  of  congress  at
Washington.  Three  years  later  he  was  made  libra-
rian-in-chief. During  his  administration  the  Na-
tional library  has  grown  from  70,000  to  about  600,-
(X)0  volumes.  The  change  in  the  law  of  copyright
that  was  effected  in  1870  has  made  the  position  of
the  librarian  an  onerous  and  important  one,  as  all
American  copyrights  are  issued  from  his  office,  and
all  copyright  publications  are  required  to  be  de-
posited in  the  Congressional  library.  As  a  libra-
rian, Mr.  Spofford  is  widely  known  for  his  compre-
hensive knowledge  of  books  and  their  contents.  He
is  a  member  of  many  historical  and  philosophical
societies,  and  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
Amherst  in  1884.  He  has  written  largely  for  the
periodical  press  on  historical,  economic,  and  literary
topics,  and  has  published,  besides  catalogues  of  the
library  of  congress,  "  The  American  Almanac  and
Treasury  of  Facts,  Statistical,  Financial,  and  Po-
litical "  (annually  since  1878);  and  has  edited  with
others  a  "  Library  of  Choice  Literature  "  (10  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1881-8) ;  " Library  of  Wit  and  Hu-
mor "  (5  vols.,  1884) ;  and  "  A  Practical  Manual  of
Parliamentary-  Rules  "  (1884).


SPOONER,  Alden  Jeremiah,  historian,  b.  in
Sag  Harbor,  Long  Island.  N.  Y.,  2  P'eb.,  1810;  d.
in  Hempstead,  Long  Island.  2  Aug.,  1881.  His  fa-
ther, Alden.  was  the  founder  of  the  "  Long  Island
('ity  Star,"  which  the  son  and  his  brother  carried
on  for  many  years  afterward.  He  studied  law  and
practised  in  Brooklyn,  but  devoted  himself  largely
to  local  history,  and  wrote  many  articles  on  that
subject  for  periodicals.  He  was  the  originator  in
1863  of  the  Long  Island  historical  society,  and
gave  more  than  1,000  books  and  pamphlets  as  a
nucleus  for  its  library.  Mr.  Spooner  edited,  with
notes  and  memoirs  of  the  authors,  Gabriel  Furman's
"  Notes,  Geographical  and  Historical,  relating  to
the  Town  of  Brooklyn  "  (Brooklyn,  1865),  and  Silas
Wood's  "Sketch  of  the  First  Settlement  of  the
Several  Towns  on  Long  Island"  (1865).

SPOONER,  Benjamin  F.,  soldier,  b.  in  Mans-
field, Ohio,  27  Oct.,  1828;  d.  in  Lawrenceburg,
Ind.,  3  April,  1881.  At  the  beginning  of  the
Mexican  war  he  enlisted  in  the  3d  Indiana  regi-
ment, and  was  chosen  2d  lieutenant.  After  serving
in  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor's  campaign  he  returned
home,  studied  law,  and  practisea  in  Lawrenceburg,
holding  the  office  of  prosecuting  attorney  of  Dear-
born county  for  several  years.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
7th  Indiana  regiment,  with  which  he  fought  at
Philippi  and  Laurel  Hill,  and  he  afterward  held
the  .same  commission  in  the  51st  Indiana,  with
which  he  was  present  at  Shiloh  and  the  siege  of
Corinth.  He  then  resigned  and  returned  home,
but  was  soon  made  colonel  of  the  83d  Indiana,  and
took  part  in  the  engagements  around  Vicksburg,
the  battle  of  Mission  Ridge,  and  the  Atlanta  cam-
paign, receiving  a  wound  at  Kenesaw  mountain
that  necessitated  the  amputation  of  his  left  arm.
He  then  served  on  a  military  commission  till  his
resignation  in  April,  1865,  and  on  13  March  of
that  year  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  and
major-general  of  volunteers.  He  was  U.  S.  mar-
shal of  the  district  of  Indiana  till  1879,  when  fail-
ing health  compelled  him  to  resign.

SPOONER,  John  Coit,  senator,  b.  in  Law-
renceburg, Ind.,  6  Jan.,  1843.  His  father,  Judge
Philip  L.  Spooner,  was  an  authority  on  the  law  of
real  estate.  The  family  removed  to  Madison,  Wis.,
in  June,  1859,  and  the  son  was  graduated  at  the  st«te
university  in  1864,  when  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in
the  40th  Wisconsin  infantry.  He  subsequently  re-
turned and  served  as  assistant  state  librarian,  but
entered  the  army  again  as  captain  in  the  50th
Wisconsin  regiment.  After  he  was  mustered  out
in  July,  1866,  with  the  brevet  of  major,  he  studied
law  with  his  father,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1867,  became  Gov.  Lucius  Fairchild's  private  sec-
retary, and  was  then  assistant  in  the  attorney-gen-
eral's office  till  1870,  when  he  removed  to  Hudson,
Wis.,  and  began  the  general  practice  of  his  profes-
sion. He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  legislature
in  1872,  and  was  active  in  his  support  of  the  state
university,  on  whose  board  of  regents  he  served  in
1882-'5.  In  1885  he  took  his  seat  in  the  United
States  senate,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Republican
for  the  term  that  will  end  in  March,  1891.

SPOONER,  Lvsander,  lawyer,  b.  in  Athol,
Mass.,  19  Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  14  May,
1887.  He  studied  law  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  but  on
completing  his  course  of  reading  found  that  admis-
sion to  the  bar  was  permitted  only  to  those  who
had  studied  for  three  years,  except  in  the  case
of  college  graduates.  This  obnoxious  condition  at
once  engaged  his  attention  and  he  succeeded  in
having  it  removed  from  the  statute-books.  In
1844  the  letter  postage  from  Boston  to  New  York


SPOONKR


8P0T8W00D


635


wax  twelve  an<l  a  half  ocnU  and  t<>  Waithington
twenty-five  cents.  Mr.  S|XH>nor,  believing  that
the  U.  S.  gnveninient  hud  no  ei>ni«tituti(tnal  right
to  a  mono|M)ly  of  the  ninil!*,  eMablishe*!  an  inde-
pendent service  from  lioston  U>  New  York,  carry-
ing letters  at  the  uniform  rate  of  five  cents.  His
business  prew  rapidly,  hut  the  )Ci>vernment  soon
ovt-rwhfl tiled  him  with  prosivutions,  S4i  that  he  waa
comiH'lle«l  to  n-tire  from  the  undertaking,  but  not
until  he  ha<l  shown  the  [M^ssibility  of  supfmrtiuf;
the  post-offlce  department  by  a  lower  rat*  of  post-
age. His  efforts  resulted  in  an  act  of  congress  that
reduced  the  rates,  followed  in  1851  and  subsequent
years  by  still  further  reductions.  Mr.  SjKKmer  was
an  active  Abolitionist,  and  contribute<l  largely  to
the  literature  of  thesuiiject,  notably  by  his"  Uncon-
stitutioimlity  of  Slavery  "(184.1).  the  tenets  of  which
were  supiwrted  by  (territ  Smith.  Klizur  Wright,
and  others  of  the  Lit»erty  party,  but  were  opjjoMHl
by  the  Garrisonians.  He  defencled  Thomas  I)rew,
who  in  1870  declined  to  take  his  oath  as  a  witness
bef<»re  a  legislative  committee  on  the  ground  that
in  the  matter  it  was  investigating  it  had  no  au-
thority to  compel  him  to  testify.  The  c^sc  was
adversely  decidtnl  on  the  ground  of  fjrecwlent.  but
the  principles  of  Mr.  Sjiooner's  argument  were  after-
ward sustained  by  the  U.  .S.  supreme  court.  His
writings  include  "  A  Deistic  Reply  to  the  Allege<l
Su()crnatural  Evidences  of  Christianity  "  and  "  The
Deistic  Immortality,  and  an  Essiiy  on  Man's  Ac-
countability for  his  Belief"  (1830);  " Credit,  Cur-
rency, and  Banking"  (1843):  "Poverty.  Causes
and  Cure"  (184G);  "A  Defence  for '  F'ugitive
Slaves"  (1856);  "A  New  Svstem  of  Paper  Cur-
rency" (1861);  "Our  Financiei-s"  (1877):  "The
Law  of  Prices  "  (1877) :  "  Gold  and  Silver  as  Stand-
ards of  Value"  (1878);  and  "Letter  to  Grover
Cleveland  on  his  Falst!  Inaugural  Address  "(1886).

SPOONER,  Khearjashub,  author,  b.  in  Bran-
don. Vt..  in  180J) ;  d.  in  Piainfield.  N.  J.,  in  March.
1859.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1830,
and  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons.
New  York  city,  in  1835,  and  became  a  dentist  in
New  York,  attaining  eminence  in  his  profession.
In  1858  he  retired  from  business.  Dr.  Sp<x)ner
was  the  author  of  "  Guide  to  Sound  Teeth  "  (New
York,  1836) ;  "Art  of  Manufacturing  Mineral  Teeth  "
(18^17) ;  a  "Treatise  on  Surgical  and  Mechanical
Dentistry  "  (1838);  "Anecdotes  of  Painters,  En-
gravers, Sculptors,  and  Architects,  and  Curiosi-
ties of  Art  "  (3  vols.,  1853) ;  and  "  Biographical
and  Critical  Dictionary  of  Painters,  Eiigmvers,
Sculptors,  and  Architects"  (185Ji;  new  ed.,  2  vols.,
1865).  He  purchased,  restored,  and  reissue<l  the
plates  of  Jonn  Boydell's  "  Shakesi)eare  Gallery,"
and  bought  those  of  the  "  Musee  Fran^aise,"  but,
as  the  government  refused  to  remit  the  heavy  ini-
piJrt  dutv,  thev  were  returned  to  France.

SPOTSWObD,  Alexander,  governor  of  Vir-
ginia, b.  in  Tangier,  Africa,  in  1670;  d.  in  An-
najH^lis,  Md..  7  June.  1740.  He  was  bred  to  arms
from  an  early  age,  serve<I  under  the  Duke  of  .Marl-
borough, was  dangerously  woundetl  at  Blenheim,
and  became  deputy  quartermaster-jfeneral.  He  was
then  ap|M)inteu  governor  of  Virginia  and  arrived
there  in  June,  1710,  bringing  with  him  as  a  i)eace
offering  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus,  which  hitnerto
had  Ix'eii  withheld  from  the  pi-oviiice.  The  satis-
faction with  which  this  was  re<-eive<l  by  the  jieople
and  the  evident  necessity  of  such  a  protection
turned  his  attention  to  the  condition  of  their  laws,
and  he  introduced  reforms  in  the  constitution,  in
the  general  administration  of  justice,  and  in  the
chanicter  of  the  revenue  laws  and  the  collecti«»n  of
taxes,  receiving  the  co-operation  of  the  assembly


froa

ItOOM


and  the  approval  of  the  people,  while  the  burgaa^
es  voted  £*i.O(N)  to  bml'l  to-  »  "  <u.\,u-..  •'  In  Um
•eoond  year  of  his  a<i  ^  of  bar-

geases  refuMNl  to  pro \  he

for  refielling  the  invHMon  o(  ihe  French
Canada,  ancl  he  tRercforc  requeittrd  the
government  for  as-
sistance. Virginia
also  refiiseil  to  con-
cur with  his  proito-
sals  for  the  uis-
charge  of  the  pub-
lic debt,  but,  not-
withstanding these
differences,  his  pop.
ularitv  was  undi-
ininislie<l  for  years.
He  exertwl  himself
in  behalf  of  Will-
iam  and  Marv  c<il-
lege,  assisted  in
raising  a  large  fund
for  its  support  and
in  restoring  the
building  that  had
lieen  burned  sever-
al years  l)efore  his
arrival,  established  a  school  for  the  ediicAtionof  In-
dian children,  insisted  on  rigid  e<-onoiny  in  the  offi-
ces under  his  contn)l,  and  su|>(>orte4l  every  measure
that  was  conducive  to  the  general  pr«)s|K-rity.  He
was  the  first  to  exf)|ore  the  An|Htlacnian  mountains.
His  expedition,  which  lasteii  from  17  Aug.  till  20
S»nt.,  1716,  consiste*!  of  a  company  of  his  friends,
well  mounte<l  and  armed,  and  also  rangers.  Indian
guides,  and  servants,  leading  horses  laden  with
provisions.  No  savage  dannl  attack  so  well-ap-
pointed a  patty.  an<l  there  was  no  luck  of  merry-
making, as  they  hunted  by  day  or  ciK)ked  the  siHiils
by  their  cam|»-fires  and  dranli  of  "white  and  red
wine,  uscpiebaugh,  brandy  shrub,  two  kinds  of
rum,  chamiwgiie.  canary,  cherry  [tuiich.  and  cider,"
which  were  among  their  stores.  The  most  ele-
vated summits  they  named  Mount  George,  for  the
king,  and  Mount  S|M>tsw(MHl  or  Mount  .Mcxander,
in  honor  of  the  governor.  He  als<»  ;«M)k  measures
to  mark  the  valley  of  Virginia  for  the  English
king,  and  John  Fontaine.  wht»  was  one  of  the  |>artj,
siiys  in  his  journal :  "  The  governor  hml  graving
irons,  but  could  not  grave  anything.  thestoiU'>  were
so  hard.  The  governor  burietl  a  Imltle  with  a
jmper  enclosed,  on  which  he  writ  that  he  tm>k  pos-
session of  the  place,  and  in  the  name  of  and  for
King  George  the  First  of  England."  They  re-
turned to  Williamsburg,  prece<le»l  by  tnim|»eters,
and,  to  i-ommeiiionkte  the  event.  Gov.  S|Mitswood
instituted  the  oiiler  of  Tramontane  to  encourage
future  exj»editions.  He  gave  to  each  of  his  coin-
iianions  a  small  golden  horseshoe,  to  1k'  w<»m  as  a
badge,  and  the  ineml>ers  of  the  exjietlition  were
known  afterward  as  the  "  Knights  of  the  p>lden
horseshoe."  As  early  as  1710  he  sought  to  extend
the  line  of  the  Virginia  settlements  to  interrupt
the  chain  of  communication  l)et wtn-n  Canada  and
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  fuvoreil  the  inc«>r|><(ralion
of  a  Virginia  Indian  i-oni|>any.  which,  from  the
emoluments  of  a  mono|)oly  «»f  the  Irafllc.  should
sustain  forts  in  the  we>tern  ciniiitry:  but  this  act
was  iv|t«»aliHl.  He  s«Huivd  a  tivaly  with  the  Six
Nations  in  1722.  who  liound  theiiiM'lves  t«»  alian-
don  the  region  east  of  the  Blue  Kiilge  and  luuith
of  the  Potomac,  pri'venteil  the  tributary  Indiana
from  joining  the  Tuscuroras  in  their  hmiys  in
Can>lina,  and  sought  to  n-new  an  NlliNiii-u  with
this  tritx>,  wliieh ho  succeeded in  dividing, ile


636


SPOTTS


SPRAGUE


was  the  anthor  of  an  act  to  improve  the  staple  of
tobacco  and  make  tobacco-notes  the  medium  of
ordinary  circulation.  Although  the  welfare  of
Virginia  was  his  constant  aim,  he  was  often  im-
perious and  contemptuous.  On  one  occasion  he
remarked  to  the  house  of  burgesses  that  the  people
had  matle  a  mistake  in  choosing  "  a  set  of  repre-
sentatives whom  heaven  has  not  generally  endowed
with  the  ordinary  qualifications  requisite  to  legis-
lators," and  in  placing  at  the  head  of  standing
committees  men  who  could  neither  "spell  English
nor  write  common  sense."  The  most  bitter  con-
flict in  which  he  was  involved  was  that  of  church
patronage.  Like  his  predecessors,  the  governor
claimed  that  the  presentation  to  church  livings
was  a  privilege  oi  his  office,  which  admitted  no
interference  of  the  vestries.  With  the  aid  of  this
controversy,  his  enemies  prevailed  against  him,  and
he  was  removed  from  his  post  in  1722.  He  lived
eighteen  years  longer  in  Virginia,  and  from  1730
till  1739  was  deputy  postmaster-general  of  the
colonies.  In  this  capacity  he  arranged  the  transfer
of  mails  with  much  energy,  bringing  Philadelphia
and  Williamsburg  within  eight  or  ten  days  of  each
other,  and  through  his  influence  Benjamin  Frank-
lin was  appointed  postmaster  of  Pennsylvania.
On  his  domain  of  40,000  acres  he  found  oeds  of
iron-ore,  and,  establishing  a  furnace,  thus  gave  to
Virginia  a  new  industry.  He  was  also  interested
in  promoting  vine-culture.  At  his  houses  on  the
Rapidan  and  at  Yorktown  he  maintained  the
courtly  state  of  the  time  and  of  his  rank.  In  1740
he  was  made  a  major-general  to  command  an  ex-
pedition to  the  West  Indies,  and  died  while  attend-
ing to  the  embarkation  at  Annapolis.  He  be-
queathed his  books,  maps,  and  mathematical  in-
struments to  William  and  Mary  college.  Gov.
Spotswood's  official  account  of  his  conflict  with
the  burgesses  is  printed  in  the  "  Virginia  Historical
Register,"  and  he  is  best  described  in  William
Bvrd's  "  Progress  to  the  Mines,"  included  in  "  The
Westover  Manuscripts,  containing  the  History  of
the  Dividing-Line  betwixt  Virginia  and  North  Caro-
lina." written  from  1728  to  1736  and  published  by
Edmund  and  Julian  C.  Ruffin  (Petersburg,  1841).
The  vignette  is  from  a  portrait  now  in  the  Virginia
state  library.  His  letters  were  used  by  George
Bancroft,  and  then  were  lost  sight  of  until  1873,
having  been  taken  to  England  by  George  W.
Featherstonehaugh.  They  were  bought  from  the
latter's  widow  by  the  Virginia  historical  society
in  1882,  and  published  as  "  The  Official  Letters  of
Alexander  Spotswood,  Lieutenant-Governor  of
Virginia  in  1710-1722,"  in  the  collections  of  the
Virginia  historical  society,  with  an  introduction
and  not«s  by  Robert  A.  Brock  (3  vols.,  Richmond,
1882-'5).  His  speeches  to  the  assembly  in  1714-'18
are  preserved  in  William  Maxwell  s  "  Virginia
Historical  Register  "  (vol.  iv.). — His  son,  Robert,
was  killed  by  the  Indians  in  1757. — His  grandson,
Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia ;  d.  in  Not-
tingham, Va.,  20  Dec,  1818,  served  in  the  Revo-
lutionary army,  and  was  appointed  major  of  the  2d
Virginia  regiment.  He  married  Eliza,  the  daugh-
ter of  Gen.  William  Augustine  Washington  and
the  niece  of  Gen.  George  Washington. — The  sec-
ond Alexander's  brother,  John,  served  also  in  the
army,  and  was  wounded  severely  at  Germantown.
SiPOTTS,  James  Hanna,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Fort  Johnson,  Wilmington  harbor,  N.  C,  11  March,
1822 ;  d.  at  Port  Stanley,  Falkland  islands,  9  March,
1882.  His  father  was  an  officer  in  the  U.  S.  army,
and  commanded  the  artillery  under  Gen.  Andrew
Jackson  at  the  battle  of  New  Orleans.  In  acknowl-
edgment of  his  bravery,  Gen.  Jackson  presented


Maj.  Spotts  with  a  sword.  The  son  entered  the
navy  as  a  midshipman,  2  Aug.,  1837,  and  made  a
cruise  around  the  world  in  the  sloop  "  John
Adams "  in  1837-40,  in  which  he  participated  in
two  battles  on  the  island  of  Sumatra  with  the  na-
tives, who  had  committed  piratical  acts  against
American  merchant  ships.  He  attended  the  naval
school  at  Philadelphia  in  1842-'3.  During  the
Mexican  war  he  served  in  the  "  Lexington  "  on  the
Pacific  coast  in  1846-'9,  participated  in  the  en-
gagements that  resulted  in  the  conquest  of  Cali-
fornia, on  the  blockade  of  the  Mexican  Pacific
ports,  and  at  the  capture  of  Guaymas,  San  Bias,
and  La  Paz.  He  was  promoted  to  master,  8  April,
1851,  and  to  lieutenant,  25  Nov.,  1851.  Though  a
native  of  the  south,  he  promptly  announced  his
devotion  to  the  Union,  taking  command  of  the
schooner  *'  Wanderer"  in  June,  1861,  and  acted  as
captain  of  the  port  of  Key  West.  In  July,  1862,
he  took  charge  of  the  steamer  "  Magnolia  "  on  the
Eastern  Gulf  blockade.  He  was  promoted  to  com-
mander, 5  Aug.,  1862,  and  had  the  steamer  "  South
Carolina"  on  the  South  Atlantic  blockade  in
1863-'4.  He  was  transferred  to  the  steamer  "  Paw-
tucket,"  in  which  he  participated  in  both  attacks
on  Fort  Fisher.  In  June,  1865,  he  was  detached
and  ordered  to  the  Mare  island  navy-yard,  where
he  served  until  October,  1867.  His  duties  had
taken  him  to  California  so  often  that  he  made  his
home  in  San  Fran-
cisco, and  was  one
of  the  first  naval
officers  to  identify
himself  with  the
interests  and  de-
velopment of  Cali-
fornia. He  was
promoted  to  cap-
tain, 6  Aug.,  1866,
commanded  the
steamers  "  Sara-
nac  "  and  "  Pensa-
cola"  in  the  Pa-
cific squadron  in
1870-'2,and  served
as  light-house  in-
spector on  the  Pa-
cific coast  in  1872-

'4,  being  commis- J^r^y^r^Z^^r^^!^?^
sioned com  mo- ^  /^

dore, 25 Sept.,

1873.  He  served  as  president  of  the  board  of  in-
spection on  the  Pacific  coast  until  1880.  He  was
promoted  to  rear-admiral,  28  May,  1881,  and  took
command  of  the  U.  S.  naval  force  on  the  South
Atlantic  station  in  July.  He  was  on  a  cruise  to
visit  the  ports  of  that  station  when  he  was  stricken
with  apoplexy  while  receiving  the  farewell  visit
of  the  British  colonial  governor  at  Port  Stanley.
After  his  death  the  autnorities  gave  a  lot  in  the
cemetery  for  his  burial,  and  every  honor  was  paid
to  the  American  admiral.

SPRAGUE,  Alfred  White,  author,  b.  in  Hono-
lulu, Sandwich  islands,  17  June,  1821.  His  father,
Daniel  Chamberlain,  was  the  first  missionary  to  the
Sandwich  islands  in  1819,  and  built  the  first  frame
house  there,  and  his  mother  was  the  first  white
woman  to  land  on  those  islands.  The  son  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  1847,  and  in  1849  changed
his  name  to  Sprague  by  an  act  of  the  legislature
of  Massachusetts.  In  1854-'5  he  was  professor  of
natural  philosophy  and  chemistry  in  Washington
university,  St.  Louis,  and  from  1859  till  1863  he
was  experimental  lecturer  on  these  subjects  in  pri-
vate schools  in  Boston. In  1863  he  applied  the


SPRAOUE


8PRAGUK


687


Cvvcw^ \)


VvwCkCy^AJL*


AUtomAtio  rofTiilatinn  i>f  hoAt  to  the  manufacture
of  nitn)Urt-<)xi«h'  jjus  ft)r  xur^ienl  |iur{K)tiPi(.  Mr.
Spraguo  JH  the  author  of  Itvlurw  eiititloil  "Chemi-
cal Ex  peri  men  t«"  (Hontoii,  18.M);  and  "  Elements
of  Nntural  IMiilosophv"  (IXM).

Sl'KAlil'K.  CharleH,  |MH<t,  l>.  in  Itostnn,  Mam..
2«  Utl.,  ITUl ;  a.  thtre.  22  Jan..  iHTo.  !lis  father,
Samuel,  a  native  of  llinffham,  Mas.s.,  wa.H  one  of

the  {tarty  that
threw  the  tea  in-
to I^mton  har-
t)or.  The  son  was
educated  .  at  the
Franklin  sch<K>|of
Ho!<toti,  and  at  the
Bjifof  ten  lost  the
us«'  of  his  left  eve
bv  an  accident.  In
1H04  he  entere<l
mercantile  life,
and  in  1H16  was
taken  into  part-
nership bv  his  em-  ]
plovers,  'in  IH20
he  U>cHme  teller
in  the  State  hank,  >
and  on  the  esUil>-  j
lishment  of  the
Glol}e  bank  in
1824  he  was  employed  as  cjishier,  servinj;  there
until  ISOa,  when  he  retired  from  busine^s.  Mr.  I
Sprajjue  first  attrac-ted  attention  as  a  poet  when
he  won  a  prize  for  the  l)est  prt)lo{jiie  at  the  open-
ing of  the  Park  theatre  in  New  York.  He  achieved
similar  success  at  the  of>ening  of  other  theatres  in
Philiulelphia,  Salem,  and  I'ortismouth.  In  l!:<23  he
obtaineil  the  prize  for  the  best  ode  to  lx>  recite<i  at
the  exhibition  in  the  Boston  theatre  of  a  nageant
in  h(mor  of  Shakespteare,  and  in  IbiiO  he  pro-
nounced an  ode  at  the  centennial  celebration  of  the
settlement  of  Boston.  In  lb29  he  delivered  before
the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  of  Harvard  a  jioem  on
"Curiosity,"  which  was  considered  his  best  pro-
duction. Among  his  shorter  poems  are  the  '*  Ode
to  Shakespeare  "  and  *'  Winged  Worshippers."  Etl-
win  P.  Whipple  says:  "His  prologues  are  the  Ijest
which  have  been  written  since  the  time  of  Poih".
His  ' Shakes[>eare  Ode'  has  hardly  been  exceedi'd
bv  anything  in  the  same  manner  since  Gray's
'Progress  of  Poesy.'  But  the  true  p<iwer  and
originality  of  the  man  are  manifested  in  his  do-
mestic pieces.  'The  Brothers,'  'I  see  Thw  Still.'  i
and  'Tne  Family  Meeting 'are  the  finest  const>cra-
tions  of  natural  afifection  in  our  literature."  There
have  been  several  collections  of  Mr.  Sprague's
writings  (New  York,  1841);  his  "  Prose  and  Poeti-
cal Writings,  revised  by  the  Author"  (Boston,
1850):  and  other  etiitions  (1855  and  1876).— His
son.  Charles  James,  poet,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  16
Jan.,  lH2'.i,  was  educattHl  in  private  schools,  and
became  cashier  of  the  GIoIk'  bank  in  18G4,  serving
until  1882.  For  many  years  he  was  curator  of
botany  in  the  Boston  society  of  natuml  history,
and  he  is  known  among  cryptogam ists  for  his  col-
lection of  lichens.  He  has  published  several  lists
of  New  England  fungi.  Mr.  Sprague  has  contrilt-
uted  |)oems  to  journals  and  magazines,  and  has
written  articles  for  scientific  |>a|>ers.  During  the
past  thirty  years  he  has  translatetl  numerous
|KK>ms  for  part-songs.

SFRACiUE,  Charles  Ezra,  author,  b.  in  Nas-
sau, l{ensselaer  cf).,  N.  Y.,  »  Oct..  1842.  He  was
graduated  at  Union  college  in  186(),  and  since  1878
has  been  secretjiry  of  the  Union  Dime  savings  in-
stitution of  New  York  city. During  the  civil  war


he  wrved  in  the  arni^,  waa  aeTeTBljr  wounde<l  at
(tettysburg,  anil  wan  given  the  breret  of  c-apuin  in
1805.  He  i(t  the  inventor  of  the  "Sprague  rheck-
t><M)k,"  halt  devised  numerous  aooount-buokit  and
forms,  and  also  a  saringa-bank  ayBteni  for  testing
the  accuracy  of  aooounts,  and  haa  written  many
articles  on  the  dubjcct,  on  which  he  liaa  also  le^
turtnl  at  Colutnbin  college.  Mr.  Sprague  is  the
first  prominent  iMlvocato  in  this  country  of  the  in-
ternational language  that  i'<  calletl  Volapltk.  Sinc«
1N87  he  hase4lite<l  the  "  Volas{MKlel."  issued  as  |Min
of  "The  Office,"  and  tie  is  the  author  of  "  Ix>gical
Svmbolism"  (printetl  privatelv.  New  Y«»rk.  1H82),
"The  Hand-B«K)k  of  VolapOlt  "  (1888).  and  "The
Story  of  the  Flag,"at><}em  reail  liefore  tlic  survi-
voi-s  of  the  44th  New  ^  ork  rogin»ent  ( Albanv,  1886).

SPRA<JrK.  John  Titcomb.  <^Mu-t.  b.  in  New-
buryjKjrt,  Mass..  :j  .July,  IHIO;  d.  in  New  York  citv.
({  Sefit.,  1878.  In  18H4  he  b(>came  2*1  lieutenant  in
the  marine  corps,  an<l  »erv«Hl  in  the  Flori<la  war,
Ufing  twice  pntmoted  for  meritorious  conduct,  and
brevetted  captain  on  15  March,  1842.  He  waa
given  that  full  rank  in  1846,  and  brevetltnl  nuijor
on  :iU  May,  1848.  He  was  mwle  major  of  the  1st
infantr\',  14  May,  1861,  and,  when  ^tationeil  with
his  regiment  in  Texas,  was  taken  prisoner  bv  (Jen.
David  E.  Twiggs,  but  was  release<l  on  i«rr>fe.  and
l)ec*ame  mustering  and  disbursing  officer  at  Albany,
N.  Y.,  and  adiutant-general  of  the  state,  with  the
rank  of  brig&uier-general,  holding  this  |K«t  until
1865.  He  was  aftftointed  lieutenant-<'olonel  of  the
lllh  infantry  in  March,  18(W,  and  colonel  of  the
7th  infantrv  on  12  .lune,  1W55,  ami  in  that  year
served  in  Florida  aiul  was  mwle  military  p>venior,
but  retire<l  from  the  army  on  15  July,  1870.  He
was  the  author  of  "  Origin.  Progress,  and  Con-
clusion of  the  Florida  War"  (New  York,  1848).

SPRAGUE,  John  Wilson,  soldier,  b.  in  White
Creek,  Washington  co.,  N.  Y..  4  April.  1817.  He
was  educated  in  common  schools,  and  entered
Rensselaer  |K)lytechnic  institute.  Troy.  N.  Y.,  in
IKiO,  but  was  not  graduatetl.  He  then  Ijecame  a
merchant,  and  in  1851-*2  was  tn'a-iun'r  of  Erie
county,  Ohio.  He  was  made  a  captain  in  the  7th
Ohio  volunte«'rs  at  the  iH'ginning  of  the  civil  war,
l)cc«me  colonel  of  the  6;J<1  Ohio  in  186:^.  and  was
up|)oint«d  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  30
Julv,  1864.  receiving  the  brevet  <»f  maior-general,
U.  .^.  volunteers,  on  13  March,  ISe.^.  He  also  de-
cline<l  a  lieutenant-colonelcy  in  the  U.  S.  arniv.
After  the  war  he  was  general  manager  of  the  U  i-
nona  and  St.  Peter  railn>a<l.  Minn.,  but  removed  to
Washington  territory  in 1870.  having  been  made

S general  agent  and  superintendent  of  the  Northern
'acific  railroad,  which  offices  he  resignetl  in  1883.
Since  then  he  has  engage<l  in  various  enterprises,
and  WHS  for  five  vears  pn>sident  of  the  National
bank  in  Tacoma.  \Vashington  territorv.

SPRAGl'E,  Peleg.  jurist,  b.  in  Duxburv,  .Mass.,
27  April.  1793:  d.  in  I^tston.  .Mass.,  13  Oct.,  1(W0.
After  graduation  at  Harvanl  in  18r2,  he  studied
in  the  Litchfield  law-sch(H)l.  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1815,  and  practise<l  in  Augusta  Me.,  and
afterward  in  Hallowell.  He  was  a  meml»er  t»f  the
.Maine  legislature  in  1820-'l,  eleotwl  to  congn>ss  as
a  Whig.  siTving  fmm  5  Deo..  18-25.  till  3  .March,
18*20.  and  then  chosen  U.  S.  seriator  fn>m  Maine.
serving  from  7  Dec..  18*29.  till  1  Jan.,  18:15,  when
he  resignetl  and  practised  law  in  Ikiston.  He  waa
a  presiilential  elector  on  the  Harrison  and  Trier
ticket  in  1840.  and  from  1841  till  1865  was  I.  S.
jiulp'  for  the  district  of  Massachus«>tts.  He  waa
the  last  sun-iving  mendter  of  the  U.  S.  senate  of
18;>0-'*2,  in  which  Daniel  Welwter.  Henry  Clay.
John  C.  Calhoun,  Thomas  H.  lienton.  and  Robert


638


SPRAGUE


SPRANGER


y.  Hayne  served.  As  a  judge  and  lawyer  he  was
much  esteemed,  and  he  was  regarded  as  a  fine  de-
bater. Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in
1847.  He  published  "Speeches  and  Addresses"
(Boston,  1858),  and  his  "  Decisions  in  Admiralty  '
and  Maritime  Cases  in  the  District  Court  of  the  |
United  States  for  the  District  of  Massachusetts,
1841-1861."  were  edited  by  Francis  E.  Parker
(Philadelphia.  1861).  In  this  work  "Two  Charges
to  the  (irand  Jurv,"  1851  and  1861,  are  included.

SPRAOUE,  William,  governor  of  Rhode  Isl-
and, b.  in  Cranston.  R.  I.,  3  Nov.,  1799 ;  d.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  19  Oct.,  1856.  He  received  a
good  education  at  an  early  age,  became  a  member
of  the  assembly,  and  in  1832  was  chosen  speaker
of  the  house.  He  was  then  elected  to  congress  as
a  Democrat,  served  from  7  Dec.  1835,  till  3  March,
1837,  and,  declining  a  re-election,  became  governor
of  Rhode  Island  in  1838-'9.  He  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate  in  place  of  Nathan  F.  Dixon,
serving  from  18  Feb.,  1842,  till  17  Jan.,  1844.  when
he  resigned,  and  was  subsequently  a  member  of
the  Rhode  Island  legislature.  In  1848  he  was  an
elector  on  the  Taylor  and  Fillmore  ticket.  He
was  largely  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  cotton,
and  was  president  of  the  Hartford,  Providence,  and
Fishkill  railroad,  and  of  two  banks.— His  nephew,
William,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,  b.  in  Cran-
ston, R.  I.,  12  Sept.,  1830,  received  his  education  in
common  schools,  served  in  his  father's  factory,  and
engaged  in  making  calico-prints.  Subsequently
he  became  a  manufacturer  of  linen,  woollen  goods,

and  iron,  a  builder
^^^^  of  locomotives,and

J^H^  ^  an  owner  of  rail-

pr '  ~^  roads  and  steam-

ships. In  18G0-'3
he  was  governor
of  Rhode  Island.
He  had  served  as
colonel  in  the  state
militia,  offered  a
regiment  and  a
battery  of  light-
horse  artillery  for
service  in  the  civil
war,  and  with  this
regiment  partici-
pated in  the  bat-
tle of  Bull  Run,
where  his  horse
was  shot  under
him.  He  received  a  commission  as  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  which  he  declined.  He  also
served  in  other  actions  during  the  peninsular
campaign,  including  Williamsburg  and  the  siege
of  Yorktown.  He  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate
as  a  Republican,  was  a  member  of  the  committee
on  manufactures,  and  chairman  of  that  on  public
lands,  his  term  extending  from  4  March,  1863,
till  3  March,  1875,  when  he  resumed  the  direction
of  his  manufacturing  establishments.  He  oper-
ated the  first  rotary  machine  for  making  horse-
shoes, perfected  a  mowing-machine,  and  also  various
processes  in  calico-printing,  especially  that  of  di-
rect printing  on  a  large  scale  with  the  extract  of
mad«ler  without  a  chemical  bath.  Gov.  Si)rague
claims  to  have  discovered  what  he  calls  the  "  prin-
ciple of  the  orbit  as  inherent  in  social  forces."  He
asserts  that  money  is  endowed  with  two  tendencies,
the  distributive  and  the  aggregative,  and  that  when
the  latter  predominates,  as  before  the  civil  war,
decatlence  results ;  but  that  when  the  former  is  in
the  ascendancy,  as  was  until  recently  the  case,  there
is  progress. He  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  from


CvtXU,


^^-t^O  ^i^JL


Brown  in  1861,  of  which  university  he  has  been  a
trustee  since  1866.

SPRAOUE,  William  Bnel,  clergyman,  b.  in
Andover,  Conn.,  16  Oct.,  1795;  d.  m  Flushing,
L.  I.,  7  May,  1876.  He  was  the  son  of  Benjamin
Sprague,  a  farmer.  After  graduation  at  -Yale  in
1815  he  was  a  private  tutor,  studied  two  years  at
Princeton  theological  seminary,  and  in  1819  was
ordained  pastor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church
in  West  Springfield,  Mass.,  as  a  colleague  of  Rev.
Joseph  Lathrop,  D.  D.,  remaining  there  until  1829,
when  he  was  installed  as  pastor  of  the  2d  Presby-
terian church  in  Albany,  N.  Y.  He  held  this
charge  till  1869,  when  he  resigned  and  removed  to
Flushing.  In  1828  and  1836  he  visited  Europe.
He  received  the  degrees  of  A.  M.  from  Yale  in
1819;  S.T.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1828,  and  Har-
vard in  1848;  and  LL.  D.  from  Princeton  in  1869.
Dr.  Sprague  made  extensive  collections  of  religious
pamphlets  and  autographs,  and  presented  the
former  to  the  state  library  at  Albany,  to  which  he
also  gave  a  manuscript  volume  of  the  "  Letters  of
Gen.  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst."  Dr.  Sprague  also  pre-
sented to"  the  library  of  Harvard  the  papers  of
Gen.  Thomas  Gage.  His  autographs,  numbering
nearly  100,(XX),  probably  the  largest  private  collec-
tion in  the  world,  are  now  in  the  possession  of  his
son.  He  was  the  author  of  more  than  100  pub-
lished sermons,  memoirs,  addres.ses,  and  essays,
and  wrote  many  introductions  to  books.  His
principal  work  is  "  Annals  of  the  American  Pul-
pit" (9  vols..  New  York,  1857-'69).  His  other
books  are  "  Letters  to  a  Daughter  "  (1822) ;  "  Let-
ters from  Europe"  (1828);  "Letters  to  Young
People"  (1830);  "Lectures  on  Revivals"  (1832);
"  Hints  designed  to  regulate  the  Intercourse  of
Christians  "  (1834) ;  "  Lectures  illustrating  the  Con-
trast between  True  Christianitv  and  various  other
Svstems "  (1837) ;  "  Life  of  Rev.  Edward  Dorr
(jrriffin  "  (1838) ;  "  Letters  to  Young  Men,  founded
on  the  Life  of  Joseph  "  (2d  ed.,  1845) ;  "  Aids  to
Early  Religion "  (1847) ;  "  Words  to  a  Young
Man^s  Conscience"  (1848);  "  Women  of  the  Bible ^
(1850);  "Visits  to  European  Celebrities "  (1855) ;
the  life  of  Timothy  Dwight  in  Sparks's  "  Ameri-
can Biography"  (1845);  and  "Memoirs "of  Rev.
John  and  William  A.  McDowell  "  (1864).

SPRANGER,  Daniel  (jueriii,  Hebrew  colonist,
b.  in  Holland  about  1610;  d.  in  Cayenne,  South
America,  in  1664.  He  accompanied  Maurice  de
Nassau  in  the  conquest  of  Brazil,  as  he  had  a  con-
tract for  furnishing  supplies  to  the  invading  army.
During  sixteen  years  he  lived  in  Brazil  occupied  m
colonization  schemes,  and  opened  an  extensive
trade  between  that  country  and  A  rasterdam.  When
the  Portuguese  army  recovered  jx)ssession  of  Brazil
in  1654  all  Hebrews  living  in  the  country  were
expelled,  and  Spranger  sought  refuge  in  the  island
of  Cayenne,  wnich  had  been  abandoned  by  its
former  possessors,  the  French  company  or  the
twelve  lords.  Although  he  was  oj)posed  at  first
by  the  Galibi  Indians,  he  gained  their  favor  with
presents  and  made  a  treaty  with  their  principal
chief,  who  granted  to  him  the  absolute  possession
of  the  island.  Being  joined  by  several  parties  of
Hebrews  from  Brazil,  he  .undertook  to  colonize  the
island,  and  succeeded.  This  is  the  more  remark-
able as  it  is  the  only  instance  in  which  a  Hebrew
colony  has  exclusively  devoted  itself  to  agriculture.
Spranger  introduced  the  culture  of  the  sugar-cane
and  indigo-plant,  which  so  prospered  that,  accord-
ing to  Jacques  Dutertre  in  his  "  Histoire  g^n^rale
des  Antilles,"  "  under  Spranger's  administration,
the  island  of  Cayenne  was  reputed  an  El  Doratlo."
The  population  of  the  island  at  that  time  was


SPKKAD


SPRING


688


about  flOO— nil  nol»n<W!«. In  IfWO  Iho  Dtifoh  com-  1
paiiv,  orpiniw«<l  in  AtnsU<nlitm  for  thooolnnizAtinn  I
of  (iiiiana,  M'lit  h  \mrty  of  2M}  Jewish  rniiKrnnt<«,
an<l  150  mon*  from  Ijojjiiorn  followcMl  in  tho  nrxt

{ear. The  colony  wax  tlestroyml  in  KMM  l»y  l^c
^im  do  In  Warn?,  who  retook  Cayenne,  iind  airnin
expeilwl  «ll  McbrewH,  Spmn|*rr  boinf;  killwl  while  ]
lie  wii<  lii'fi'iKlin;:  his  <li>iiiiiiion.

SFRKAU,  Heiirr  Fenton,  artist,  h.  in  Kin«al«-.
Ireland.  21  Oct.,  IHAA.  He  Wgan  tho  Ktiidr  of  art
at  the  Suith  Kensington  schools,  and  later  studied
water-color  [minting  with  William  Kivicre  and
Henry  Warren.  In  IWW  he  went  to  Brusfwds  and
Ux-ame  the  pupil  of  Kniest  Slinjjineyer.  1'he  fol-
lowing; year  he  went  to  Australia,  settling  in  Mel-
l»ourne,  and  painted  numerous  portraits.  In  1870
he  camo  to  the  United  States,  sfKMit  a  short  time
in  New  York,  and  then  nMiioviHl  to  Chicago,  where
he  now  (1888)  resides.  He  was  electe«l  an  aca<le-
mician  of  the  Chicago  acjidemy  of  design  in  1871.
and  became  its  professor  of  drawing  and  painting.
This  jxist  he  held  for  alx)Ut  twelve  years,  during
which  time  the  name  of  the  institution  was  twice
chungeil.  first  to  Academy  of  fine  arts,  and  then  to
Art  institiite.  He  left  the  institute  to  make  a  two
years'  tour  in  Italy,  and  on  his  return  founded
Spreml's  art  academy.  He  was  also  instrumental
in  organizing  the  Chicago  society  of  artists,  of
which  .he  is  the  president.  Among  his  works  are
"Chicatro  rising  from  her  .\shes."  and  "Sad  News."

SPRKCHKR.  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  near  Ha-
gerstown,  .Md.,  28  Dec,  1810.  He  was  educated  at
Pennsylvania  college  and  theological  seminary.
Gettysburg.  Pa.,  in  ia30-'6,  licensed  by  the  Lu-
theran synod,  and  was  pastor  of  churches  of  that
denomination  in  Harrisburg.  Pa.,  Martinsburg,
Va.,  and  Chambcrsburg,  Pa.,  from  \m(i  till  1849,
'after  which  he  was  president  of  Wittenburg  col-
lege. Springfield,  Ohio,  until  1874.  Since  that  year
he  has  lieen  profes.sor  of  systematic  thi'ology  there.
Washington  college.  Pa.,  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  I),  in  IS-W,  and  Pennsylvania  college  that  of
IAj.  D.  in  1874.  Dr.  Sprecher  is  the  author  of
"The  Providential  Position  of  the  Evangelical
Churches  of  this  Country  at  this  Time"  (Selins-
grove,  1864) :  "  Groundwork  of  a  System  of  Evan-
gelical Lutheran  Theology  "  (Philadelphia,  1879);
arid  various  addresses.

SPRlXli,  Edward  Adolnhns,  .sculptor,  b.  in
New  York  city,  20  Aug..  1837.  He  studied  with
Henry  K.  Brown.  John  Q.  A.  Wanl,  and  William
Rimmer,  and  spent  several  years  in  study  abroad.
In  184W  he  discovere*!  at  F^agleswood.  N.  J.,  a  fine
mcMlelling  clay,  jseculiarlv  suited  to  terra-cotta
work,  and  in  1877  he  established  at  Perth  Amboy
the  "  h^gleswood  Art  Pottery."  At  the  National
academy  he  exhibited  a  bust  of  Giuseppe  Mazzini
in  18~i,  and  several  terra-cotta  pieces  in  1878.  He
has  given  lectures  on  clay  modelling  in  various
cities  in  the  United  States.'and  since  1880  has  l)een
<lirector  of  the  Chautauqua  school  of  .sculpture.

SPRIN(i,  Robert,  forger,  b.  in  England  in
\HV4;  d.  in  Phila.Ielphia,  Pa.,  14  Dec.,  1870.  He
trained  notiiriety  by  his  fabrication  of  autograph
letters  of  Washington.  Franklin,  and  Ijord  Nelson.
Of  his  life  prior  to  the  time  when  he  came  to  the
Uniteil  States  nothing  is  known.  Settling  in  Phila-
delphia atniut  1858.  he  Itegan  to  deal  in  a  small  way
in  l)fM)ks  relating  to  America,  autographs,  and  prints.
fre(juentl V  obtaining  literary  rarities.  Finding  him-
self unable  to  supply  the  demand  for  genuine  auto-
graph letters  of  eminent  men  of  the  Revolution,
he  l)egan  to  make  and  s<'ll  counterfeits.  Being  an
ex|)ert  |M>nman.  he  s<K>n  ac<|uin'<l  great  facility  in
nnitating  the  handwriting  of  Washington.  Frank-


lin, and  others. Thew  (>ount<>rfeitii  were  written
on  paper  of  the  period,  with  ink  prrparwi  mi  a«  to
give  the  a|i{M>amnec  of  age  to  the  writing,  and
readily  doct>ive«l  tho!H>  who  were  not  ex  per  t«. He
wa*  fn'ijuently  arr«*!»te<l  by  the  civil  authorities  for
obtaining  money  under  fuM  prefrncr*.  but  always
esca[)e<l punishment  by  conf(M>ing  hi*  guilt  and
expn'ssing  contrition  f«)r  hi«  offence. Most  of  hit
counterfeit letters  of  Franklin  and  Neliion  were
sold  in  Canwia  and  England. To  itoll  bin  forgerie*
he  resorte*!  to  various  devices.  Anally  firetending
in his  letters  that he  waa  a  daughter  of  Gen.
Thomas  J.  Jackson,  who  waa  oompelle*!  by  p<ivertT
to  part  with  family  papers. By  these  means  he
sold  many  counterfeit  autographs  to  Confe«lerate
Iwnd-holilers  in  England. At  the  time  of  his  death
he  was  an  inmate  of  a  hospital  and in  poverty.
See  "The  American  Antiipiarian  "  for  May,  1888.
SPRINCf, Saninel,  «'lergyman,  b. in'  North-
briilge,  Mass..  10  .March,  174«':  d.  in  Newbury^wrt.
Mass.,  4  March,  1819. .\fter  graduation  at  Pnnce-
tfm  in  1771 he  studie<l  theology  there  and  under
Dr.  Joseph  Bellamy.  Saujuel  Ho|ikins,  and  Stephen
West  in  New  England.  an«l  was  licenswl  to  preach
in  1774. In  1775  he  joine<l  the  volunt«*er  corjis  of
1,100  men  under  Col.  Bene<lict  Arnold  as  cha{>-
lain,  marchetl  with  them  to  Canada,  participate<l
in  the  attack  on  QucImh-,  and  carrie<l  Aaron  Burr
from the field when he was  wounded. At  the
close  of  1776  he  left  the  army,  and  in  t'ebniary.
1777,  he preached  to  the  congregation in New-
buryport.  of  which  he  lx>came  pastor,  serving  from
177t  until  his  death. He  possesseil  great  influence
and  weight  of  chanwter.  was  a  leader  of  the  Hop-
kinsian party  (see Hopki.ns.  Samuel),  and  waa
active  in  promoting  the  union  of  the  two  parties
in  the  Congregational  churches  by  the  establish-
ment of  the  Andover  thiH>logical  seminary,  of  which
he  was  a  founder. Ho  was  also  an  originator  of
the American  lx)ard  of  commissioners  for  foreign
missions. Dartmouth  gave  him  the  degrw'  of  A.  ^f.
in  1789.  and  Williams  that  of  S.T.  D.  in  1806. He
publisheil  several  contr<jversial  works  and about
twenty-five  njiscellaneous  dis<-ourses,  including  one
on  the  death  of  Washington  and  one  on  the  duel
l)etween  Aaron  Burr  and  Alexander  Hamilton. —
His  son.  (iard I ner,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newburviwrt,
Ma.ss.,  24  Feb..  1785 ;  d.  in  New  York  city.  18  Aug..
187:1.  was  graduated  at  Yale  in 180.5,  taught  in
Bermuda  for  two  years,  and  on  his  return  studied
law  and  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in
1808. but aban-
doned his profes-
sion, studiwl  at  An-
dover theological
seminary, and on
10  Aug.'.  1810.  was
ordaine<l  pastor  of
the  Brick  Presbyte-
rian church  in  New
York  city,  where  he
continued  until  his
death,  although he
was o(Tere<l the
presidency  of  Ham-
ilton an<l Dart-
mouth colleges. In
18.56 he removwl
with  his  congrega-
tion to the new
church  on  Murray
hill. During  the  last  years  of  his  life  Dr.  Spring
seldom  prtwhed.  his  piilpit  l>eing  filial  by  an  a»-
si.stant. Hamilton  i:"^<'  him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.


C  At^iHh  ^jhrvt/h^


640


SPRINGER


SPROULL


in  1819,  and  Lafayette  that  of  D.  D.  in  1853.
In  addition  to  many  pamphlets  he  published  "  Es-
says on  the  Distinguishing  Traits  of  Christian
Character"  (New  York,  1813);  "Fragments  from
the  Study  of  a  Pastor"  (1838);  "Obligations  of
the  World  to  the  Bible"  (1841);  "The  Attraction
of  the  Cross"  (1845);  "The  Bible  not  of  Man"
(1847);  "Discourses  to  Seamen"  (1847):  "The
Power  of  the  Pulpit "  (1848) ;  "  The  Mercy-Seat  "
(1849);  "  First  Things"  (3  vols.,  1851);  "  The  Glory
of  Christ "  (3  vols..  1853) ;  "  Memoirs  of  the  Rev.
Samuel  J.  Mills  "  (1854) ;  "  Contrast  between  Good
and  Bad  Men  "  (3  vols.,  1855) ;  "  Pulpit  Ministra-
tions ;  or  Sabbath  Rejidings,  a  Series  of  Discourses  "
(8  vols.,  18fi4) ;  and  "  Pei-sonal  Reminiscences  of  the
Life  and  Times  of  Gardiner  Spring"  (3  vols.,  1866).
He  also  published  several  occasional  sermons,  the
last  of  wnich  are  contained  in  the  "  Brick  Church
Memorial "  (New  York,  1861).  Many  of  his  books
were  translated  into  French  and  other  languages,
and  republished  in  Great  Britain.  A  collective
edition  of  his  earlier  works  was  published  (9  vols.,
New  York.  1855).

SPRINGER,  Reuben  Runyan,  philanthropist,
b.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  16  Nov.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio.  10  Dec,  1884.  The  family,  originally
from  Sweden,  settled  in  Delaware  in  the  17th
century.  Reuben's  father,  Charles,  a  native  of
West  Virginia,  moved  to  Kentucky,  was  a  soldier
under  Gen.  Anthony  Wayne  in  the  Indian  war,
and  afterward  postmaster  at  Frankfort.  At  thir-
teen his  son  became  a  clerk  in  the  post-office,  and
in  three  years  succeeded  his  father  as  postmaster.
He  was  next  a  clerk  on  a  steamboat  that  ran  be-
tween Cincinnati  and  New  Orleans,  soon  acquired
an  interest  in  the  boat,  and  thus  laid  the  founda-
tion of  his  fortune.  Later  he  became  a  partner  in
a  large  and  prosperous  grocery  house  in  Cincinnati,
but  retired  in  1840  on  account  of  his  health,  and
never  resumed  active  business.  He  went  abroad
repeatedly,  buying  many  fine  works  of  art,  most  of
which  are  now  the  property  of  the  Cincinnati  art
museum.  He  gave  to  the  Music  hall,  the  Exposi-
tion building,  the  Odeon  theatre,  and  the  Art  mu-
seum in  that  city,  in  all  $430,000 ;  to  private  chari-
ties of  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  of  which  he
was  a  member,  more  than  $100,000,  and  at  least
$30,000  annually  in  the  way  of  benevolence,  besides
contributing  liberally  and  regularly  to  various
charities  and  public  enterprises.  He  left  about
$3,000,000  to  his  nearest  of  kin,  having  no  children ;
also  annuities  to  the  College  of  music,  the  Music
hall  and  the  Art  museum,  and  nearly  $400,000  to
various  Roman  Catholic  charitable  institutions,
among  these,  $40,000  to  the  cathedral  schools,
$50.0(X)  to  St.  Peter's  benevolent  society,  and  $100,-
000  for  the  education  of  priests.

SPRINGER,  William  McKendree,  lawyer,
b.  in  New  Lebanon,  Sullivan  co.,  Ind.,  30  May.
1836.  His  family  removed  to  Jacksonville,  111.,  in
1848,  and,  after  receiving  his  early  education  at  the
Illinois  college,  he  was  graduated  at  Indiana  uni-
versity in  1858,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1859,  and  practised  in  Springfield,  111.,  where
he  still  resides.  He  was  secretary  of  the  State  con-
stitutional convention  of  1863,  served  in  the  le^s-
lature  in  1871-'3,  which  was  engaged  in  revismg
the  laws  of  the  state,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as
a  Democrat,  serving  since  4  March,  1875.  On  15
Dec,  1875,  he  introduced  in  the  house  his  resolu-
tion declaring  the  precedent  of  retiring  from  the
presidential  office  after  the  second  term  has  become
a  part  of  our  republican  system,  and  that  any  de-
parture from  this  time-honored  custom  would  be
unwise,  unpatriotic,  and  fraught  with  peril  to  our


free  institutions,  which  was  adopted — yeas.  238,
nays,  18.  This  large  affirmative  vote  contributed
materially  to  the  defeat  of  President  Grant  for  re-
nomination  in  1876  for  a  third  term.  In  1875  he
was  a|»pointed  chairman  of  the  committee  on  ex-
penditures in  the  state  department,  and  has  been  a
member  of  other  important  committees,  including
the  Potter  committee,  which  investigated  the  presi-
dential election  of  1876,  and  of  the  joint  committee
which  reported  the  electoral  commission  bill  of
1876-'7,  and  in  1882-'4  delivered  numerous  and  ex-
haustive speeches  in  congress  on  the  establishment
of  the  tariff  commission  and  the  revision  of  the
tariff.  He  has  also  introduced  several  notable  bills,
and  his  amendment  to  the  bill  granting  $1,500,000
to  the  Centennial  commissionei-s  and  his  successful
efforts  in  recovering  the  amount  through  the  U.  S.
supreme  court  have  won  for  him  a  wide  reputation.
During  the  50th  congress  he  secured  favorable
action  in  the  committee  on  territories,  of  which  he
was  chairman,  on  his  bill  to  provide  for  the  organi-
zation of  the  territory  of  Oklahoma,  and  on  his
bill  to  enable  the  people  of  Dakota,  Montana,
Washington,  and  New  Mexico  to  form  constitutions
and  state  governments.  In  1888  he  was  chair-
man of  the  committee  of  the  whole  house  pend-
ing the  protracted  debate  on  the  tariff  bill.  In  May,
1888,  he  was  renominated  as  a  candidate  for  the
51st  congress. — His  wife,  Rebecca  Ruter,  author,
b.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  8  Nov.,  1833,  is  the  daugh-
ter of  the  Rev.  Calvin  W.  Ruter,  a  clergyman  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.  In  1850  she  was
graduated  at  the  Wesleyan  female  college,  Cin-
cinnati, and  on  15  Dec,  1859,  she  married  Mr.
Springer.  She  is  the  author  of  numerous  fugitive
poems,  and  of  two  novels,  "  Beechwood  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1873),  and  "Self"  (1881).

SPROAT,  Ebenezer,  soldier,  b.  in  Middle-
borough,  Plymouth  eo.,  Mass.,  in  1753;  d.  in
Marietta,  Ohio,  in  February,  1805.  He  entered
the  Provincial  army  as  a  captain  early  in  1775,
was  promoted  major  and  lieutenant-colonel,  and
finally  given  command  of  the  3d  Massachusetts
regiment.  He  was  in  Gen.  John  Glover's  brigade
at  the  battles  of  Trenton,  Princeton,  and  Mon-
mouth, and  was  appointed  brigade-inspector  by
Baron  Steuben.  After  the  war  he  was  a  surveyor
at  Providence,  R.  I.,  where  he  married  a  daughter
of  Cora.  Abraham  Whipple.  Subsequently  he
went  to  the  west,  and  in  1786  began  a  survey  of
the  territory  now  within  the  borders  of  the  state
of  Ohio.  In  1788  he  led  the  party  of  emigrants
that  settled  Marietta,  and  he  was  for  fourteen
years  sheriff  and  colonel  of  militia.  He  was  tall
and  commanding  in  person,  and  was  known  among
the  Indians  as  "  The  Big  Buckeye."

SPROULL,  Thomas  (sprowl),  clergyman,  b.
near  Freeport,  Armstrong  co..  Pa.,  15  Sept.,  1803.
He  was  graduated  at  the  Western  university  of
Pennsylvania,  at  Pittsburg,  in  1839.  studied  for
the  ministry,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Reformed
Presbyterian  congregation  of  Alleghany  and  Pitts-
burg from  1834  till  1868.  He  was  a  professor  in
1838-'40  in  the  Reformed  Presbyterian  western
theological  seminary,  and  in  1840-'*45  in  the  united
Eastern  and  Western  seminaries.  In  1856  he  was
re-elected,  and  in  1874  was  made  professor  emeri-
tus. In  1847  he  was  moderator  of  the  sjTiod  of
the  Reformed  Presbyterian  church.  He  edited
"The  Reformed  Presbyterian"  in  1855-'63  and
"  The  Reformed  Presbyterian  and  Covenanter  "  in
1863-'74,  both  in  Pittsburg.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  from  Westminster  college,  Pa.,  in
1857,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  the  Western  univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  in  1886. Besides  numerous


SPRUANCE


8TADKN


641


pim|ihl(>t.>(. he has puliIiKhiHl "  Prelections on
Tfu'olDj.'v"  (I'itt.slmrjr.  I'lc,  1882).

SPKt' ANCE,  Presley,  twtiatur.  h.  in  D«>lAwan>
in  17K);  d.  in  Smyrna,  I)ol..  18  VvK  1H<W.  He
wati  for  some  time  a  resident  of  the  latter  place,
where  he  was  engaged  in  l)usille^ill.  He  was  sent
to  the  state  senate,  of  which  ImkIv  he  wan  elected

firesident,  and  also  repri'scnted I)eiaware  in  the
J.  S.  senate  from  «  iKv..  1847,  till  3  Marvh.  18.W.
He  lielonpeil  to  the  \Vhi)f  party  in  iM)liiies.

SPKY,  WHUaiu,  jurist,  b.'  in  Kngland ;  d.  in
{lurlMultH's,  \V.  I.,  ill  SepteuilMT,  1772.  He  married
a  niece  of  the  VmtI  of  Chat  ham,  and  on  2.5  Sept.,
17G4,  arnve<i  with  his  family  at  Halifax.  Nova
S<M>tia,  having  been  apt)oint45(l  judge  of  the  vice-
admiralty  court  over  all  America,  which  had  been
recently  constituted  by  act  of  [wrliament.  In  the
proclamatiun  that  announces  the  o|K*ning  of  the
court  he  is  style<l  "The  Right  Worshipful  William
Spry,  I)«K;tor  of  Ijaws."  The  other  ofllcers  of  the
new'  court  were:  vice-atlmiral,  the  Karl  of  Nor-
thumU'rland ;  registrar,  the  lion.  Spencer  Pen-i-
val ;  marshal,  Charles  Howard,  gent.  These  of-
ficers probably  exi)ected  to  fulfil  their  duties  by
deputies.  Judge  Spry  ojxMietl  his  court  at  Halifax
on  9  0<rt.,  1764.  Its  creation  hud  l)een  op|K)se<l  in
the  colonies,  and  the  ]>assagc  of  the  stain |>-uct  the
next year,  with  the  accompanying  disturUmces.

Strobjibly  |>reveiited  its  extension  toother  orovinces.
udge  Spry  wiu<  apiM)inte«l  governor  of  Harbadoes
in  .lune.  17<iT.  and  iiied  in  otllce.

SUriKR,  Kphruim  Oeorge,  author,  b.  in
Betlilehem,  N.  \ .,  17  June.  1821  ;  d.  in  Hnxiklvn.
N.  Y.,  17  April,  1888.  In  early  youth  he  worked
on  a  farm,  attended  and  taught  school,  studied  en-
gineering, and  be-
came interested  in
American  antit^ui-
ties.  He  was  associat-
ed in  the  publication
of  the  "  New  York
State  Mechanic,"  at
Albany,  in  1841-'2,
and  engagtnl  in  jour-
nalism in  Hart  font.
Conn.,  and  Chilli-
cothe.  Ohio,  in  l8*i-
'8,  during  which  pe-
riod he  also  inves-
tigated the  ancient
monuments  of  the
Mississippi  valley  in
conjunct  ion  with  Dr.
Kdwin  Humiltoii
Davis  (7.  c),  and  pre-
iHired  the  narrative
that  was  pubILshe<l  in  v<il.  i.  of  the  "Smithsoniar.
Contributions  to  Knowledge"  (Washington.  1848).
He  al.so  mmle  an  examination  of  the  ancient  re-
mains of  New  York  state  under  the  auspices  of  the
New  York  historical  siK-iety  in  1848.  He  was  ap-
(M)inted  sp(>cial  charge  d'affairi's  to  all  the  Centrai
American  slates  in  1849.  and  negotiate<l  tn^aties
with  Nicaragua.  Hoixluras.  nml  .Stn  .S<ilvador.  In
18.*>;{  he  made  a  second  visit  to  Central  .\merica
to  examine  a  line  for  a  projected  interoceaiiic  rail-
road, and  to  make  further  study  of  the  arclm-ology
of  the  c«)untry.  In  18.W  he  receivetl  the  medal  of
the  French  geogniphical  society  for  his  researches.
In  18<W  Mr.  Spiier  was  ap|x>inted  U.  S.  commis-
sioner to  Peru,  where  he  made  an  exhaustive  inves-
tigation of  Inca  remains  and  took  numerous  |>hoto-
graphs  of  them.  In  18(>8  he  was  a|i|M)inte4l  consul-
general  of  Honduras  at  New  York,  and  in  1871  he
was  electetl  the  first  president  of  the  Anthropologi-
TOL.  T. — II


cat  {n«titiit«  of  New  York.  In  1874  bis  hcsllb  be-
came so  serioiuly  impaired  wi  to  prsdade  further
original  research,  and  though  he  ^utlM'4)uently  r»-
coverwd  safflciently  to  dire<-t  the  final  (in-iiariilion
and  n>vision  of  his  work  on  Peru  for  puulkialion.
lhea(Ti*rtinn  resulte«l  in  his  death.  HewasaiiMin-
lN>r  of  numerous  luNtorical.  an-hamloffioal,  and  soi-
etitiflc  s<M'ietie«,  and  several  years  chief  editor  of
Frank  I^eslie's  publishing-house.  Besides  many
ofilcial  re|Kirts,  scientific  |tapen>,  '  articles,

and  contributions  to  the  "  Kn<  Itritan-

nica"  and  fon-ign  |H>rio«licals.  tii^  w<.rK>«  include
"AlK)riginal  Monuments  of  the  .State  of  New
York"  (".Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowl-
edge," 1849;  HufTal.j,  18.51);  "Serfient  Symbols"
(lAi2);  "  Nicaragua:  its  People. Sit>nery. and  Monu-
ments" (New  York,  1852);  "Note*  on  Central
America"  (1854);  "  Waikna,  or  Adventures  on  the
Mos<|uito  Shore"  (1855);  "The  SUtes  of  Central
America"  (1857;  revise<l  e<l..  1870);  "  Monographs
of  .\uthors  who  have  written  on  the  Atioriginal
'languages  of  Cent  nil  .\merica"  (18<10);  "Tnipical
Fibres  and  their  Economic  Kxtraction"  (1801);
and  "Peru:  Incidents  and  Explorations  in  the
I^nd  of  the  Incas"  (1877).

SQl'IKR,  Miles  Powell,  clergyman,  b.  in
Cornwall.  Vt..  4  May,  171>2;  d.  in  (leneva.  N.  Y„
22  June,  1800.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury
in  1811,  and  at  .\ndover  seminary  in  1814,  and  was
licensed  to  preach  by  a  Congregational  associa-
tion. After  lalH)ring  at  Oxford,  Mass.,  and  Ver-
^nnes,  Vt.,  and  iloing  missionary  work  for  a  year
m  western  New  York,  he  wa*>  orJaine«l  on  3  May,
1816,  the  first  {Mistor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian
church  of  Huffalo,  N.  Y..  which  relation  he  main-
tained until  1824.  In  1824-'6  he  actiHl  as  finan-
cial agent  of  the  Auburn  theological  s«'minary.
and  from  1826  till  1834  he  wa<  s«'cn'tary  of  the
tteneva  agency  of  the  American  home  missionary
society.  In  1831  he  founded  the  Geneva  lyceum,
and  was  occupied  in  suj»erinten<ling  its  affairs  un-
til 1841.  The  next  eight  years  he  residetl  at  Ge-
neva, but  supplicil  the  pulpits  of  various  neighbor-
ing t»hurches.  From  1849  till  180;i  he  was  pro-
fessor of  intelli>ctual  and  moral  philowiphy  at
Beloit,  Wis.  The  n>maining  three  years  of  his
life  were  si»ent  in  tJeneva.  Dr.  S<|uier  was  an
earnest  student  and  fearless  in  the  expression  of
opinion,  but  genial  in  manner.  IJesitles  txintribut-
ing  to  the  |ieri<Hlical  press,  he  publishe«l  "  The
Problem  Solvetl,  or  Sin  not  of  (Jod"  (New  York,
1855);  "  Reastm  and  the  Bible,  or  the  Truth  of  Re-
ligion" (1800);  "  Mis<-ellane<ms  Writings,  with  an
.\utobiographv.  edited  ami  suppleinenltHl  by  the
Rev.  James  R.'  l^.y«l.  of  (Jeneva.  N.  Y."  (1807).

STACY,  Janie.H,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lilterty  c«iunty,
(Ja.,  2  June.  IKiO.  He  was  graduate<l  at  Oglethorpe
university,  (Ja.,  in  1849,  studiinl  theology  at  Colum-
bia, S.  ('.,  and  in  185^1  wjls  ordaiiuHl  by  the  Georgia
presbytery.  After  pn»aching  as  a  supi>ly  until
1857.  he  was  calletl  to  the  pastorate  of  the  New-
nan,  (la..  Presbyterian  church,  where  he  still  re-
mains. He  has  Im-i'II  .statinl  clerk  of  the  pn«sbytery
of  Atlanta  from  its  organinUion  in  1807  to  the
present  time,  and  has  held  the  same  office  in  the
svnoil  of  G»>orgia  sim-e  1876.  He  is  president  of
the  board  of  <lirectors  of  the  thw»logical  seminary
at  Columbia,  .S.  C.  He  received  the  honorary  de-
gree of  D.  I),  from  Arkansas  ctJlege  in  1876.  Dr.
Stacy  ha«i  puhlishiMl  a  priw  essav  on  the  "  Holr
S»il.r.ath"  (Richmond,  1877);  "  \Vater  Baptism'
(IHS'i):  and  "  Day  of  Rest"  (1885).

ST.\UEN.  Hans  (.Htah-«len).  German  traveller,
b.  in  He.s.s«»-H«»mburg  in  1.520;  d.  there  aUmt  1565.
lie bad received  a  good  education and  was  in


642


STAGER


STALLO


moderate  circumstances,  when  desire  for  travel  led
him  to  enlist  in  1647  on  a  ship  that  was  bound  for
Brazil.  He  returned,  8  Oct.,  1548,  juid,  ijoing  to
Seville,  enlisted  as  a  volunteer  in  an  expedition  for
La  Plata  river,  which  sailed  in  March,  1549.  On
reaching  the  mouth  of  the  river  two  ships  sank  in
a  storm,  and,  after  vainly  trying  to  build  a  bark,
part  of  the  shipwrecked  crew  set  out  overland  for
Asuncion,  while  the  other  sailed  upon  the  third
vessel  for  the  island  of  S4o  Vicente,  but  were  also
wrecked,  and  Staden,  with  a  few  survivors,  passed
to  the  continent  and  established  themselves  at  H&o
Marco  in  1552.  A  few  weeks  later  Staden,  while
engaged  in  a  hunting  expedition,  was  captured  by
a  party  of  Tupinarnba  Indians,  who  carried  him
to  their  village,  where  he  was  to  be  devoured  at
the  next  festivity,  but  he  won  the  friendship  of  a

Eowerful  chief,  whom  he  cured  of  a  disease,  and
is  life  was  spared.  The  Portuguese  tried  several
times  to  negotiate  for  Staden's  ransom,  but  the
Indians  declined  all  overtures.  At  last  he  made
his  escape  on  a  F'rench  ship,  and  on  22  Feb.,  1555,
arrived  at  Honfleur,  in  Normandy,  and  thence
went  immediately  to  his  native  city,  which  he
never  left  afterward.  His  interesting  narrative
"Geschichte  eines  Landes,  gelegen  in  der  Neuen
Welt,  America  genannt,  von  Hans  Statlen  aus  Hom-
burg  in  Hessen  "  (Marburg,  1557),  which  contains
also  a  summary  of  the  manners  of  Tupinamba
Indians  and  a  description  of  their  villages,  has
been  translated  into  French  and  reprinted  in  the
collection  of  Henry  Ternaux-Compans.

STAGER,  Anson,  soldier,  b.  in  Ontario  county,
N.  Y.,  20  April,  1825 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  2(J  March,
1885.  At  sixteen  years  of  age  he  entered  into  the
service  of  Henry  O'Reilly,  a  printer,  who  subse-
quently became  a  pioneer  in  the  building  and
operating  of  telegraphs.  He  followed  O'Reilly  in
his  enterprise,  and  when  the  latter  established  a
line  from  Philadelphia  to  Harrisburg  he  was
placed  in  charge  of  the  first  office  at  Lancaster,
Pa.,  in  1846.  He  then  went  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
where  he  made  several  improvements  in  the  con-
struction of  batteries  and  the  arrangement  of
wires,  and  in  1852  he  was  made  general  superin-
tendent of  the  principal  lines  in  the  west  at  that
time.  After  the  consolidation  of  the  Western
union  company  with  these  he  was  still  superintena-
ent,  and  to  his  industry  and  ability  the  success  of
these  lines  is  much  indebted.  At  the  opening  of
the  civil  war  he  v/as  asked  to  take  the  manage-
ment of  the  telegraphs  in  southern  Ohio  and  along
the  Virginia  line,  to  which  he  consented  and  at
once  prepared  a  cipher  by  which  he  could  safely
communicate  with  those  who  had  the  key.  In  Oc-
tober he  was  called  to  Washington  and  appointed
general  superintendent  of  government  telegraphs
in  all  departments.  He  remained  in  service  till
September,  1868,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers  for  valuable  services.  In
1869  Gen.  Stager  returned  to  Chicago,  and,  in  addi-
tion to  his  duties  as  general  superintendent,  he  was
the  promoter  of  many  enterprises,  among  which
was  the  Western  electric  manufacturing  company,
one  of  the  largest  of  its  kind  in  the  United  States.
He  was  also  interested  in  the  Babcock  manufactur-
ing company  and  several  others.  He  secured  a
consolidation  of  the  two  telephone  companies  in
Chicago,  and  was  president  of  them  and  also  of  the
Western  Edison  electric  light  company,  and  a  di-
rector in  many  corporations.

STAHEL,  ^uUus,  soldier,  b.  in  Csongrad,  Hun-
gary, 4  Nov.,  1825.  After  being  educated  at  Buda-
pest, he  entered  the  Austrian  army  and  had  risen
from  the  ranks  to  be 1st  lieutenant  when  the


Hungarian  revolution  occurred.  Stahel  joined  the
revolutionists  and  served  on  the  staffs  of  Gen.  Ar-
thur GSrger  and  Gen.  Richard  Dehaufre  Guyon.
After  the  success  of  the  Austrian  arms  he  went  to
Germany,  thence  to  England,  and  finally  to  New
York  city.  There  he  essaved  journalism,  and  in
1859  was  editor  of  the  "  l)eut.sche  illustrirte  Fa-
milienbiatter,"  an  illustrated  German  weekly.  He
became,  in  May,  1861,  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
8th  New  York  volunteers,  commanded  that  regi-
ment in  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  was  m^e
colonel.  He  was  promoted  brigatlier-general,  12
Nov.,  1861,  given  a  brigade  in  Gen.  Louis  Blen-
ker's  German  division,  and  took  part  in  the  battle
of  Cross  Keys,  Va.,  8  June,  1862.  He  was  subse-
quently in  command  of  a  division  of  Gen.  Franz
Sigel's  army  corps,  the  11th.  and  on  14  March^
1863,  was  commissioned  major-general.  He  re-
signed from  the  army,  8  Feb.,  1865.  In  1866  he
was  made  U.  S.  consul  at  Yokohama,  Japan,  but
after  three  years'  residence  there  he  was  compelled
to  return  on  account  of  impaired  health.  He  was
engaged  in  mininjj  from  1870  till  1877,  when  he
was  again  appointed  consul  to  Japan.  There  he
remained  until  March,  1884,  when  he  was  made
U.  S.  consul-general  at  Shanghai,  which  latter
office  he  resigned  in  1885.  He  has  since  been  en-
gaged in  business  in  New  York  city.

STAIGO,  Richard  MorreH  (stag),  artist,  b.  in
Leeds,  England,  7  Sept.,  1817;  d.  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  11  Oct.,  1881.  When  he  was  about  thirteen
years  of  age  he  was  placed  in  an  architect's  office,
and  he  subsequently  received  a  few  weeks'  instruc-
tion in  portrait-painting.  In  1831  he  came  to  the
United  States  with  his  father,  and  four  years  later
he  settled  with  the  family  in  Newport.  In  his
artistic  eflforts  he  met  with  encouragement  and  ad-
vice from  Washington  Allston,  and  soon  devoted
himself  entirely  to  miniature-painting.  Among
his  portraits  are  those  of  Washington  Allston,
Edward  Everett,  Daniel  Webster,  William  H.
Prescott,  and  others.  Some  of  his  miniatures  were
exhibited  at  the  Royal  academy,  and  received  warm
praise.  He  was  a  regular  exhibitor  at  the  Acade-
my of  design.  New  York,  of  which  he  was  elected
an  associate  in  1856,  and  an  academician  in  1861.
He  visited  Europe  in  1867-9,  and  again  in  1872-'4.
The  last  twenty  years  of  his  life  were  devote<i  to
painting  life-size  portraits  in  oil,  as  well  as  genre
pieces  and  landscapes.  Among  his  works  in  oil  are
portraits  of  himself,  of  Russell  Sturgis  and  George
H.  Calvert,  and  the  "Crossing  Sweeper":  "The
Sailor's  Grave  "  (1862) ;  and  "  Cat's  Cradle  "  (1863).

STALL,  Sylvanus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Elizaville,
Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  18  Oct.,  1847.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in  1872,
and  at  the  theological  seminary  there  in  1874,
after  studying  also  in  Union  theological  seminary,
New  York  city.  He  was  ordainetl  by  the  Hartwick
Lutheran  svnod  in  1874,  and  has  held  pastorates
at  Cobbleskill,  N.  Y.,  in  1874-'7.  Martin's  Creek,
Pa,  in  1877-'80,  and  Lancaster,  Pa,  in  1880-'7.  In
the  last-named  year  he  retired  from  the  active
duties  of  the  ministry  in  order  to  devote  his  time
to  "  Stall's  Lutheran  Year-Book  "  (Lancaster,  Pa.),
which  he  originated  in  1884.  He  has  been  statis-
tical secretary  of  the  'general  synod  since  1885.
He  has  published  a  "  Pastor's  Record  "  (Albany,
1876);  "Hand-Book  to  Lutheran  Ilvmns"  (Phila-
delphia, 1879);  "How  to  pay  Church  t)ebts  and  how
to  keep  Churches  out  of  Debt"  (New  York,  1880);
and  "Methods  of  Church  Work"  (1887).

STALLO,  John  Bernhard,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Sierhausen,  Oldenburg,  16  March,  1823.  He  came
to  this  country  in  1839,  taught  in  Cincinnati  and


STANBERY


STAN  DISH


648


N«w  York  citr  till  1847,  Mtudiml  law,  and  wm  •
judge  of  the  (  incinimti  i-oiirt  of  e<iiiiiiion  \t\tstm  in
I85S-'5.  He  t(H>k  (wrt  in  the  lii>N-nii  Ut>|>ul>lican
movement  of  1H73.  untl  wii.h  HpiMiintcd  nunist«<r  to
Italy  in  188."),  Ho  is  the  author  of  ••  (n-iir.mi  Prin-
ciples of  the  PhiloHuithy  of  Nuture"  (li<»Mon.  184(J)
and  "  Coneept-H  and  rheorie.H  of  Modem  Phjrsk* "
(New  York.  1882).

STANBKRY,  llcnr)',  attornev-jreneral.  b.  in
New  York lit y. 20  K»l..,  18<W:  d.  there. 2« June,  1H81.
He  was  the  son  of  .lonas  StnnlH.'ry.  a  physician,  who
n'lnoviHl  to  /jinesville.  Ohio,  in  1814.  '  Henry  wa*«

f^rmhmted  at  Washington  collejfe.  l*a..  in  IHIU,  and
H>^an  the  study  of  law  in  that  year,  but  couhl  not
lie  a<linittcd  to  the  Imr  until  he  wils  of  a^^e,  in  1824.
Then,  at  the  invitation  of  Thomas  Kwin;;,  he  U^gan
practice  in  Ijancaster  county.  ()hit>,  and  nnlo  the
circuit  with  him.  Mr.  Stanlxjry  remaineil  for
many  years  at  Ijanca.ster.  In  1840  the  olllce  <if
attorney -jfeneral  of  Ohio  was  create<l  by  the  jjen-
eral  assemblv,  and  ho  wa.s  ele<'te<l  to  Ite  its  first
occu{>ant.  lie  accordingly  removed  to  Columbus,
where  he  resided  for  about  five  years.  At  that
time  the  U.  S.  wiurts  were  held  there,  and  Judjje
Stanbery  et^tablished  a  large  and  valuable  prac-
tice in  them  as  well  as  in  the  supreme  ct)urt  of
Ohio,  In  1850  he  was  elected  a  delegate  to  the
convention  that  frame«l  the  present  state  constitu-
tion. In  1853  he  n-movetl  to  Cincinnati,  and  in
18(56  he  was  appointed  attoniey-general  of  the
Unite<l  States  by  President  Johnson.  This  office
he  accepted,  after  consultation  with  his  friends,
solely  from  a  desire  to  assist  in  carrying  the  gov-
ernment safely  through  the  perilous  jieriod  that
foUowwl  the  war,  and  resigned  it  at  the  request  of
the  executive  to  become  one  of  his  counsel  on  the
vnpeHchment  trial.  His  health  at  the  time  was  so
delicate  that  most  of  his  arguments  were  submitted
in  writing.  On  the  termination  of  the  trial  he
was  nominated  by  the  president  to  the  office  of
justice  of  the  U.  b.  supreme  court;  but  the  senate
refused  to  confirm  him.  He  then  returned  t4i  Cin-
cinnati, where  he  was  president  of  the  Law  associa-
tion of  that  city,  but  held  no  other  public  office.
He  wrote  occasionally  on  political  questions,  and
sometimes  made  public  addresses.  As  a  lawyer,
although  he  was  learned  in  technicalities  and
skilled  in  applying  the  nice  rules  of  evidence  and
practice,  he  esfK-cially  delighted  in  the  discussion
of  general  principles.  As  a  practitioner  he  was
quick  to  perceive  the  slightest  weakness  in  his  op-
ponent's «use.  He  never  attempted  to  browbeat
or  mislead  a  witness,  but  knew  how  to  secure  full
and  triie  answers  even  from  those  who  had  come
U|M)n  the  stand  with  hostile  intentions.

STANDISH.  Myleit,  soldier,  b.  in  I^ancashire.
England,  almut  1584  ;  d.  in  Duxbury,  Mas.s.,  '.i  Oct.,
I<l5rt. It  is  sup{)ose<l  that  he  was  a  sci«m  of  the
Standish  family  of  Duxbury  Hall  in  Ijtmcashire,
and  that his name  was  eni-sed fr«>m the  family
n'gister  to  deprive  him  of  a  share  in  the  estate.
The  name  is  ancient,  and  Kroissart,  descril)ing  the
meeting  between  Kichanl  II.  and  Wat  Tyler,  re-
lates how  the  latter  was  killtnl  by  a  "squyer  of  the
kynges  called  John  .Standysshe."  who  was  knighted
for  this  act. Later  another  Sir  John  Standish  par-
tici[>ated  in  the  Iwittle  of  Agincourt. While  still  a
youth,  Myles  entered the English  forces  on  the
continent,  and  after  serving  in  the  Netherlamls
he  joiti<>d  in  lA\vden  the  colony  that  sailtnl  in  the
"Mayfbtwer" fnim Plymouth. England, on 1(5  I
Sept.,  1620. The  vessel'  anchored in  the  liav  of  I
CaiK) C«m1 on 21 Nov., 1620, and  on 25 5»ov.  I
sixteen armed men, "every one his Musket,  j
Sword,  and  Corslet,  Under  the  command  of  Cap-  |


TMiSfJU


Uino  MylM  Standinh,"  were  wnt  asborB  for  •

second  exploration.  Tliey  nmn-hed  in  linglc  fll«
through  what  in  now  Provin«-ftown,  where  tbejr
saw  several  Iiidianw,  followe«l  their  trBclu  Bbout
ten  milt>s,  and  F>|M>nt  the  night  in  the  wmmU.  Thrr*
safasequent  vx\ny-
ditions  were  sent
out.  Onthethinl,
after  landing  in
the  vicinity  of
East  ham.  they
went  towanl  Well-
flivt,  found  an
Indian  burying-
place  and  Indian
nouses,  and  en-
cam|ied  Ijefore
nightfall  at  Nans-
keket.  On  the  fol-
lowing dav  they
were  surprised  by
the  Indians,  uimju
whom  Standish
fired,  but  the  skir-
mish was  slight.
On  29  Sept.,  1621.
after  the  founding  of  Plymouth,  a  [lartv  of  ten
men,  with  three  savages  as  guides,  under  com-
mand of  Standish.  who  had  lieeii  aptMiinted  mili-
tary captain  in  February,  1621,  explored  Massa-
chusetts bay.  They  anchoretl  off  what  is  now
Thomson's  island,  which  Standish  explored  and
named  Trevore.  This  i>arty  also  ex)ilored  the
broad  plain  known  as  '*  Massachusetts  fields,"  the
gathering-place  of  the  tribes,  which  cfunprised  a
part  of  what  is  now  (^iiincy.  In  1622  Thomas
Weston  sent  out  emigrants  to  plant  a  new  c<ilony,
which  they  did  at  Wessagussett  (now  Weymouth).
They  incurred  the  enmity  of  the  Massachusetts  In-
dians, who  formed  a  plot  to  destroy  them ;  but,
fearing  that  such  an  act  would  lie  avenged  by  the
J'lymouth  colony,  they  decided  to  extenninate  the
T^nglish.  Before  this  plan  was  executed.  Massasoit
revealed  the  plot,  and  the  Plymouth  colonists  de-
termiiKHl  to  send  an  exi>edition  to  Wessagussett.
Fearful  of  exciting  the  suspicion  of  the  Indians  by
an  arme<l  bixly,  Myles  Standish  selecte«l  eight  men
to  march  to  the  relief  of  that  colony,  which  he
found  in  a  wretchetl  condition.  By  Massasoit's
atlvice,  Standish,  with  a  few  of  his  men,  enticed  the
chiefs  Pecksuot  and  Wituwainat,  with  a  half-
brother  of  the  latter,  into  a  rotim,  and.  closing  the
door,  killed  the  Indians  after  a  desperate  nght.
This  was  the  first  Indian  IiUkxI  that  was  sheil  by
the  Pilgrims.  A  general  Iwttle  ensued  in  the  open
field,  from  which  the  Indians  fie<l  ancl  in  which
no  lives  were  lost.  This  victory  of  Standish  spread
terror  among  the  savages  ami,  as  a  warning  to
further  depre<lat ions,  the  head  of  Wituwamat  was
ex|>ose«l  to  view  at  Plymouth.  When  the  news  of
Standish's  exploit  reachetl  the  pious  John  Uobin-
s<in.  the  pastoral  Ix'yden.  he  wrote  to  the  gover-
nor of  Plymouth  on'  19  IKh:>..  162;J.  "to  consider
the  disposition  of  their  cantain.  who  was  of  a
warm  tem{)er."  and  concliuh-il  with  the  remark:
"  O  how  happy  a  thing  had  it  been  that  you  had
converted  some  liefore  you  had  killetl  any!"  In
the  summirof  1625  the  colony  was  in  great  trouble,
owing  to  its  unhappy  relation  with  its  itartnen,  the
so-called  "  merchant  adventurers"  in  Ix>nd«in,  and
Cai>t.  Standish  wjis  sent  to  England  to  st-t-k  n»lief,
lH«ariiig  a  letter  from  (lov.  William  Bnwlford  to  the
i-oumil  of  New  England  urging  their  intervention
in  Ix-half  of  the  colony  :  but  Bradfonl  savsthat,  on
account  of  the  plague  in  London,  Stanilish  could


644


STANFORD


STANLEY


accomplish  nothing.  In  1638  Standisb  captured
Thomas  Morton,  of  Merry  Mount  {q.  v).  In  retalia-
tion for  an  attack  of  D'Aulnay  (see  Charms^,
AuLNAY  DE),  who  drove  away  in  1635  a  party  of
Plymouth  men  at  Penobscot,  Plymouth  despatched
a  vessel  and  a  force  under  Standish  to  compel  the
surrender  of  the  French  at  that  post;  but  this  expe-
dition failed.  In  addition  to  being  the  military
leader  of  every  exploit  of  importance  in  the  col-
ony, his  counsel  was  often  required  in  civil  affairs,
anH  for  many  years  he  was  also  treasurer  of  the
colony.  He  was  not  a  member  of  4^he  Plymouth
communion,  but  was  a  dissenter  from  the  dissent-
ers, lie  was  resolute,  stern,  bold,  and  of  incorrupt-
ible integrity,  "  an  iron-nerved  Puritan  who  could
hew  down  forests  and  live  on  crumbs."  A  por-
trait, painted  on  an  old  panel,  was  found  in  1877
in  a  picture-shop  in  School  street,  Boston,  bearing
the  date  1625,  and  "  ^tatis  Sua,  38,"  on  which  the
name  of  M.  Standish  was  discovered  after  removing
the  frame.  It  now  hangs  in  Pilgrim  hall,  Plym-
outh, and  is  reproduced  in  the  accompanying  vig-
nette. His  first  wife.  Rose,  died  on  29  Jan.,  1621,
and  his  second  courtship  has  been  made  the  subject
of  a  romance  by  Henry  W.  Longfellow,  in  which
there  are  several  anachronisms.  Although  his  en-
voy, John  Alden,  won  his  chosen  bride,  Priscilla
JMullens,  they  remained  close  friends  until  death,
and  later  generations  of  the  Standish  and  Alden
families  intermarried.  A  tradition  says  that  his
second  wife,  Barbara,  was  the  younger  sister  of
Rose  Standish.  In  his
will,  dated  7  March,  1655,
he  left  his  property  to
his  wife,  Barbara,  and  to
his  four  sons,  Alexan-
der, Myles,  Josias.  and
C'harles.  His  goods  and
chattels,  worth£350,  were
exhibited  in  the  court
that  was  held  in  Plym-
outh on  4  May,  1657.
One  of  his  swords  is  pre-
served in  the  cabinet  of
the  Massachusetts  histo-
rical society,  and  another
is  in  Pilgrim  hall,  Plym-
outh. Several  other  rel-
ics are  in  the  possession
of  the  Pilgrim  society,
which  also  owns  a  piece
of  ingenious  embroidery
made  by  his  daughter,
Lora.  In  1632  several  of
the  "Mayflower"  families  settled  in  Duxbury,
Mass.  Standish  established  himself  on  "  Captain's
Hill,"  so  named  from  his  military  office,  and  it  is
probable  that  he  was  buried  tliere.  It  is  supposed
that  his  house  stood  unchanged  until  about  1666,
and  that  it  was  then  enlarged  by  hLs  son  Alexan-
der, who  it  is  thought  was  a  trader  and  [tossibly
town-clerk  of  Duxbury.  The  present  house  was
built  by  this  son.  A  granite  monument  is  now
being  erected  to  his  memory  on  Captain's  Hill,
Duxbury,  as  seen  in  the  accompanying  illustra-
tion. The  shaft  is  one  hundred  feet  in  height  and
upon  it  stands  a  statue  of  Standish  looking  east-
ward. His  right  hand,  holding  the  charter  of  the
colony,  is  extended  toward  Plymouth,  while  his
left  rests  upon  his  sheathed  sword.

STANFORD,  Lelaiid,  senator,  b.  in  Watervliet,
Albany  co..  N.  Y.,  9  March,  1824.  His  ancestors
settled  in  the  valley  of  the  Mohawk,  N.  Y.,  about
1720.  He  was  brought  up  on  a  farm,  and  when
twenty  years  old  began  the  study  of  law. He  was


admitted  to  the  bar  in  1849,  and  the  same  year
began  to  practise  at  Port  Washington,  Wis.  In
1852,  having  lost  his  law  library  and  other  property
by  fire,  he  removed  to  California  and  l)egan  mining
for  gold  at  Michigan  bluflf.  Plater  co.,  subsequently
becoming  associated  in  business  with  his  three
brothers,  who  had  preceded  him  to  the  Pacific
coast.  In  1856  he  removed  to  San  Francisco  and
engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits  on  a  large  scale,
laying  the  foundation  of  a  fortune  that  has  recent-
ly been  estimated  at  more  than  $50,000,000.  In
1860  Mr.  Stanford  made  his  entrance  into  public
life  as  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  convention  that
nominated  Abraham  Lincoln  to  the  presidency.
He  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  a  Pacific  railroad,
and  was  elected  president  of  the  Central  Pacific
company  when  it  was  organized  in  1861.  The
same  year  he  was  elected  governor  of  California,
and  served  from  December,  1861,  till  December,
1863.  As  president  of  the  Pacific  road  he  super-
intended its  construction  over  the  mountains,  build-
ing 530  miles  in  293  days,  and  on  10  May,  1869,  drove
the  last  spike  at  Promontory  point,  Utah.  He  also
became  interested  in  other  roads  on  the  Pacific  slope,
and  in  the  development  of  the  agriculture  and
manufactures  of  California.  In  1885  he  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate  for  the  full  term  of  six  years
from  4  March,  1886.  In  memory  of  his  only  son,
Mr.  Stanford  has  given  the  state  of  California  $20,-
000,000  to  be  used  in  founding  at  Palo  Alto  a  uni-
versity whose  curriculum  shall  not  only  include
the  usual  collegiate  studies,  but  comprise  instruc-
tion in  telegraphy,  type-setting,  type-writing,  jour-
nalism, book-keeping,  farming,  civil  engineering,
and  other  practical  branches  of  education.  The
corner-stone  was  laid  on  14  May,  1887,  and  it  is
expected  that  the  various  structures  will  be  so  far
completed  as  to  afford  accommodation  for  several
hundred  students  by  January,  1889.  Included  in
the  trust  fund  for  the  maintenance  of  the  univer-
sity is  Mr.  Stanford's  estate  at  Vina,  Tehama  co.,
Cal.,  which  is  said  to  be  the  largest  vineyard  in
the  world.  It  comprises  30,000  acres,  3,500  of
which  are  planted  with  bearing  vines.  It  is  divided
into  500-acre  tracts,  and  most  of  the  labor  is  per-
formed by  Chinamen.

STANLEY,  Antliony  Dnnioiid,  mathemati-
cian, b.  in  East  Hartford,  Conn.,  2  April,  1810;
d.  there,  16  March,  1853.  He  was  |rraduated  at
Yale  in  1830,  was  appointed  tutor  in  1832,  and
professor  of  mathematics  in  the  same  institution
in  1836,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  He
published  an  "  Elementary  Treatise  of  Spherical
Geometry  and  Trigonometry"  (New  Haven,  1848),
and  '•  Tables  of  Logarithms  <>f  Numbers,  and  of
Logarithmic  Sines,  Tangents,  and  Secants  to
Seven  Places  of  Decimals,  together  with  Other
Tables"  (1849).  He  also  edited  an  edition  of
"  Day's  Algebra,"  assisted  in  the  revision  of  "  Web-
ster's Quarto  Dictionary  "  (1847),  and  left  several
unfinished  works  in  manuscript.

STANLEY,  David  Sloan,  soldier,  b.  in  Cedar
Valley,  Ohio,  1  June.  1828.  He  was  graduated  at
the  l).  S.  military  academy  in  1852.  and  in  1853
was  detailed  with  Lieut,  Amiel  W.  Whipple  to
survey  a  railroad  route  along  the  35th  parallel.  As
lieutenant  of  cavalry  from  1855  till  his  promo-
tion to  a  captaincy  in  1861.  he  spent  the  greater
part  of  his  time  in  the  saddle.  Among  other  In-
dian engagements  he  took  part  in  one  with  the
Cheyennes  on  Solomon's  Fork,  and  one  with  the
Comanches  near  Fort  Arbuckle.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  refused  high  rank  in  the  Con-
federate army.  In  the  early  part  of  the  war  he
fought  at  Independence,  Forsyth*  Dug  Springs,


STANLEY


STANLEY


646


Wilson's  Creok,  Ilolla,  Mtid  other  places,  and  wm
appointed  briejMlier-^i'nfriil  of  voliinttiors,  28  Sept,
IHdl.  Ho  Im  a  diviition  at  Now  Ma<irid,  and  the
c-oinmandinf;  eencral  re{M>rt«Ml  that  lie  was  " es|H'-
cially  iiidebtwi"  to  (Jon.  Stanley  for  his  "efllcient
aid  and  iitiiforin  zeal."  SubM'fjuenlly  he  was  coni-
plimentc><l  for  his  "  untiring  activity  and  skill  "in
the  (tattle  of  Island  No.  lU.  lie  tcM>k  part  in  most
of  tlio  skirmishes  in  an<l  around  Corinth  and  in
the  luittlu  of  Farmin^^ton.  In  the  flKl>t  n*>Ar  the
White  House,  or  Bridfje  Crock,  he  roiHjTied  the  ene-
my's attack  with  severe  loss,  and  ho  was  e8|)«cially
commended  by  Uen.  William  S.  Kosoerans  at  luka.
At  Corinth  he'occupir<l  the  line  between  batteries
Kobinett  and  Williams,  and  was  thus  exposed  to
the  severest  part  of  the  attack  of  the  enemy,  and,
although  other  parts  of  the  line  gave  way,  his  was
never  broken.  Gen.  Stanley  was  ap[>ointed  major-
general  of  volunteers  on  21)  Nov.,  1802.  He  bore  an
active  part  in  most  of  the  battles  of  the  Atlanta
campaiji^n.  and  as  commander  of  the  4th  army  corps
he  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Jonesl)oro'.  After
Gen.  Georce  H.  Thomas  was  onlered  to  Nashville,
Gen.  Stanley  was  directed  on  (}  <)<!t.  to  command
the  Army  o^  the  Cumlx'riand  in  his  alisence.  Until
ho  was  severely  woundwl  at  Franklin,  he  took  an
active  part  in  all  the  ojjerations  and  Imttles  in  de-
fence of  Nashville.  His  disposition  of  the  troops
at  Spring  Hill  enabled  him  to  repel  the  assault  of
the  enemy's  cavalry  and  afterward  two  assaults  of
the  infantry.  A  few  days  afterward,  at  Franklin,
he  fought  a  desperate  hand-to-han»l  conflict.  Pluc-  '
ing  himself  at  the  head  of  a  reserve  brigade,  he  re-  '
gained  the  part  of  the  line  that  the  enemy  had
broken.  Although  severely  wounded,  he  did  not
leave  the  field  until  long  after  dark.  When  he  re-
«covered  he  rejoinetl  his  command,  and,  after  the
war  closed,  took  it  to  Texas.  He  had  receive<l  the
brevets  of  lieutenant-colonel  for  Stone  River,  Tenn..
colonel  for  Uesaca,  Ga.,  brigadier-general  for
Ruff's  Station,  Ga.,  and  major-general  for  Frank-
lin, Tenn.,  all  in  the  regular  army.  He  was  ap-
pointed colonel  of  the  22d  infantry,  and  spent  a  :
greater  part  of  the  time  up  to  1874  in  Dakota.  In
connnand  of  the  Yellowstone  exi>edition  of  18T:J.
he  successfully  conducted  his  troons  through  the
unknown  wilderness  of  Dakota  anu  Montana,  ami
his  favorable  reports  on  the  country  led  to  the  sub-
sequent emigration  thither.  In  1H74  he  went  with
his  regiment  to  the  lake  stations,  and  in  187J>  moved
it  to  Texas,  where  he  completely  suppressed  Indian
raids  in  the  western  part  of  the  state.  He  also  re-
store<l  the  confidence  of  the  Mexicans,  which  hntl
been  disturbe<l  by  the  raid  that  the  V.  S.  troops
made  across  the  lioiindary  in  1878.  He  wiis  onlere*!
tx) Santa  Fe,  N.  M..  in  1882.  and  plmed  in  command
of  the  district  of  Now  Mexico.  While  he  was  sta-
tiomnl  there,  and  subsequently  at  Fort  I^wis,com-

tli(fations  arose  at  various  times  with  the  Navajos,
Ttes.  and  .licarillas,  all  of  which  he  qiiietwl  with-
out l»loo<lslied.  The  greater  part  of  his  service  has
been  on  the  Indian  fn>ntier.  and  he  has  had  to  deal
with  nearly  every  triUithat  (x-cupies  the  Mississippi
and  Rio  Gnimle  valley,  thus  becoming  iH?rfectly
ac(juainted  with  the  Indian  character.  In  March,
1884,  he  was  api>ointe«l  a  brigadier-eenenil  in  the
regular  army,  and  assigned  to  the  I)epartment  of
Texas,  where  he  has  been  ever  nince.

STAMiEY,  Frederick  Arthur.  Lonl.  govenior
of  Canmla,  b.  in  Iiond<»n.  Kngland.  15  Jan.,  1841.
He  1^  the  youngest  s<m  of  the  fourteenth  Karl  of
Derby,  anci  bn>ther  of  the  present  earl.  After  re-
ceiving his  education  at  Kton.  he  onteroil  the
Gronmlier  ginirds  in  1H58.  I»ecame  lieutenant  an<l
captain  \n  18(J2.and  retinal  from  the  army  in  18«».


''^^i:^^y ^  i^AC^:^


H*  lepresentMl  Preston  in  p*rliaineni,  as  a  Coo-
Mnrativo,  from  Julv.  18&1.  till  Deoember.  1808.
when  he  wat  electeil  for  North  fjanc— hire,  lie
was  loni  of  the  admimlty  from  August  till  Decem-
ber, 1808,  atul  flnanciaf  Mcretary  for  war  froin
February.  1874.  till
August,' 1877,  wb«D
he  Decaroe  financial
secretanr  to  the  treas-
ury. On  2  April,
18'78.  he  wasappoinU
ed  secretary  of  state
for  war,  which  port-
folio he  held  till  he
went  out  of  office
with  his  party  in
April,  1880.  In  the
government  of  Ixjrd
i^lisbury  he  was  sec-
retary of  state  for
the  colonies  frcim
June,  188r),  till  Fol>-
ruary,  188(J,  and  in
the  cabinet  of  Au-
gust, 1880,  he  was  (/'
ap|>ointed  president
of  t  he  board  tif  t  ra<le,
and  raised  to  the  peerage  with  the  title  of  Ix)rd
Stanley  of  Preston.  In  June,  1888,  he  was  a|>-
pointwl  governor-general  of  Canada,  in  succession
to  the  Marquis  of  Lansdowne.  who  had  been  ap-

Sointetl  governor-general  of  India.  In  1804  Lonl
tanley  married  Lady  Constance,  eldest  daughter
of  the  fourth  Karl  of  Clarendon.  His  elder  brother
being  childless,  he  is  heir-prc9umptive  to  the  earl-
dom of  Derby.

STANLEY.  Honrjr  Morton,  explorer,  b.  near
Doiibiijh,  Wales,  in  1840. His  name  wasoriginally
John  Rowlands. He  was  placed  in  the  iHH>r-house
at  St.  Asaph  when  he  was  thri'o  years  old,  remain-
ing there  and  being  edueate<l  for  ten  years. In
1805  he  sailed  as  a  <'abin-lM)y  to  New  Orleans,  where
he  was  adopte<l  by  a  merchant,  whose  name  he  took
instead  of  his  own. This  merchant  died  without
leaving  a  will,  and  young  Stanley  enlistee]  in  the
Confederate  army,  was  taken  prisoner,  and  suIjm--
quently  volunteeml  in  the  T.  S.  navv,  serving  as  act-
ing cn.sign  on  the  in)n-clad  "  Ticon(lert)ga." At  the
close  of  the  war  he  went  as  a  newspaper  corre-
sj)ondent  to  Turkey. In  1808  he  accomimnied  the
British  army  to  Abyssinia  as  cx»rres|xjnaent  of  the
New  York  "Herald.' When  he  was  in  Siwin  in
[  the  service  of  the  same  pajK-r  he  was  a.«ke<l  by  its
I  proprietor,  in  October,  186S>.  to  go  and  find  Dr.  David
I  Livingstone,  the  African  explorer,  of  whom  nothing
definite  had  been  heard  for  more  than  two  years.
After  attending  the  oi)ening  of the  Suez  canal.
I  visiting  Constantinople,  the  Crimea.  Palestine,  the
!  valley  of  the  Kuphrates.  Persia,  and  India.  Stan-
I  ley  siiikHl  from  liomlwy,  12  Oct.,  1870,  and  reachwl
Zanzil)ar.  on  the  eastern  coast  of  Africa,  early  in
January.  1871. There  he  organized  his  sean-h  ex-
pe<litioij  anil  set  out  for  the  interior  on  21  Man-h
with  11»2  followers. On  10  Nov.  he  found  Dr.  Liv-
ingstone at  Cjiji.  on  I^ake  Tanpmyika.  where  he
had  just  arrived  from  the  soiithwost. Stanley  fur-
nished Dr.  Liviim'stone  with  su|>plies.  explored  the
northern  juirt  of  I^ake  Tanganyika  with  him,  and
remained  till  February,  1872,  when  Livingstone  set
out  on  that  jouniey  from  which  he  never  returned,
while  Stanley  made  his  way  back  to  the  coast,  sail-
ing thence  on  14  March.  18?2,  and  reaching  Eng-
land late  in  July. The  British  a.ssociation  enter-
taino<l  him  at  Brighton,  where,  on  10  Aug..  he  gave
an  account  of  his  ex|M>dition. On  27  Aug.  the


646


STANLEY


STANLY


((iieen  sent,  him  a  gold  snuff-box  set  with  diamonds,
and  on  21  Oct.  a  banquet  was  given  him  by  the
Royal  geographical  society.  In  1873  he  received
the  patron's  gold  medal  of  the  Royal  geographical
society.  The  New  York  "  Herald  "  and  the  London
"  Daily  Telegraph  "  again  sent  Stanley  to  explore
the  laKe  region  of  equatorial  Africa. Me  reached

Zanzibar  in  the
autumn  of  1874.
There  learning
that  Livingstone
had  died  in  cen-
tral Africa,  he  de-
termined to  shape
his  course  north-
west and  explore
the  region  of
Lake  Victoria
N'yanza.  Leav-
ing at  the  head
of  300  men,  after
many  hardships
and  severe  en-
counters with  the
natives,  he  reach-
ed it  in  February,
1875,  having  lost

w/-  -  on  the way 104

(i/U,A.,<r^/2^\..-<i't^^^  men  by  death  or

(_  U  _-^ desertion.  He  cir-

cumnavigated the
lake,  sailing  about  1,000  miles  and  minutely  ex-
amining all  the  inlets,  in  a  boat  that  he  had
brought  with  him  in  pieces,  and  found  it  to  be  a
single  large  lake,  instead  of  a  series  of  lagoons,  as
had  been  supposed  by  Richard  F.  Burton  and
Livingstone,  so  that  the  opinion  of  the  explorers
Speke  and  Grant  was  confirmed.  Thus  was  Lake
\  ictoria  N'yanza  proved  to  be  the  largest  body  of
fresh  water  in  the  world,  having  an  area  of  40,000
square  miles.  On  17  April,  1875,  continuing  his
explorations,  he  set  out  westward  toward  Lake
Albert  N'yanza,  and  found  that  it  was  not,  as  had
been  supposed,  connected  with  Lake  Tanganyika.
The  hostility  of  the  natives  barred  his  further  ad-
vance, and,  forced  to  return  to  Ujiji,  he  resolved  to
reach  the  coast  by  descending  the  great  river  that
had  been  discovered  by  Livingstone,  and  named
the  Lualaba,  but  which  Stanley  had  called  the
Livingstone  in  honor  of  its  discoverer.  The  latter
had  thought  that  it  might  be  identical  with  the
Nile ;  others  supposed  it  to  be  part  of  the  Congo,
and  Stanley,  by  his  descent  of  it,  proved  that  these
last  were  correct.  The  descent,  chiefly  by  canoes,
took  eight  months,  was  accomplished  under  very
great  difficulties  and  privations,  and  cost  him  the
lives  of  thirty-five  men.  On  his  reaching  a  west-
coast  settlement,  a  Portuguese  man-of-war  took
him  to  St.  Paul  de  Loanda,  whence  an  English
vessel  conveyed  the  party  to  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  and  thence  to  Zanzibar,  where  what  re-
mained of  the  men  who  had  joined  his  expedition
were  left  at  their  own  homes.  Stanley  reached
England  in  February,  1878.  On  28  June,  1878,  at
the  Sorbonne.  Paris,  he  was  presented  with  the  cross
of  chevalier  of  the  Legion  of  honor  by  the  president
of  the  French  geographical  society.  In  1879-82
he  was  again  in  Africa,  sent  out  by  the  Brussels
African  international  association  with  a  view  to
develop  the  great  basin  of  the  river  Congo.  The
king  of  the  Belgians  devoted  £50,000  a  year  from
his  own  private  means  toward  this  enterprise.  In
1884  Stanley  completed  the  work,  establishing
trading-stations  along  the  Congo  from  its  mouth
to  Stanley  pool,  a  distance  by  the  river  of  1,400


miles,  and  founding  the  free  state  of  the  Congo,
but  he  declined  to  be  its  first  governor.  On  13
Jan.,  1887,  he  was  presented  with  the  freedom  of  the
city  of  London.  At  present  (August,  1888)  he  is  en-
gaged on  an  African  expedition  to  the  Soudan,
sent  out  for  the  relief  of  Emin  Pasha.  He  has
published  "  How  I  Found  Livingstone  "  (New  York,
1872) ;  "  Through  the  Dark  Continent,"  an  account
of  his  second  expedition  (1878;  abridged  ed.,  1885);
and  "  The  Congo  and  the  Founding  of  its  Free
State"  (1885).

STANLY,  Edward,  statesman,  b.  in  New  Berne,
N.  C,  about  1811;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  12
July,  1872.  He  was  the  son  of  John  Stanly,  who
was  several  times  speaker  of  the  North  Carolina
legislature  and  twice  a  member  of  congress.  The
son  was  educated  at  Capt.  Alden  Partridge's  mili-
tary academy  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  studied  and
practised  law,  and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Whig  in  1836,  and  re-elected  for  the  two  succeed-
ing terms.-  Having  left  congress  in  1843,  he  repre-
sented Beaufort  in  the  state  house  of  commons
from  1844  till  1849,  serving  during  his  last  term
as  speaker.  In  1847  he  was  elected  attorney-gen-
eral of  the  state.  He  was  re-elected  to  congress
in  1848  and  returned  for  the  succeeding  term,  at
the  close  of  which,  in  1853,  he  removed  to  Cali-
fornia, where  he  practised  his  profession,  and  in
1857  was  the  unsuccessful  Republican  candidate
for  governor.  After  the  capture  of  New  Berne  on
14  March,  1862,  and  the  occupation  of  other  points
in  North  Carolina  by  National  troops.  President
Lincoln  appointed  Stanly  military  governor  of  his
native  state.  The  people  were  embittered  by  this,
and,  after  vainly  endeavoring  to  consolidate  and
give  effect  to  the  Unionist  sentiment  in  North
Carolina,  he  resigned  and  returned  to  California.
— His  brother,  Fabius,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
Berne,  N.  C,  15  Dec,  I8l5;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  5  Sept.,  1882,  entered  the  navy  as  a  midship-
man. 20  Dec,  1831,  was  promoted  to  lieutenant,
8  Sept.,  1841,  and  during  the  Mexican  war  was
attached  to  the  Pacific  squadron,  where  he  did  good
service,  participating  in  the  capture  and  defence
of  San  Francisco  and  other  California  ports.  He
assisted  at  the  capture  of  Guaymas,  where  he  led
the  storming  party,  and  commanded  a  night  ex-
pedition to  a  fort  twelve  miles  from  that  place,
where  with  thirty  men  he  passed  through  the
enemy's  lines,  spiked  the  guns,  and  returned  in
safety.  He  was  also  present  at  the  capture  of
Mazatlan,  commanded  the  outposts,  and  had  fre-
quent skirmishes  with  the  enemy,  in  one  of  which
he  had  a  hand-to-hand  contest,  and  received  a  lanee
wound  in  the  breast.  lie  was  highly  commended
for  his  zeal  and  ability,  and  received  the  thanks  of
two  secretaries  of  the  navy  for  his  services  in  the
Mexican  war.  He  commanded  steamers  of  the
Pacific  mail  company  in  1850-'l.  During  the  Para-
guay expedition  he  commanded  the  store-ship
"Supply,"  and  in  1859-60  he  had  the  steamer
"  Wyandotte  "  on  the  south  side  of  Cuba.  While
he  was  at  Key  West  he  prevented  what  he  supposed
to  be  an  attempt  by  the  secessionists  to  seize  Fort
Taylor  in  December,  1860 ;  but  the  rumor  was  con-
tradicted, and  he  was  relieved  from  his  command
for  his  excessive  zeal,  and  sent  to  command  the
receiving-ship  "  Independence  "  in  California.  He
was  commissioned  commander,  19  May,  1861,  and
was  in  the  steamer  "  Narragansett "  in  the  Pacific  in
1862-'4.  He  received  the  thanks  of  the  state  depart-
ment for  his  diplomatic  services  in  Mexico  during
this  period.  He  commanded  the  "  State  of  Georgia
on  the  coast  of  South  Carolina  in  1864-'5,  co-oper-
ated in  the  expedition  up  the  Sant^e,  and  ha<l


8TANNARD


8TAN8BURY


047


ohftrge  of  the  oxpt*«lition  of  Huir«  \mj.  FTp  wm
coin  111  isMioiietl  on|iUii),  2!i  July,  1MW(,  fomiiKMlorv,
1  July,  1H7U.  and  (var-iiilmiml,  12  Feb.,  IH74.  He
was  rt'tinnl  on  4  Juno,  1874, on  liiH  own  Monlication.
STANNAKU,  Ueorge  J<>rriH4>n,  Moidicr,  b.  in
(K'orK'iH.  Vt.,  20  Oct.,  1H2();  d.  in  Wji-Hhincton.
D.  C,  31  May,  lH8«t,  Ih-  nHfivwl  an  aca(h>mir
education,  worked  on  liis  father's  farm,  teat-hint;
in  winter,  and  wa-s  a  clerk  in  a  foundry  from  184>'i
till  IHW),  when  iio  iKH-ame  joint  proprietor  of  the
business,  llu  was  a  colonel  of  militia  when  the
civil  war  lH>gan,  and  was  the  flrst  man  in  Vermont
to  offer  his  services  after  the  president's  call  for
volunteers.  Ho  was  commissioned  as  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  2<i  Vermont  reiriment,  which  wm
mustered  into  the  service  in  May,  IWU.  He  was
at  the  first  Imttlo  of  Hull  Kun,  and  while  stationed
near  the  Chain  bridge  in  the  following  autumn  fre-
quently le«l  scouting  imrties  into  the  enemy's  terri-
tory. In  May,  1802,  he  was  cominissione<l  colonel
of  the  9th  Vermont  infantry,  which  was  stationed
at  nar|)er's  Ferry  when  Col.  Dixon  S.  Miles  sur-
rendered that  post,  and  on  Iwing  parole<l  went  into
camp  at  Chicago.  On  11  March,  1H(W,  he  was  com-
missioned as  nrigadier-general.  His  brigiwle  of
Vermont  troops  cAine  up  at  the  close  of  the  first
dav's  l>attle  at  Gettysburg.  On  the  second  day  he
held  the  left  slo|)e"  of  Cemetery  hill  till  he  was
ordered  farther  to  the  left  in  the  afteriuKin  to
oppose  Gen.  James  Ixjngstreet's  assault  after  the
rout  of  the  3d  corps.  His  brigade  closed  the  gap
speedily,  saving  two  Iwtteries,  retaking  another,
and  capturing  two  Confe<lerate  guns.  On  the  third
day  it  oppt)sed  a  solid  front  to  (ten.  (Jeoree  K.
Pickett's  division,  and,  when  the  Confederate
column  turnetl  slightly  to  the  left,  threw  the  assail-
'  ants  into  confusion  by  a  flanking  fire.  Gen.  Stan-
nard  was  wounded  in  the  action,  and  could  not
return  U)  the  field  till  May,  1«<>4.  At  Cold  Harlwr
he  was  struck  by  a  rifle-ball,  but  brought  off  the
remnant  of  his  command.  He  led  the  advance
on  Petersburg,  and  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  a  division,  but  was  again  wounded  and,
moreover,  disjibled  by  sickness.  When  he  re-
joined the  army  after  a  few  weeks  of  absence  he
led  the  advance  ujjon  the  defences  of  Kichmoiul
north  of  James  river,  and  captured  Fort  Harri-
son, for  which  he  was  brevettwi  major-general  on
28  Oct,,  1864,  but  when  the  enemy  attempted  to
storm  the  works  on  the  day  after  their  capture  a
bullet  shattered  his  arm,  necessitating  amputation.
He  returned  to  his  home,  and  in  December,  1864.
after  the  raid  on  St.  -\lbans,  was  place<l  in  charge  of
the  defence  of  the  northern  frontier  of  Vermont.
He  resigned  on  27  June,  18(56.  and  wa-s  ai_>|»oint«l
collector  of  customs  for  the  district  of  \  erinont,
which  office  he  held  till  1872.

STANSBL'RY,  Arthur  J.,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1781 ;  d.  about  1845.  He  was  gnuluat«Ml
at  Columbia  in  1799,  and  licensed  to  preach  in
1810.  Besides  contributing  to  i)erio<licals,  he  pub-
lished several  sermons  and  mhlresses,  and  was  the
author  of  "  Elementary  Catechism  on  the  Consti-
tution of  the  Uniteil  States"  (lioston,  1828)  ami  a
"  Report  of  the  Trial  of  Jiulge  James  H.  Peck,  or
an  Impeachment  by  the  House  of  Kepresentatives
of  the  Unito«l  States"  (18:W).  His  i-e|K)rts  of  the
deliates  in  congress  for  twenty  vears  are  omlnHlied
in  Joseph  Gales's  and  William  \V'.  Seaton's  "  Regis-
ter of  Del)ates"(14  vols..  Washington,  182.'>-';}7).
He  also  wrote  and  illustrated  lx)oks  for  children.

STANSBIRY,  Howard,  exj.lorer,  b.  in  New
York  citv,  8  Feb.,  18()«;  d.  in  Madison,  Wi.s.,  17
April,  1863.  Early  in  life  he  Ijccame  a  civil  engi-
neer, and  in  October,  1828,  he  waa  placed  in  charge


of  the  survey  of  profxMted  t«nal.o  to  unite  ImJu  Brie
and  L<ako  Michigan  with  the  Wabash  river,  and  was
aim  engagi*<l  in  other  surveya  of  wcalern  riverk
In  1885  ne  hail  charp-  of  numerout  public  worka
in  Indiana,  in  IHSo  he  made  a  Mirvey  of  James
river  with  a  view  toward  improving  the  liarborof
Uichmoiid,  and  in  1837  he  aurreved  Illinois  and
KaHka^kia  rivent,  U-ing  afterwara  cnnged  upon
the  survey  for  a  railnwd  frr)m  Milwauicee  to  Uu*
bu(|ue.  and  charge<l  with  the  construction  of  a  road
fntin  Milwaukee  to  MiKsis>ippi  river.  He  became
1st  lieutenant  of  U.  S.  to|Migniphical  onginrem  on
7  July.  1838,  captain  in  1840,  and  in  1841  wan
engaged  in  a  survey  of  the  lakes.  In  184^'A  be
waa  in  chai^  of  the  survey  of  the  harimr  of  Porta-
mouth,  N.  11.,  a  work  which  for  minute  accuraoT
of  detail  is  unsuqwsstHl  in  this  country.  In  1847
he  was  charged  with  the  construction  of  an  iron
light-house  on  Carysfort  reef,  Florida,  which  is  the
largest  light-house'  on  our  c«»ast.  Fn>m  1849  till
1851  he  was  engagtnl  in  the  Great  Salt  I^ake  expe-
dition, his  re|>ort  of  which  gave  him  a  wide  reputa-
tion. In  1852-'3  he  was  engaged  u|Km  the  lake
harl)or8,  and  in  185($  he  was  assigne*!  to  the  charge
of  the  military  roads  in  Minnesota.  He  was  ap-
p>inted  major  f>n  28  Sept..  18(51,  and  at  the  time  of
nis  death  he  was  mustering  and  disbursing  officer
at  Mmlison.  Maj.  Stansbury  publislunl  "  An  Expe-
dition to  the  Valley  of  the  Great  Salt  I^ake  of
Utah"  (Phila«lelphia,  18,-,2:  2d  ed.,  1855).

STANSBrRl,  Joseph,  merchant,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1750:  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1809.  He
emigrateil  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  l)ecame  an
imiKirting  merchant,  and  was  generally  resiiected
for  his  integrity.  In  1776  it  was  n'i»orted  that  he
"  sung  *God  save  the  King'  in  his  house,  and  that
a  number  of  persons  present  bore  him  the  chorus,"
and  Itefore  the  close  of  that  year  he  was  imprisoned
in  Hurlington.  N.  J.  In  1777  he  was  ap|K>tnted  by
Sir  William  Howe  a  commissioner  for  selecting  and
governing  the  city  watch  of  Philadeljihia,  an«l  in
1778  he  was  a  manager  of  that  officers  lottery  for
the  relief  of  the  j)oor.  In  1780  the  Whigs  were
again  in  possession  of  Philadelphia,  and  again  im-
prisoned him.  and  the  agi'Ut  of  the  loyalists'  es-
tates was  directed  by  the  c-ouncil  of  Philadelphia
to  make  an  inveniory  of  his  possessions.  His  re-
quest for  ix-rmission'to  live  within  the  British  lines
was  grante<l  on  the  condition  that  he  should  pro-
cure the  release  and  safe  return  of  two  prisoners
then  <»n  Long  Islan<l.  and  that  he  wtmid  do  noth-
ing injuri(ms  to  the  Whig  cause.  He  was  lib(>rated,
his  pn>|)ertv  was  restoretl.  and  with  his  family  he
resided  in  New  York  during  the  remaimler  of  the
war,  and  afterward  removiHl  to  Nova  S-otia,  but
returned  to  Philadelphia  in  1785,  inten<ling  to  re-
sume his  former  (K-cupation,  but,  threatened  with
violence,  he  removed  to  New  York,  where  he  l>e-
caine  secretary  of  an  insurance  c«>mj>any. ,  He  wrote
in  supwrt  of' the  crown,  and  his  verst-s  were  c<lil-
ihI  by  Winthrop  Sargent  under  the  title  of  Stans-
burv's  and  Odells  'T/.val  Verses"  (AU>any,  I860).
— Ilis  s<.n.  Philip,  traveller,  b.  in  New  York  citT
about  18<r2:  d.  about  1870.  was  the  author  of  "  .\
Petlestrian  Tour  of  Two  Thousaml  Three  Hundred
Miles  in  North  America,  to  the  I^kes.  the  Cana-
das.  and  the  New  England  States  i>erfonueil  in
the  Autumn  of  1821  ^  (New  York,  1822).  This
work,  which  is  extoetlingly  ran*,  is  characteriied
by  great  keenness  of  ol>servation,  and  contains  one
of  the  U-st  descriptions  extant  of  the  im|>ortant
battle-fielils  include«l  in  the  connuest  of  Canada
in  17.')9-'6:J.  its  invasion  during  the  war  of.  1812,
the  wars  with  the  Indians  in  the  New  England
states,  the  RevolutioiuU7  contest  in  Massachusetta.


648


STANSEL


STANTON


and  the  disastrous  expedition  of  Gen.  Burgoyne.
As  a  comparison  between  the  customs,  habits  of
living,  modes  of  thought  and  educational  interests
of  Isew  England  and  New  York  of  seventy  years
since  and  to-day,  Stansbury's  work  is  valuable.

STANSEL  (styled  by  Spanish  and  Portuguese
writers  STANCtL,  ESTANSEL,  and  ESTAN-
CEL),  Valentine,  German  astronomer,  b.  in  Mora-
via in  1621 ;  d.  in  Bahia,  Brazil,  18  Dec,  1705.  lie
became  a  Jesuit  in  1637,  and  taught  rhetoric  and
mathematics  in  the  colleges  of  Olmutz  and  Prague.
He  was  in  Brazil  in  1664,  and  took  observations  of
the  comets  that  appeared  in  that  and  the  following
year.  Ho  wjis  appointed  professor  of  theology  in
the  Jesuit  college  of  San  Salvador,  and  continued  to
make  astronomical  observations,  the  results  of  which
he  sent  to  Europe.  There  is  a  full  list  of  his  works
in  Backer's  "  Bibliotheque  des  6crivains  de  laCom-
pagnie  de  Jesus"  (5th  series),  in  which  it  is  also
shown  that  the  dates  of  his  death  given  in  the  "Bio-
graphie  universelle"  and  other  biographical  dic-
tionaries are  incorrect.  His  principal  writings  are
"  Orbis  Alfonsinus  "  (Evora,  1658) ;  "  Legatus  ura-
nicus  ex  orbe  novo  in  veterem ;  hoe  est.  Observa-
tiones  Americanae  cometarum  factie  conscriptae  ac
in  Europam  missje"  (Prague.  1683);  "  Uranophi-
lus  coelcstis  peregrinus,  sive  mentis  Uranicae  per
mundum  sidereum  peregrinantis  eestases  "  (Ant-
werp and  Ghent,  1685);  and  "  Mercurius  Brasilicus,
sive  Cceli  et  soli  brasiliensis  oeconomica."

STANTON,  Daniel,  Quaker  preacher,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1708:  d.  there,  28  June.  1770.
He  began  to  preach  in  1728,  travelled  in  New  Eng-
land and  the  West  Indies,  went  to  Europe  in  1748,
and  visited  the  southern  colonies  in  1760,  preach-
ing zealously  against  slavery  as  well  as  worldliness
and  the  vices  of  society.  See  "Journal  of  his  Life.
Travels,  and  Gospel  Labors  "  (Philadelphia.  1772).
STANTON,  Edwin  McMasters,  statesman,  b.
in  Steubenville,  Ohio,  19  Dec,  1814;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  24  Dec,  1869.  His  father,  a  phy-
sician, died  while  Edwin  was  a  child.  After  act-
ing for  three  years  as  a  clerk  in  a  book-store,

he  entered  Kenyon
college  in  1831,  but
left  in  1833  to  study
law.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar
in  1836,  and,  begin-
ning practice  in
Cadiz,  was  in  1837
elected  prosecuting
attorney.  He  re-
turned to  Steuben-
ville in  1839,  and
was  supreme  court
reporter  in  1842-'5,
preparing  vols,  xi.,
xii.,  and  xiii.  of  the
Ohio  reports.  In
1848  he  removed  to
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and
in  1857,  on  account
of  his  large  busi-
ness in  the  IJ.  S.  su-
preme court,  he  established  himself  in  Washing-
ton. During  1857-'8  he  was  in  California,  attend-
ing to  important  land  cases  for  the  government.
Among  the  notable  suits  that  he  conducted  were
the  first  Erie  railway  litigation,  the  Wheeling
bridge  case,  and  the  Manney  and  McCormick
reaper  contest  in  1859.  When  Lewis  Cass  retired
from  President  Buchanan's  cabinet,  and  Jeremiah
S.  Black  was  made  secretary  of  state,  Stanton  was
appointed  the  latter's  successor  in  the  office  of  at-


vsAaaaa^  'VVa.  ^XoaaXo


tomey-general,  20  Dec,  1860.  He  was  originally  a
Democrat  of  the  Jackson  school,  and,  until  van
Buren's  defeat  in  the  Baltimore  convention  of  1844,
took  an  active  part  in  p<jlitical  affairs  in  his  locality.
He  favored  the  Wilmot  proviso,  to  exclude  slavery
from  the  territory  acquired  by  the  war  with  Mexi-
co, and  sympathized  with  the  Free-soil  movement
of  1848,  headed  by  Martin  Van  Buren.  He  was
an  anti-slavery  man,  but  his  hostility  to  that  in-
stitution was  qualified  by  his  view  of  the  obliga-
tions imposed  by  the  Federal  constitution.  He  had
held  no  public  offices  before  entering  President
Buchanan's  cabinet  except  those  of  prosecuting
attorney  for  one  year  in  Harrison  county,  Ohio,  and
reporter  of  the  Ohio  supreme  court  for  three  years,
being  wholly  devoted  to  his  profession.  "While  a
member  of  Mr.  Buchanan's  cabinet,  he  took  a  firm
stand  for  the  Union,  and  at  a  cabinet  meeting,
when  John  B.  Floyd,  then  secretary  of  war,  de-
manded the  withdrawal  of  the  United  States  troops
from  the  forts  in  Charleston  harbor,  he  indignantly
declared  that  the  surrender  of  Fort  Sumter  would
be,  in  his  opinion,  a  crime,  equal  to  that  of  Arnold,
and  that  all  who  participated  in  it  should  be  hung
like  Andre.  After  the  meeting.  Floyd  sent  in  his
resignation.  President  Lincoln,  though  since  his
accession  to  the  presidency  he  had  held  no  com-
munication with  Mr.  Stanton,  called  him  to  the
head  of  the  war  department  on  the  retirement
of  Simon  Cameron,  15  Jan.,  1862.  As  was  said
by  an  eminent  senator  of  the  United  States :  "  He
certainly  came  to  the  public  service  with  patriotic
and  not  with  sordid  motives,  surrendering  a  most
brilliant  position  at  the  bar,  and  with  it  the  emolu-
ment of  which,  in  the  absence  of  accumulated
wealth,  his  family  was  in  daily  need."  Infirmities
of  temper  he  had.  but  they  were  incident  to  the
intense  strain  upon  his  nerves  caused  by  his  de-
votion to  duties  that  would  have  soon  prostrated
most  men,  however  robust,  as  they  finally  pros-
trated him.  He  had  no  time  for  elaborate  ex-
planations for  refusing  trifling  or  selfish  requests,
and  his  seeming  abruptness  of  manner  was  often
but  rapidity  in  transacting  business  which  had  to
be  thus  disposed  of,  or  be  wholly  neglected.  As
he  sought  no  benefit  to  himself,  but  made  himself
an  object  of  hatred  to  the  dishonest  and  the  in-
efficient, solely  in  the  public  interest,  and  as  no
enemy  ever  accused  him  of  wrong-doing,  the
charge  of  impatience  and  hasty  temper  will  not
detract  from  the  high  estimate  placed  by  common
consent  upon  his  character  as  a  man,  a  patriot,  and
a  statesman.

Mr.  Stanton's  entrance  into  the  cabinet  marked
the  beginning  of  a  vigorous  military  policy.  On
27  Jan.,  1862,  was  issued  the  first  of  the  president's
war  orders,  prescribing  a  general  movement  of  the
troops.  His  impatience  at  Gen.  George  B,  McClel-
lan's  apparent  inaction  caused  friction  between
the  administration  and  the  general-in-chief,  which
ended  in  the  latter's  retirement.  He  selected  Gen.
Ulysses  S.  Grant  for  promotion  after  the  victory  at
Fort  Donelson,  which  Gen,  Henry  "W.  Halleclt  in
his  report  had  ascribed  to  the  bravery  of  Gen.
Charles  F.  Smith,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1863  he
placed  Grant  in  supreme  command  of  the  three
armies  operating  in  the  southwest,  directed  him  to
relieve  Gfen.  William  S.  Rosecrans  before  his  nrmy
at  Chattanooga  could  be  forced  to  surrender.  Presi-
dent Lincoln  said  that  he  never  took  an  important
step  without  consulting  his  secretary  of  war.  It
has  been  asserted  that,  on  the  eve  of  'Mr.  Lincoln's
second  inauguration,  he  proposetl  to  allow  Gen.
Grant  to  make  terms  of  peace  with  Gen.  Lee,  and
that  Mr.  Stanton  dissuaded  him  froni  such  action.


STANTON


STANTON


649


Acconlinp  to  a  bulletin  of  Mr.  Stanton  that  wa«
is^M<'<l  Ht  the  time,  the  proHi<lent  wmte  the  (ioMftatrh
lii'  in;;  the  (general  of  the  army  to  j-oiifer  with
ilii  <  iiifwlerato  commimder  on  none  save  pun'ly
military  qm^stions  without  previously  conMiltinjf
the  memlHjrs  of  the  cahinet.  At  a  ealnnet  council
that  waM  held  in  consultation  with  (ten.  (trant.  the
terms  on  which  (Jen.  William  T.  Sherman  prf>-
poso<l  to  accept  the  surrender  of  (len.  Joseph  E.
Johnston  wer»*  disap[)rovc><l  hy  all  who  were  pres-
ent. To  the  bulletin  announcing;  the  telejfram
that  was  sent  to  Gen.  Sherman,  which  «lirecte<l
him  to  f^uide  his  a^-tions  by  the  desfiatch  that  ha<l
previously  been  sent  to  Qen.  Urant,  forbidding;
military  interference  in  the  [>olitical  settlement,  a
stAtement  of  the  reasons  for  disa|>provin);  Sher-
man's arran<;ement  was  appende<l,  obviously  by  the
direction  of  Sec.  Stantcm.  These  were:  (I)  that  it
was  uruiuthori/.ed ;  (2)  that  it  was  an  acknowle<lj;-
ment  of  the  Confederate  government;  (li)  that  it
re-established  rel)el  state  poveniments ;  (4)  that  it
would  enable  rebel  state  authorities  to  restore  sla-
very ;  (5)  that  it  involved  the  (juestion  of  the  Con-
federate states  debt :  ((5)  that  it  would  put  in  dis-
pute the  state  government  of  West  Virginia;  (7)
that  it  abolished  confiscation,  and  relieved  rebels  of
all  penalties;  (H)  that  it  pave  terms  that  had  Ijeen
rejecttnl  by  President  Lincoln;  (!))  that  it  formed
no  basis  for  jjeace,  but  relic vcfl  relnjls  from  the
pressure  of  defeat,  and  left  them  free  to  renew  the
war.  Gen.  Sherman  defended  his  course  on  the
ground  that  he  had  before  him  the  public  exam-

files  of  Gen.  Grant's  terms  to  (ien.  Ij«h>'s  army,  and
Jen.  Weilzel's  invitatiim  to  the  Virginia  legislature
to  assemble  at  Richmond.  His  central  motive,  in
giving  terms  that  would  l)e  cheerfully  accent^'d,  he
yieclared  to  be  the  peaceful  disbandinent  of  all  the
Confederate  armies,  and  the  pnnention  of  guerilla
'  warfare.  He  had  never  seen  President  Lincoln's
telegram  to  Gen.  Grant  of  3  March.  lH«5o.  above
quoted,  nor  did  he  know  that  Gen.  Weitzel's  per-
mission for  the  Virginia  legi-slature  to  assemble
had  been  rescinded.

A  few  days  l)efore  the  president's  death  Sec.
Stanton  tendered  his  resignation  Ix-cause  his  task
was  complete<l,  but  was  persuaded  by  Mr.  Lincoln
to  remain.  After  the  assassination  of  Lincoln  a
serious  controversy  arose  between  the  new  pn-si-
dent,  Andrew  Johnson,  and  the  Republican  jwrty,
and  Mr.  Stanton  took  sides  a^iinst  the  former
on  the  subject  of  reconstruction.  On  5  Aug..
1867,  the  president  demanded  his  resignati<m  ;  but
he  refusetl  to  give  up  his  office  t)efore  the  next
meeting  of  congress,  following  the  urgent  counsels
of  leading  men  of  the  Republican  [larty.  He  wa«<
sus[»ende<I  by  the  president  on  12  Aug.  (►n  !.'<
Jan.,  1808,  he  was  restored  by  the  a<ition  of  the
senate,  and  resume<l  his  office.  On  21  Feb.,  1808,
the  president  informed  the  senate  that  he  had  re-
moved Sec.  Stanton,  and  designatwl  a  secn'tary
ad  interim.  Mr.  Stanton  ri'fuse*!  to  surrender
the  office  pending  the  a^-tion  of  the  senate  on  the
''[)resident'8  message.  At  a  late  hour  of  the  sjime
day  the  senate  resolved  that  the  president  had  not
the  power  to  remove  the  secretary.  Mr.  Stanton,
thus  siistaine<l  bv  the  senate,  refust'd  to  surrender
the  office.  The  imix'achment  of  the  president  foJ-
li>we<l,  and  on  26  May.  the  vote  of  the  senate  being
"guilty,"  35,  "not  guiltv,"  19,  he  was  acquitte<l—
two  thirds  not  voting  for  conviction.  After  Mr.
Stanton's  retirement  from  offiee  he  resumed  the
firactice  of  law.  On  20  Dec,  1809,  he  wa^*  apiK)int-
ed  by  Pn'sident  (trant  a  iustice  of  the  supreme
court,  and  he  was  forthwith  confiniied  by  the  sen-
ate. Kuur  days  later  be  expired.


The  value  to  the  oonntnr  of  hin  nmrioM  during
the  civil  war  cannot  lie  ove'rMtimale<J.  Iliii  vnerfry.
inflexible  integrity.  Hr*<t<-mati7.<-4l  indu<>tr)-,  cr>ninrt>-
hensivn  view  of  the  situation  in  ita  military,  ftoiiti-
cal,  and  international  aspeeta,  his  power  to  c«»ni-
mand  and  Mipervi«»e  the  bent  iienrlcesof  otherH.  and
his  unlicnding  will  and  invincible  courage,  made
him  at  once  the  stay  of  the  |tn>(iident,  the  hoije  of
the  country,  and  a  terror  to  diiihone«tj  ana  im-
iKH'ility.  The  vastness  of  his  labora  led  to  bruinuc-
ness  in  n'i>elling  im|tortuniti(>s,  which  mwle  hlin
many  enemies.  Hut  none  ever  riuestione*!  his  hon-
estv,  his  {Mitriotism,  or  his  capability.  A  "  .Memoir  "
of  Mr.  Stanton  is  at  present  in  preparation  by  bis
son,  I^wis  ,M.  Stanton.

STANTON,  Henrjr.  w.ldier,  b.  in  Vermont
a»H)ut  17»0;  d.  in  Fort  Hamilton,  X.  Y.,  1  Auff..
18.')0.  He  was  appointed  a  lieutenant  in  the  light
artillery,  20  June,  1HI;{.  assistant  «lepiity  quarter-
mjister-general  in  July.  1813,  military  sei-retary  to
(ten.  (teorge  I/jtnl  in  1814,  deputy  ouartermaitM^
general,  with  the  rank  of  major,  i:^  May,  1820.  act-
ing adjutant-general  under  Gen.  Thonia-s  S.  Jemip
in  Florida  in  18;J0-'7,  assistant  «iuarterma.Hter-gen-
eral,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  7  July,  IKW,  and  was
brevetted  briga4Uer  -  general  f«)r  meritorious  con-
duct in  the  Mexican  war.  1  Jan.,  1847.

STANTON.  Henry  Bn-wster,  journalist,  b.  in
Griswold,  New  London  co.,  Conn.,  29  June,  1H05:
d.  in  New  York  city,  14  Jan.,  1H87.  His  ancestor.
Thomas,  came  to  \\\\»  country  from  England  in
1(J35  and  was  crown  interpreter-general  of  the  In-
dian dialects,  and  subs«Niuently  judge  of  the  New
Ix>ndon  county  court.  Iiis  father  was  a  manufac-
turer of  w(H)|lens  and  a  trader  with  the  West  In-
dies. After  re<'eiving  his  education  the  son  went
in  1820  to  Rochester.  N.  Y.,  to  write  for  Thurlow
Wee<l's  newsj)a|)er,  "The  Monroe  TelegrB|>h,"  which
was  advocating  the  election  of  Henry  Clay  to  the
[iresidency.  lie  then  U'gan  to  make  |M>litic'«l
speeches.  He  removed  to  Cincinnati  to  complete
his  studies  in  I^ane  theological  seminary,  but  left
it  to  become  an  a«lvocate  of  the  anti-slavery  cause.
At  the  anniversary  of  the  American  anti-slavery
society  in  New  York  citv  in  18;i4  he  fnc***!  the  first
of  the  many  mobs  that  fie  encoiintere*!  in  his  tours
throughout  the  countr>-.  In  1837-'4(>  he  was  ac-
tive in  the  movement  to  form  the  Abolitionist*t  into
a  compact  political  pjirty.  which  was  n'siste<l  by
William  Lloy«l  (Jarrison  and  others,  and  which  re-
sultetl  in  lasting  dissension.  In  1840  he  married
Elizald'th  Cady,  and  on  12  .May  of  that  year  saileil
with  her  to  London,  having  U-en  elwted  to  n'|)re-
sent  the  American  anti-slavery  society  at  a  c-on-
vention  for  the  j)n>motion  of  the  cause.  At  its
close  they  travelletl  through  (treat  Britain  and
P'rance,  working  for  the  relief  of  the  slaves.  On
his  return  he  studie<l  law  with  Daniel  Ca<iy.  was
admitte<l  to  the  l>ar.  and  practise«l  in  lioston,  where
he  gaineil  a  reputation  es|HH'ially  in  fwlent  cases,
but  he  aliandoned  his  nrofession  to  enter  ]N)litical
life,  ami  removing  to  N-tu'ca  Falls,  N.  Y.,  in  1847,
repn«sent<tl  that  «listrict  in  the  state  senate.  He
was  a  memlH'r  of  the  Free-soil  party  previous  to
the  formation  of  the  Re()ublican  |iartv,  of  which  he
was  a  founder,  liefore  this  he  hml  been  a  iJcmo-
crat.  For  nearly  half  a  century  he  was  actively
connecte<l  with  (he  «laily  nn-ss.  hLs  itintritnitlons
consisting  <-hiefly  of  articles  on  current  |M>litical
topics  and  elal<orate  bioCTaphies  of  public  men.
Mr.  Stanton  contribute*!  to  (iarris<m»  "  Anti-
Slaverv  Standard  "  and  "  Lilierator,"  wnUc  for  the
New  York  "Tribune,"  ami  fmm  1868  until  hi5
death  wasan  editor  of  the  New  York  " Sun."  Hen-
ry Ward  Beecher  said  of  him : "  I  think  Stanton


660


STANTON


STANTON


has  all  the  elements  of  old  John  Adams:  able,
stanch,  patriotic,  full  of  principle,  and  always  un-
popular. He  lacks  that  sense  of  other  people's  opin-
ions which  keeps uman  from  runniuKagainstthem."
Mr.  Stanton  was  the  author  of  "  Sketches  of  Re-
forms and  Reformers  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  "
(New  York,  1849),  and  "Random  Recollections"
(1886).— His  wife,  Elizabeth  Cad}-,  reformer,  b.
in  Johnstown,  N.  Y.,  12  Nov.,  1815,  is  the  daughter
of  Judge  Daniel  Cady,  and,  after  receiving  her  first
education  at  the  Johnstown  academy,  was  gradu-
ated at  Mrs.  Emma  Willard's  seminary  in  Troy,  N.
Y.,  in  1832.  While  attending  the  World's  anti-sla-
very convention  in  London  in  1840  she  met  Lucretia
Mott,  with  whom  she  was  in  sympathy,  and  with
whom  she  signed  the  call  for  the  first  Woman's
rights  convention.  This  was  held  at  her  home  in
Seneca  Falls,  on  19  and  20  July,  1848,  on  which
occasion  the  first  formal  claim  of  sufifrage  for  wom-
en was  made.  She  addressed  the  New  York  legis-
lature on  the  rights  of  married  women  in  1854,  and
in  advocacy  of  divorce  for  drunkenness  in  1860,
and  in  1867  spoke  before  the  legislature  and  the
constitutional  convention,  maintaining  that  dur-
ing the  revision  of  the  constitution  the  state  was
resolved  into  its  original  elements  and  that  citizens
of  both  sexes  had  a  right  to  vote  for  members  of
that  convention.  She  canvassed  Kansas  in  1867  and
Michigan  in  1874.  when  the  question  of  woman  suf-
frage was  submitted  to  the  people  of  those  states,
and  since  1869  she  has  addressed  congressional  com-
mittees and  state  constitutional  conventions  upon
this  subject,  besides  giving  numerous  lectures.
She  was  president  from  1855  till  1865  of  the  na-
tional committee  of  her  party,  of  the  Woman's  loy-
al league  in  1863,  and  of  the  National  woman  suf-
frage association  until  1873.  In  1868  she  was  a
candidate  for  congress.  She  has  written  many
calls  to  conventions  and  addresses,  and  was  an
editor  with  Susan  B.  Anthony  and  Parker  Pills-
bury  of  "  The  Revolution,"  which  was  founded  in
1868,  and  is  joint  author  of  "  History  of  Woman's
Suffrage "  (vols.  i.  and  ii..  New  York,  1880 ;  vol.
iii.,  Rochester,  1886). — Their  son,  Theodore,  jour-
nalist, b.  in  Seneca  Falls,  N.  Y.,  10  Feb.,  1851,  was
graduated  at  Cornell  in  1876.  In  1880  he  was  the
Berlin  correspondent  of  the  New  York  "  Tribune,"
and  he  is  now  (1888)  engaged  in  journalism  in
Paris,  France.  He  is  a  contributor  to  periodicals,
translated  and  edited  Le  Goflf's  " Life  of  Thiers"
(New  York,  1879),  and  is  the  author  of  "  The  Wom-
an Question  in  Europe"  (1884).

STANTON,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Charlestown,
R.  L,  19  July,  1739;  d.  there  after  1807.  He
served  as  2d  lieutenant  in  the  Rhode  Island  regi-
ment that  was  raised  for  the  expedition  against
Canada  in  1759,  was  a  member  of  the  general  as-
sembly of  Rhode  Island  from  1768  till  1774  and  of
the  committee  of  safety  in  1776,  and  a  delegate  to
the  State  convention  that  adopted  the  constitution
of  the  United  States  in  1790.  He  was  elected  a
U.  S.  senator,  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  25  June,
1790,  till  3  March,  1793,  was  again  a  member  of
the  Rhode  Island  house  of  representatives,  and  was
afterward  chosen  to  congress,  serving  from  7  Dec,
1801,  till  3  March.  1807.

STANTON,  Oscar  Fitzalan,  naval  officer,  b.  in
.Sag  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  18  July,  1834.  He  entered
the  navy  as  acting  midshipman,  29  Dec,  1849,  and
was  warranted  midshipman  from  the  same  date.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  at
Annapolis  in  1855,  promoted  to  master,  16  Sept.,
1855,  and  commissioned  lieutenant,  2  April,  1856,
serving  in  the  steamer  "  Memphis,"  on  the  Para-
guay expedition,  in  1858-'9,  on  the  coast  of  Africa


in  1859-'60,  and  in  the  sloop  "  St.  Mary's,"  of  the
Pacific  s(jua<lron,  from  December,  1860,  till  April,
1862.  He  was  commissioned  lieutenant-command-
er, 16  July,  1862,  commanded  the  steamer  "  Tioga,"
in  the  special  West  India  squadron,  in  1862-'3,  and
the  steamer  "  Panola,"  on  the  Western  (iulf  block-
ading squadron,  in  1863-'4.  In  1865  he  was  on
ordnance  duty  at  New  York,  after  which  he  served
at  the  naval  academy  until  May,  1867.  He  was
promoted  to  commander,  12  Dec,  1867,  and  had
charge  of  the  steamer  "  Tahoina,"  of  the  North  At-
lantic squadron,  and  the  "  Purveyor,"  on  special  ser-
vice, in  1867-'9.  He  commanded  the  receiving-ship
at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in  1871,  the  steamer  "Mon-
ocacy,"  on  the  Asiatic  station,  from  1872  until  1874,
when  he  was  transferred  to  the  "  Yantic." He  was

Eromoted  to  captain,  1 1  June,  1879,  and  in  Novem-
er,  1881,  went  on  duty  at  the  Naval  asylum  at
Philadelphia,  where  he  remained  until  November,
1884,  when  he  took  command  of  the  steam  frigate
"  Tennessee,"  flag-ship  of  the  North  Atlantic  sta-
tion. Since  31  Oct.,  1885,  he  has  had  command  of
the  naval  station  at  New  London,  Conn.

STANTON,  Richard  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  Alex-
andria, Va.,  9  Sept.,  1812.  He  received  an  aca-
demic education,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  practised  in  Maysville,  Ky.  Being  elected
to  congress  as  a  Democrat,  he  served  from  3  Dec,
1849,  till  3  March,  1855,  and  he  was  presidential
elector  on  the  Buchanan  ticket  in  1856,  state  at-
torney for  his  judicial  district  in  1858,  a  delegate
to  the  National  Democratic  convention  in  1868,
and  district  judge  in  1868-'74.  He  has  edited  the
"  Maysville  Slonitor  "  and  the  "  Maysville  Express,"
and  published  a  "  Code  of  Practice  in  Civil  and
Criminal  Cases  in  Kentucky  "  (Cincinnati,  1855) ;
"  Practical  Treatises  for  Justices  of  the  Peace,  etc,
of  Kentucky  "  (1861) ;  and  a  "  Practical  Manual
for  Executors,  etc.,  in  Kentucky "  (1862). — His
brother,  Frederic  Perry,  lawyer,  b.  in  Alexan-
dria, Va.,  22  Dec,  1814,  obtained  through  his  own
exertion  a  good  education,  and  was  graduated  at
Columbian  college  in  1833.  He  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Alexandria  in  1834,  and  re-
moved to  Memphis,  Tenn.,  where  he  practised  his
profession.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Demo-
crat, serving  from  1  Dec,  1845,  till  3  March,  1855,
and  in  1853-'5  was  chairman  of  the  judiciary  com-
mittee. In  1857  he  was  appointed  secretary  of
Kansas  territory,  and  he  was  governor  of  Kansas
from  1858  till  1861.  In  1863-'4  he  edited  with
Robert  J.  Mather  the  "  Continental  Monthly,"  and
he  has  published  numerous  speeches  in  pamphlet-
form. — Richard  Henry's  son,  Henry  Thorn psoli,
poet,  b.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  30  June,  1834,  was  edu-
cated at  several  colleges  in  Kentucky  and  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy,  but  was  not  graduated.
He  served  as  captain  and  major  in  the  Confederate
army.  For  several  yeare  he  has  been  connected
with  the  U.  S.  Indian  commissioners  in  selecting
lands  for  Indian  reservations.  He  has  invented  an
iron  tie  for  binding  cotton-bales,  and  is  the  author
of  "  The  Moneyless  Man,  and  other  Poems  "  (Balti-
more, 1872),  From  1875  till  1886  he  edited  the
"  Kentucky  Yeoman."  ,

STANTON,  Robert  Livingston,  clergyman,  b.
in  Griswold,  Conn.,  28  March,  1810.  After  gratlu-
ation  at  Lane  theological  seminary  in  1836  he  was
ordained  by  the  j)resbytery  of  Mississippi  in  1839,
and  held  charge  of  churches  in  Blue  Ridge,  Miss.,
from  1839  till  1841,  Woodville,  Miss,,  in  1841-'3,
and  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  from  1843  till  1851,  when
he  became  president  of  Oakland  college.  Miss.,
serving  xmtil  1854.  From  1855  till  1862  he  was  pas-
tor of  a  Presbyterian  church  in  ChiUicothe,  Onio,


STANTON


STARBUCK


691


from  1862  till  1800  he  wha  profemnr  of  pastoral
theology  and  homileties  in  Danvilln  theolof^tcal
semi  nary,  Hiid  from  1800  till  1871  ho  wan  pn>!«i(lent
of  Miami  university.  In  1871-'2  hei>n);ap>ti  in  liter-
ary work  in  Now  Vork  eity,  and  sul)soouL>ntlv  ho
was  an  editor  of  the  "  Herald  and  I*re.M)Vter  '  in
Cincinnati.  The  degree  of  i).  1>,  was  eon/ernul  on
hira  by  Princeton,  and  by  Wa.shin);t«>n  colleife,
Va.,  in  18/52.  Dr.  Stanton  is  the  author  of  "'Ihe
Chunh  and  the  KelK'Uion  "  (New  York.  1H«14).

STANTON.  Stile.H  Truiubull.  iournali.st.  b.  in
Stonington,  Conn.,  10  Dec.,  1840 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  2  Feb.,  1888.  He  was  e<hicated  ut  Oen.
Wdliarn  H.  Russell's  collegiate  and  commercial
institute.  New  Haven,  Conn.  In  187.'>-'8  he  was*
appointed  ai<le  on  the  brigmle  staff  of  the  National
guard.  During  the  canvass  of  1880  he  servini  as
secretary  of  the  licpublican  state  central  com-
mittee, and  was  an  alternate  delegate  to  the  Ke-
publican  national  convention  at  Chicago  in  that
year.  He  was  executive  secretary  of  state  in  Con-
necticut in  1879-'80,  and  was  a  member  of  the
bouse  of  representatives  in  1881-'2,  and  served  in
the  slate  senate  in  1884-'fl,  being  i)resident  pro
tempore  in  1885-'0.  He  was  defeateu  for  secretary
of  state  on  the  Ucpublican  ticket  in  1882,  and  in
that  year  declined  tlie  ^x)st  of  secretary  of  legation
in  Paris.  Karly  in  life  he  devotetl  himself  to
journalism,  and  became  connecte<l  with  the  Nor-
wich. Conn.,  "  Bulletin  "  and  the  Worcester,  Mass.,
'•  Press,"  achieving  a  reputation  as  a  humorist.

STANWIX,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Eng-
land about  1690:  d.  at  sea  in  December.  1765.  His
uncle  served  with  reputation  in  the  wars  of  Queen
Anne  as  a  brigadier-general.  Entering  the  army
in  1706,  John  became  a  captain  of  the  grenatliers
\\n  1T39,  major  of  marines  in  1741,  and  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1745,  and  was  appointed  ecjuerry  to
Frederick,  Prince  of  Wales,  in  1749.  In  175(»  he
was  promoted  to  the  government  of  Carlisle,  which
city  he  represented  in  parliament.  In  1754  he  be-
came deputy  quartermaster-general  of  the  forces,
and  on  1  Jan.,  1756,  he  was  made  colonel-com-
mandant of  the  1st  battalion  of  the  60th  or  royal
American  regiment.  On  his  arrival  in  this  coun-
try he  was  given  the  command  of  the  southern
district.  During  1757  his  headquarters  were  at
Carlisle,  Pa.,  and  he  was  appointed  brigadier-gen-
eral on  27  Dec.  of  that  year.  After  his  relief  by
Gen.  John  Forbes  in  1758,  Gen.  Stanwix  went  to
Albany,  whence  he  was  ordered  to  the  Oneida
carrying-place,  to  secure  that  imi)ortant  position
by  the  erection  of  a  work  which  was  called  Fort
Stanwix  in  his  honor.  A  map  of  this  fort,  with  an
account  of  its  history,  is  contained  in  the  "  D<x;u-
mentary  History  of  New  York"  (vol.  iv.).  and  the
Harvartl  college  library  |»oss»'ss*»s  a  copy  of  the
manuscript  journal  of  Ensign  Moses  Dorr,  which
includes  an  account  of  the  building  of  Fort  .Stan-
wix. In  1759  he  returned  to  Pennsylvania,  rejwired
the  old  fort  at  Pittsburg,  and  surmounted  the  w»)rk.H
with  cannon,  also  securing,  by  his  prudtnce,  the
gmnl-will  of  the  Indians.  On  19  June,  1759.  he  was
ap|)ointed  major-general,  but  he  was  relieve<l  by
Gen.  Ilol)ert  Monckton  on  4  May.  1700.  and  became
lieutenant-general  on  19  Jan..  1701.  After  his  re-
turn to  England  he  was  ap|X)inte«l  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  Isle  of  Wight.  In-came  colonel  of
the  8th  foot,  and  was  a  ineml>er  of  |uirliament  for
Appleby.  lie  was  lost  at  sea  while  crossing  from
Dutilin  to  Holvhea<l  in  "Tin-  E^igle  "  packet.

STAPLES.' John  Jacob,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Prussia;  d.  in  Newtown.  Ijong  Island,  N.  Y..  in
1800.  Early  in  life  he  came  to  New  York,  and  was
identified  with  the  Methoilist  church,  being  a  tnis-


t«e  and  st«ward  of  the  John  ttreeC  praaohlng-
houm  in  1774-'8.  He  was  one  of  the  lint  to  intro*
duco  sugar-rvllning  into  this  oountfy.  His  fint
reflnery  was  in  itector  street,  and  the  second  and
larger  one  in  LWtertj  street  Thin  was  the  famous
*'  sugar-house  "  in  which  the  British  confined
American  priMniers  during  the  R<>%'olution.  Mr.
Staples  acquir«Hl  wealth,  but  his  profM'rty  was  lost
by  liis  son.  John  Jiutib.  who  engage*!  in  specula-
tion in  England.

STAPLES,  Waller  Redd,  jurist,  b.  in  Patrick
Court-Houso,  Patrick  co.,  Va.,  24  Feb.,  IM26.  He
was  grailuated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1846,  stud-
ie<l  law,  and  was  admitte<l  to  prai-lice  in  1848.  Ue
served  in  the  legislature  in  1853-'4,  was  presiden-
tial elector  on  the  Whig  ticket  in  laV)  and  1800.
and  one  of  four  commi.ssionen  to  the  Provisional
congress  that  met  in  Montgomery.  Ala.,  in  1861.
He  serveil  in  the  Confe<lerate  congress  for  the  sub-
secjuent  three  years,  and  took  an  active  jiart  in
its  deliberations.  In  1870-'H2  he  was  a  judge  of
the  supreme  court  of  Virginia.  He  was  one  of
the  three  revisers  of  the  c«Kle  of  laws  for  the  state
in  1884-'0,  elector  on  the  Democratic  presidential
ticket  in  1884.  and  is  now  (1H8M)  counsel  f«ir  the
Richmond  and  Danville  railn>ad.  During  his
term  on  the  Ijcnch  he  acquire*!  a  national  reputa-
tion for  the  learning,  soundness,  and  (*«iiiservatism
that  characterized  his  opinions.  He  also  takes
high  rank  as  a  political  sin-aker.

STAPLES.  William  Read,  jurist  and  histo-
rian, b.  in  Providence.  R.  I.,  10  Oct..  1798:  d.  there,
19  Oct.,  1868.  After  gratluation  at  Brown  in  1817.
he  studied  law.  and  was  admitte<I  to  the  bar  in
1819.  He  was  associate  judge  of  the  Rhode  Island
supreme  court  from  1835  till  1854.  and  was  chief
justice  of  that  court  in  1854-'6.  From  18,5<J  until
nis  death  he  was  secretary  and  trea.«urer  of  the
Rho<le  Island  society  for  the  encouragrment  of
domestic  industry,  contributed  biographies  to  its
transactions,  and  was  a  founder  of  the  Rhode
Island  historical  society,  serving  as  it.s  librarian,
secretary,  and  vice-president.  Brown  gave  him  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1802.  He  edite«l  the  sei>ond
volume  of  the  Rhode  Island  historical  .society's
collections,  and  Samuel  Gorton's  ".Simplicities*
Defence  again.st  Seven  -  H cadet!  Policy"  (Provi-
dence, 1835).  and  publishwl  the  **  Annals  of  Provi-
dence to  1832"  (1843);  "  Df)cumentar)'  History  of
the  Destruction  of  the  *Gasp^'"  (1845);  "  Pro-
>ceedings  of  the  First  General  A.ssembly  for  the
Incor{K)ration  of  Providence  Plantations  in  1047"
(1H47):  and  "  Rho«!e  Island  Form- B«K)k  "  (1859).

STARBl'CK.  CalTin  Wa.shburn.  journalist,
h.  in  Cincinnati.  Ohio.  20  April,  1822;  d.  there,  15
Nov..  1870.  He  was  eilucateil  at  the  public  schools
of  his  native  city,  but,  as  his  pan'nts'  means  were
limited,  he  began  very  early  to  support  himself.
He  learned  the  print inc  trade,  aiid,  naving  saved
a  little  money,  established,  at  ninett'en,  llio  Cin-
cinnati "Times,"  an  afteriuHin  iu'ws|ia|i»'r.  Being
the  fastest  ty|>e-setter  in  Ohio,  he  pre|>ared  a  lar;^
part  of  the  i>a|K>r  for  years,  and  also  assisted!  m
distributing  it  to  subscribers.  1 1  rapidly  gained
success,  and  its  weekly  edition  had  at  one  time  the
largest  circulation  in"  the  west.  To  his  exertions
and  p'liorosity  are  mainly  due  the  Relief  union,
the  Home  of  the  friendless,  and  other  charitable  in-
stitutions of  Cincinnati,  while  his  private  gifts  were
many  and  constant.  During  the  civil  war  he  strove
by  voic^  and  {ten  to  establish  the  National  credit
when  the  government  neetled  money.  To  the
families  of  the  men  in  his  employment  who  had
enlisted  he  continued  their  n-gular  iiay  while  they
were  in  the  servii'e. When  in  1804  the  governor


652


STARIN


STARK


of  Ohio  tendered  the  home-guards  of  the  state  to
the  country  for  a  hundred  days,  Starbuck  left  his
business  and  went  into  the  field.

STARIN,  John  Henry,  steamboat-proprietor,
b.  in  Sammonsville,  Fulton  co.,  N,  Y.,  27  Aug.,
1827.  He  received  a  good  education,  intending  to
study  a  liberal  profession,  but  began  business  as  a
druggist  in  Fultonville,  N.  Y.,  in  1845.  He  was
postmaster  of  the  place  under  President  Polk's
administration.  Afterward  he  began  to  hire  canal-
boats  to  carry  freight  in  the  waters  about  New
York  city.  Succeeding  in  this  enterprise,  he  was
soon  able  to  buy  boats,  and  he  next  invested  in
steamboats.  Having  purchased  for  his  summer
residence  a  group  of  islands  in  Long  Island  sound,
nearly  opposite  New  Rochelle.  he  opened  a  sum-
mer resort  for  excursionists  there,  and  it  has  be-
come very  popular.  He  founded  the  Starin  city,
river,  and  harbor  transportation  company,  of  which
he  is  the  president.  In  1877  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress, and  served  one  term.

HTARK,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  in  the  county
of  Stirling,  Scotland,  in  1790;  d.  in  Denny-loan-
hcad,  Scotland.  18  Sept.,  1849.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Glasgow  in  1811,  studied  the-
ology at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  taught  in
London,  and  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1817  by  the
Associate  presbytery  of  Edinburgh.  He  was  pastor
of  the  congregation  of  South  Shields  in  1818-'19,
and  in  1820  came  to  New  York,  where  in  1822  he
was  installed  pastor  of  the  Grand  street  associate
church.  In  1849,  owing  to  impaired  health,  he
visited  Scotland,  where  he  died.  His  remains  were
brought  to  this  country.  The  University  of  Lon-
don gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  about  1844.
He  published  several  sermons,  and  wrote  a  "His-
tory of  the  Secession  "  in  a  series  of  papers  printed
in  the  "  Religious  Monitor,"  and  afterward  in  the
'•Associate  Presbyterian  Magazine,"  to  which  he
was  a  frequent  contributor.

STARK,  Benjamin,  U.  S.  senator,  b.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  2G  June,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  school.  New  London.  Conn.,  in  1835,  entered
a  counting-house  in  New  York,  and  became  a  mer-
chant. In  1845  he  removed  to  Oregon,  and  en-
gaged in  trade  with  the  Sandwich  islands,  but
studied  law  in  1850,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Oregon,  and  began  practice  in  Portland,  of  which
city  he  was  a  founder.  He  was  a  member  in  1853
of  the  territorial  house  of  representatives,  and  in
1860  of  the  state  house  of  representatives,  and  was
appointed  a  U.  S.  senator  from  Oregon  as  a  Demo-
crat, in  place  of  Edward  D.  Baker,  serving  from

27  Feb.,  till  1  Dec,  1862.  He  was  a  delegate  from
Oregon  to  the  National  Democratic  convention  at
Chicago  in  1864,  and  from  Connecticut  to  the  one
in  New  York  in  1868.  Since  1867  he  has  been  a
member  of  the  board  of  education  of  New  London,
Conn.,  a  director  of  the  New  London  Northern
railroad  company,  and  since  1871  a  deputy  to  the
conventions  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.

STARK,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Londonderrv,  N.  H.,

28  Aug.,  1728;  d.  in  Manchester,  N.  H.,'8  May,
1822.  His  lather  emigrated  from  the  north  of  Ire-
land and  settled  on  the  extreme  frontier  of  New
Hampshire  in  near  neighborhood  to  the  Indians,
owned  extensive  tracts  of  land  about  Amoskeag
falls,  and  was  an  original  proprietor  of  Dunbarton
(then  called  Starkstown).  Here  the  son  grew,  up
with  few  advantages  of  book  education,  but  with
abundant  training  in  hunting  and  all  athletic  em-
ployments. He  made  frequent  hunting-excursions
mto  the  forest,  and  on  one  of  these  occasions,  in
1752,  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  savages,  and  re-
tained in  captivity  till  he  was  ransomed  by  the


^■Arryyv  c/Zcc/iy^


colony  of  Massachusetts.  The  bold  and  defiant
bearing  of  Stark  excited  the  admiration  of  his
savage  captors,  and  after  the  initiatory  ceremony
of  running  the  gantlet,  in  which  he  took  the  un-
expected part  of
using  his  club  on
the  Indians,  he
was  released  from
the  drudgery  usu-
ally imposed  on
captives,  and  was
called  by  them
"  the  young  chief."
The  knowledge  he
thus  gained  of  for-
est life  and  of  the
topography  of  the
lx)rder  was  of  great
service  in  subse-
quent conflicts
with  the  Indians.
In  1755  he  was  ap-
pointed a  lieuten-
ant in  Maj.  Robert
Rogers's  famous
corps  of  rangers,  and  served  with  it,  soon  rising
to  the  rank  of  captain,  through  all  the  campaigns
around  Lake  George  and  LaKe  Champlain,  where
traditions  still  exist  of  his  sagacity  and  bravery.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  retired  from  the
army  and  engaged  in  farming  at  Derryfield  (now
Manchester,  N.  H.),  and  so  continued  till  tidings
reached  him  of  the  battle  of  Lexington.  Prompt-
ly he  then  mounted  his  horse,  and,  at  the  head  of
several  hundred  of  his  neighbors,  set  out  to  join
the  army  at  Cambridge.  Being  there  appointed
colonel,  he  in  one  day  organized  a  regiment  of
eight  hundred  hardy  backwoodsmen.  On  17  June,
1775,  he  was  stationed  about  three  miles  north
of  Boston,  in  a  position  from  which  he  had  a  full
view  of  Bunkers  and  Breed's  hills.  Seeing  that
a  battle  was  inevitable,  he  waited  for  no  orders,
but  set  out  at  once  for  the  ground,  which  he
reached  just  before  the  conflict  began.  He  led  his
men  into  the  fight,  saying:  "Boys,  aim  at  their
waistbands  " — an  order  that  has  become  historical.
His  ammunition  giving  out,  he  was  forced  to  retreat,
which  he  did  with  much  deliberation,  leading  his
men  under  a  hot  fire,  but  in  good  order,  across
Charlestown  neck  to  Merlin  hill.  After  the  evacu-
ation of  Boston  he  marched  with  his  regiment  to
New  York.  He  was  subsequently  ordered  to  Cana-
da, and  then  rejoining  Washington,  was  with  him
at  Trenton  and  Princeton.  Having  been  slighted,
as  he  thought,  in  the  promotions,  he  resigned  his
commission  and  retired  to  his  farm.  When  infor-
mation arrived  that  Gen.  Arthur  St.  Clair  had  re-
treated and  Ticonderoga  had  been  taken,  New
Hampshire  flew  to  arms,  and  called  for  Stark  to
command  her  troops.  He  consented  on  condition
that  he  should  not  be  subject  to  any  orders  but  his
own  ;  and  to  this  the  council  of  state  agreed,  be-
cause the  men  would  not  march  without  him.  Set-
ting out  with  a  small  force  for  Bennington,  he
there  learned  that  Bufgoyne  had  despatched  Col.
Frederick  Baiim  with  506  men  to  seize  the  stores
collected  at  that  place.  Sending  out  expresses  to
call  in  the  militia  of  the  neighborhood.  Stark
marched  out  to  meet  him,  hearing  of  which,  Baura
intrenched  himself  in  a  strong  position  about  six
miles  from  Bennington,  and  sent  to  Burgoyne  for
re-enforceinents.  Before  they  could  arrive.  Stark
attacked  him  on  16  Aug.,  1777.  Tradition  says
that  he  called  to  his  men  as  he  led  them  to  the  as-
sault :  "  There  they  are,  boys. We  ]?eat  them  to-


STARK


STAKKWKATIIKR


66B


day,  or  Molly  St«rk'«  h  wiilow ! " — nnothrr  of  his
sentencns  that  has  gone  into  history. I>«>ubtH  have
been cast  <>n it.s atitht'iitii'ity, for Mm. Stark's
name  was  Klizabcth. The  s«>«'on«l  British  force  of
500  men,  undor  Col.  UrcyMiuiin,  prf»«Mitly  arriving;
on  the  scene,  was  likewise  totally  defeat*'*!. Of  the
l.tKM)  British,  not  more  than  a  hiindn'd  escape«l,
all  th»'  rest  \to\ng  killetl  or  capture*!,  a  result  of
groat  im|K>rtance,  as  it  led  ultimately  to  the  sur-
render of  IJurgoyne  at  Sarat*>ga. Vol.  liaum,  who
was mortally  wounde*!.  sjiid of tlio provincials:
"  They  fought  more  like  hell-hounds  than  soldiers."
The  American  loss  was  only  al)out  seventy." Wash-
ington s|x>keof  it  immiMliately  a.s  "  the  great  stroke
struck  by  (Jen.  Stark  n*^ar  liennington  " ;  and  IJar-
oness  ltie<losel,  then  in  the  British  c«mp,  wrote:  '
"  This  unfortunate  event  paralyz*;*!  our  o|H»rjiti<>ns.*'
For  this  victory  Stark  was  made  a  brigatlier-general,
4  Oct.,  1777,  aiid  given  the  thanks  of  congress. He  j
continue*!  in  active  service  during  the  remaintler  of
the  war,  »lisplaying  everywhere  distinguishe*!  abil-
ity and  commanding  the  northern  department  in
1778  and 1781. In  1788  he  retinnl  to  his  farm,
where  he  lived  in reptiblican  simplicity  till  his
death  at  the  age  of  ninety-three. When  lie  was
eighty-nine  years  ol*l  c«)ngress  allowe*!  him  a  jk'H-
sion  (if  sixty  dollars  per  month  :  but  with  his  sim-
ple tastes  and  habits  this  was  not  essential  to  his
*;omfort. He  was  a  go*xi  ty|)o  of  the  class  of  men
who gave success to the American Revolution.
With  the  exception  of  Gen.  Thomjis  Sumter,  he  was
the last  surviving  general  of  the Revolutionary
army. He  was  buried  on  his
own  grounds  on  the  e^ist  bank
of Merrimack  river  at Man-
chester, where  a  simple  granite
ol)elisk  was  placed  in  1829  to
mark his  ri'sting- place. The
citizens  *)f  Manchester  niantetl
memorial trees  arounu it in
187C. In August, 1887, the
corner-stone  was  lai*l  in  lien-
nington of  the  mt>nument  seen
in the illustration. It  is  an
obelisk  of  limestone,  801 feet
high  from  foumlation  to  a|)ex.
It  is  also  proposed  to  erect  at
Manchester  a ma.ssive  eques-
trian statue  in  bronze  of  th»
general.  Stark's  biography  wa>
written  by  Edward  lOven-tt  in
Sparks's "  American Biogra-
plirv'." See  also  his  "  Life  and
Omcial  Correspondence,"  by  his
grandson, Caleb  Stark (C«)n-
cord,  N.  H..  18<»0).— His  broth-
er, WiUiain,  soldier,  b.  in  Ijondonderry,  X.  H..  12
April.  1721;  d.  on  Ij<ing  Island.  N.  Y.,  alx)ut  1770.
acquired  a  good  education,  and  was  among  the  first
to  whom  the  proprietors  grante*!  hunls  in  Ij<mdon-
derry. Previous  to  the  erection  of  a  public  njeet-
ing-house  the  town-meetings  were  held  at  his  home.
Ho  served  in  the  oh!  Fa'iich  war,  an*!,  as  a  captain
of  rangers  on  the  northern  fnjutier,  was  at  Ticon-
deroga,  and  fought under  (Jen.  .Jeffrey  Amherst
at Ii*)uisburg  and  Gen.  James  Wolfe  at  (^ueU-c.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  applied  for
the  command  of  a  regini«Mit.  but  an*)ther  olTlcer
was  jjrfferriH!  by  the New Ham|)shire  ass<Mnbly.
and  (teeming  this  an  insult,  he  entenn!  the  British
service  as  colonel. He  endeavored  to  persua*!e  his
brother  John  toa«lopt  this  course,  but  without  suc-
cess. He  is  descTil)e(!  as  |M)ssi*s8ing  great  bravery
and  hardiluxxl,  but  as  wanting  in  moral firmness.
His  name  ap|)ears  in  tlie  banishment  and  proscrip-


'J


lion  act  of  Now  Hampuhirv.  and  hb  estate  WMoon-
flflcated.  He  wna  «  proprietor  of  Vlggwacktl  (nam
Fryoburg,  Me.),  ami  a  hill  there  wan  natnoq  for
him.  His  death  was  caumm!  I*y  a  fall  frora  his
horse. — John's  mm,  Calkh,  meri-hant,  b.  in  I>un-
Iwrton.  N.  H..  8  Dec.,  1750;  d.  on  hin  Mtja«  in  ()x-
fori!  township,  Ohio.  2(1  Aug..  18»6,  aenrcd  at  the
age  of  flfte4>n  as  ensign  in  his  father's  regiment  at
Bunker  Hill,  and  remained  with  the  army  until
the  close  of  the  war,  ri>ting  Ut  tlie  rank  of  brigade
major.  He  then  engage^!  in  commertv  in  Boston,
and  removin!  in  1828  to  Ohio. — Caleb's  son,  Caleb,
author,  b.  in  Dunbarton.  N.  H.,  21  Nov..  1H04:  d.
there,  1  Fei).,  1804,  was  gnuluated  at  Harvard  in
182^},  studied  law  in  Litchfield,  and  afterward  in
New  York  city,  and  U-gan  to  pnu^tise  in  (--'incin-
nati,  Ohio,  but  soon  remov«>d  to(  oncord,  N.  H..  and
subsequently  to  Dunbarton,  N.  H..  n-tiring  from
his  profession.  He  wasa  niem>*er  of  the  New  Hamp-
shire legislature,  and  was  the  author  of  "Remi-
niscences of  the  P'rench  War,  containing  Rogers's
Expeditions  with  the  New  Kngland  Rangers,  and
an  Account  of  the  Life  and  Military  Serviee  of  John
Stark"  (Concord,  18:11);  ".Memoir  and  Oflhial
(,'orrespondence  of  (Jen.  John  Stark;  with  Notices
of  other  Officers  of  the  Itevolution"  (18<10):  and
a  "  History  of  Dunlmrton.  N.  H..  fn)m  the  Grant
by  Mason^s  Assigns  in  K.")!  to  18<W"  (1800).—
John's  great-grandson.  ^liUiam,  lawyer,  b.  in
Manchester.  N.  H..  about  1820;  d.  in  Somerville,
Mass.,  29  ()ct.,  1878,  was  graduat*-*!  at  Williams
in  1850,  studiinl  law,  was  admitted  to  the  liar  of
New  York  in  18.">1,  and  pnK-tised  in  Njissau.  In
185;}  he  remov*?t!  to  Manchester,  remaining  there
until  1870,  when  he  was  plmiH!  in  the  Mcljean  asy-
lum in  Somerville,  Mass..  as  his  faculties  had  lie-
come  im|)Jiired.  Pn'viously  he  ha<!  devoted  him-
self to  literary  pursuits  and  to  the  care  (»f  a  lar^
collecticm  of  rare  l>irds  and  animals.  His  imrk  in
Manchester,  which  wius  o|H'n  to  the  publiir,  was
widely  known.  He  wrote  several  |M»erns,  and  fre-
(luentlv  ItH'ttinMl.

STARK EY,  Thomas  Alfred.  P.  E.  l)ishop.  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1824.  He  was  educated  as
a  civil  engmeer,  and  practise*!  that  pn»fession  in
1839-'45.  Having  rest)lviH!  to  enter  the  ministry,
he  studied  theology  for  two  vears,  and  wa*  onlained
(leacon  in  the  Church  of  the  Ascension,  Philadel-
phia, 21  Feb.,  1847,  Ity  Bishop  Alonz*>  P*>tter.  an«l
priest  in  Trinity  church,  Pottsville,  Pa.,  21  May,
1848,  bv  the  same  bishoi».  He  serve*!  as  mis>ionary
in  Schuvlkill  c«>unty,  Pa,,  in  1847-'50,  where  he
founded'  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Apostles,  at  St,
Clair.  He  was  rector  of  Christ  church,  Troy,
N.  Y.,  in  1850-'4.  of  .St.  Paul's,  AlUmv,  N.  Y.,  in
18.->4-'8,  of  Trinitv  church,  Clevelaiuf.  Ohio,  in
18,')8-'fi9.  and  of  the  Church  i»f  the  Epiphany.
Washington.  D.  C..  in  18r.{>-'?2.  H.-  s<tv»v!  in
1875-*0  in  the  Mission  rooms.  New  York  city.  an«l
Ijecame  rector  of  St.  Paul's  chunh.  Paterson,
N.  J.,  in  1877.  This  ptist  he  held  for  three  years.
He  receive*!  the  degree  of  D.  D.  fr*>iii  H.»b«rt  col-
lege. N.  Y..  in  18(14.  He  wa.s  elected  liishop  of
northern  New  Jersey  in  1879.  and  wa.s  consecrated
8  Jan..  18N0.  The  name  of  his  di*x?es«  was  changed
to  that  of  Newark  in  ISHtt.

STARKWEATHER,  John  (onTerse,  soldier,
b.  in  C.H>iKrstowu.  N.  Y.,  11  -May.  IxlO;  d.  in
Washington.  D.  C..  15  Nov..  1890.  His  father.
(ie(.rge  Anson  (b.  in  1794:  *!.  in  1878).  was  gradu-
ate*! tit  Union  in  1819.  held  l.val  .>ffi*xv<«  in  Ot»«Bgo,
N.  Y.,  was  colonel  of  the  New  Y«»rk  I2th  artillery,
and  was  el*'cl*H!  i.»c*mgress  as  a  DenxK-ral.  serving
from  «  IKh-..  1847.  till  8  March.  1S49.  After  gr«Ju-
I  ation  at  Union  in  1850,  the  son  removed  to  Mil-


654


STARNES


STAUGHTON


waiikee,  Wis.,  and  practised  law  until  1861.  On
17  May.  1861,  he  was  made  colonel  of  the  1st  Wis-
consin volunteers,  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Fall-
ing Waters,  2  July,  1861,  and  Edward's  Ferry,  29
July,  1861.  and  was  mustered  out  on  21  Aug.,  1861.
Reorgarizing  his  regiment  for  three  years,  by  spe-
cial order  of  the  war  department,  he  again  enlisted,
and  served  in  Kentucky  and  northern  Alabama.
He  participated  in  the  battle  of  Perryville,  Ky.,
8  Oct.,  1862.  He  was  also  engaged  at  Stone  river,
31  Dec,  1862,  and  1-2  Jan.,  1863.  and  remained  on
duty  at  Murfreesboro,  Tenn.,  until  23  June,  18613.
He  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  U.  S.  volun-
teers on  17  July,  1863,  commanded  brigades  and
divisions  in  the  Array  of  the  Ohio  and  in  the  Army
of  the  Cumberland,  participated  in  the  attack  at
Chickamauga,  19-21  Sept.,  1863,  where  he  was
wounded,  in  battles  around  Chattanooga,  Tenn.,
23-25  Nov.,  1863,  and  in  the  assault  and  capture
of  Mission  Ridge,  Tenn.,  23-25  Nov.,  1863.  He
served  on  the  court-martial  that  tried  Gen.  Will-
iam A.  Hammond,  surgeon-general,  U.  S.  army
(o.  v.),  and,  after  commanding  several  posts  in
Tennessee  and  Alabama,  he  was  mustered  out  of
the  army  on  11  May,  1865.  After  farming  for
several  years  in  Wisconsin,  and  occupying  posts
of  importance  and  trust,  he  removed  to  Washing-
ton, I).  C,  where  he  engaged  in  practice,  having
been  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1857. — His  cousin,
Henry  Howard,  lawyer,  b.  in  Preston.  New  Lon-
don CO.,  Conn.,  29  April,  1826 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  28  Jan.,  1876,  was  educated  in  public  schools,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  served  in  the
Connecticut  legislature  in  1856,  and  was  a  delegate
to  the  National  Republican  conventions  that  nomi-
nated Lincoln  in  1860  and  Grant  in  1868.  In  1861
he  was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln  to  be  post-
master at  Norwich,  and  he  was  reappointed  by
President  Johnson  in  1865,  but  resigned  in  1866.
He  was  then  chosen  to  congress  as  a  Republican,
and  served  from  4  March,  1867,  until  his  death,
being  thrice  reelected.

STARNES,  Henry,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Kingston,  Ontario,  13  Oct.,  1816.  His  grandfather,
a  loyalist,  settled  in  Canada  at  the  close  of  the
American  Revolution.  Henry  was  educated  at
Montreal  college,  and  was  for  several  years  a  mem-
ber of  the  firm  of  Leslie,  Starnes  and  Co.,  whole-
sale merchants  in  Montreal.  He  represented  Cha-
teauguay  in  the  Canadian  assembly  from  1857  till
1863,  when  he  retired,  He  became  a  member  of
the  executive  council,  province  of  Quebec,  in  1878,
speaker  of  the  legislative  council  in  1879,  was  com-
missioner of  railways  in  1882-'4,  and  commissioner
of  public  works  in  the  Taillon  ministry  for  a  short
time  in  1887.  Mr.  Starnes  has  been  warden  of
Trinity  house,  manager  of  the  Ontario  bank  in
Montreal,  president  of  the  Shedden  County  rail-
way, and  mayor  of  Montreal  in  1856  and  1866.

STARR,  Alfred  Adolphus,  lecturer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  25  Jan.,  1820.  He  was  educated  in  pri-
vate schools  in  New  York  and  in  Mendham,  N.  J.,
after  which  he  entered  mercantile  life,  which  he
abandoned  in  1845,  and  began  to  deliver  lectures,
which  he  illustrated  with  a  crude  solar  microscope
made  of  pasteboard.  Afterward  he  made  an  oxy-
hydrogen  microscope,  and  several  years  later  he
procured  a  fine  apparatus.  He  has  given  more
than  2,500  lectures  and  exhibitions  before  schools
and  colleges,  and  was  also  connected  with  Phineas
T.  Barnum.  Using  a  microscope  of  enormous
power,  he  projected  living  specimens  on- his  screen,
and,  being  a  skilful  manipulator,  regulated  their
performances  with  dexterity,  showing  water-insects
and  animalcules  feeding  upon  or  fighting  with


each  other.  He  was  one  of  the  first  to  procure  a
patent  (1858)  to  light  railroad-cars  with  gas.

STARR,  Eliza  Allan,  author,  b.  in  Deerfield,
Mass.,  29  Aug.,  1824.  She  received  her  education
in  her  native  town,  became  a  member  of  the  Roman
Catholic  church  in  1850,  and  has  since  devoted  her-
self principally  to  the  study  of  Christian  art.  In
1856  she  removed  to  Chicago.  She  has  published
a  volume  of  poems  (1867),  and  "Patron  Saints"
(New  York,  1871).

STARR,  Frederick  Ratcliford,  author,  b.  in
Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  19  June,  1821.  He  removed
to  this  country  and  became  president  of  an  insur-
ance compatiy  in  Philadelphia,  but  retired  in  1870
and  established  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  Echo  farm,
a  dairy  and  stock-farm  that  has  become  widely
known.  Later  the  Echo  farm  company  was  or-
ganized by  him,  which  controls  large  creameries
throughout  a  great  part  of  Litchfield  county.
Mr.  Starr  served  in  the  Connecticut  legislature  in
1883-'4,  and  has  been  interested  in  temperance  and
other  reforms.  He  has  lectured  and  is  the  author
of  "  Didley  Dumps,  the  Newsboy  "  (Philadelphia,
1866) ;  "  May  I  Not  ?  or  Two  Wavs  of  looking
through  a  Telescope"  (1867);  "What  Can  I  Dof  a
Question  for  Professing  Christians  "  (1867 ;  revised
ed.,  1887) ;  "  Farm  Echoes  "  (New  York,  1881) ;  and
"  From  Shore  to  Shore  "  (Philadelphia,  1887).

STARRS,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dnim-
quin.  County  Tyrone,  Ireland,  in  1807;  d.  in  New
York  city,  6  Feb.,  1873.  After  receiving  a  good
classical  education,  he  studied  theology  at  May-
nooth  college,  near  Dublin,  Ireland,  came  to  this
country  in  1828,  was  received  into  the  diocese  of
New  York,  completed  his  theological  course  at  St.
Mary's  seminary,  Baltimore,  and  in  1834  was  or-
dained a  priest  at  St.  Patrick's  cathedral  in  New
York,  remaining  curate  there  for  ten  years.  In
1844  he  was  made  pastor  of  St.  Mary's  church  in
Grand  street.  New  York,  serving  until  1853,  when
he  was  appointed  rector  of  St.  Patrick's  cathedral
and  vicar-general  of  the  archdiocese  of  New  York.
After  the  death  of  Archbishop  Hughes  in  1864,  Dr.
Starrs  was  administrator  of  the  diocese  until  the
succeeding  bishop  was  appointed,  to  whom  he
acted  as  theologian  in  the  plenary  council  in  Balti-
more in  1866,  and  also  filled  this  office  at  two
councils  of  the  province.  For  twenty  years  he  was
the  spiritual  superior  of  the  Sisters  of  Charity,  and

6 resident  of  the  trustees  of  St.  Vincent's  hospital.
le  was  instrumental  in  instituting  the  Sisters  of
Mercy  and  Sisters  of  the  Good  Shepherd.

STAUGHTON,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cok
ventry,  Warwickshire,  England,  4  Jan.,  1770;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  12  Dec,  1829.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Baptist  theological  institution,  Bristol,
in  1792,  and  the  next  year  came  to  this  country,
landing  at  Charleston.  After  preaching  for  more
than  a  year  at  Georgetown,  S.  C,  he  removed  to
New  York  city,  and  thence  to  New  Jersey,  residing
for  some  time  at  Bordentown,  where,  in  1797,  he
was  ordained,  and  then  at  Burlington.  At  the  lat-
ter place  he  remained  until  1805,  when  he  accepted
a  call  to  the  pastorate  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  of
Philadelphia.  After  a  successful  ministry  there  of
six  years,  he  identified  himself  with  a  new  enter-
prise, which  resulted  in  the  formation  of  a  church
and  the  erection  of  a  large  house  of  worship  on
Sansom  street.  His  pastorate  of  this  church,  ex-
tending from  1811  till  1822,  was  one  of  great  suc-
cess. Besides  preaching  regularly  three  times  on
Sunday  and  once  or  twice  during  the  week,  he  was
the  principal  of  a  Baptist  theological  school.  In
1822  he  was  called  to  the  presidency  of  Columbian
college,  D.  C,  which  office  he  resigned  in  1827,  and


STAUNTON


STBARN8


600


was  cIpcUkI  in  lft2n  prcsidpitt  of  Ooorp>town  ool-
U'iH-,  Ky.  IIh  clitMl  in  \ViL«hin^t4>n,  whiio  «in  hi«
w»y  to  this  new  field  i»f  scrviw.  Ho  was  pmliably
the  most  eloquent  Itaplist  minister  of  his  time  in
this  country.  He  receive«l  from  Prinwton  the  de-
gree of  I).  I),  in  IHOl.  IVsides  a  volume  of  [HH-ms.
wliieh  he  issueil  when  he  wiu<  s^'venttH-n  vears  old,
his  publications  consiste<l  of  a  few  o<-ca.slonal  si'r-
nions  an<l  discourses,  among  them  '*  Kulogium  on
Dr.  IJ4'nmmin  Hush  "  (1818).  Sec  a  "  Memoir"  by
Rev.  S,  W.  I.vnd  (liosfon,  1834).

STAUNKiN.  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Chos-
tcr.  Knglnnd.  20  April.  180;(.  At  the  ag»»  of.  fifteen
he  came  to  the  Unitecl  .States,  and  r(»ceive<i  a  gfHKl
English  and  classical  training  under  one  of  the
profes,s«)r8  in  Hobart  college,  Geneva,  N.  Y.  He
8tudie<l  theology  under  Kev.  Dr.  (afterward  Bishop)
Whitchouse  in  Rochester,  X.  Y..  fmm  18;J0  till  1m;J3,
was  ordaino<l  deacon  in  Oneida  Castle.  N.  Y.,  0
June.  IWW,  by  Bishop  Benjamin  T.  Onderdonk,
and  priest  in  '/Aon  church,  Palmyra,  N.  Y..  7  Sept.,
1834.  by  the  same  bishop.  During  his  diaconate
ho  serye<l  as  missionary  in  Palmyra  and  Lyons,
N.  Y.  He  was  re<'t«)r  of  St.  James's  chun-h.  Kox-
bury,  Mass.,  in  ISa^-'T,  and  of  St.  I'eter's  church,
Morristown,  N.  J.,  in  l!U40-'7,  founded  St.  IVter's
church.  Brf)oklyn,  N.  Y..  an<i  was  its  first  rector  in
1848-'r)l.  and  was  rector  of  Trinity  churc-h.  Pot,s-
dam.  N.  Y.,  in  1852-'9.  Since  then,  having  given
up  active  parochial  work,  he  has  resicled  m  New
York  city,  and  been  engaged  in  literary  and  other
occupations.  He  receivetl  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Hobart  in  1856.  Dr.  Staunton  has  published  "  Dic-
ti«mary  of  the  Church."  which  was  subsequently
revise*!  and  enlarged  under  the  title  of  "  Ecclesias-
tical Dictionary"  (New  York.  1844-'C1);  "The
Catechist's  Manual"  (IKW);  "Songs  and  Prayers
for  the  Family  Altar"  (18(50);  "  Book  of  Common
Praise"  (1800);  a  prize  "Te  Deum  "  and  original
"  Voluntaries  for  tne  Organ  "  ;  and  "  Episotles  in
Clerical  and  Parish  Life '^(1887).  In  1878  he  took
charge  of  the  musical  science  department  in  a  new
cvclojMedia.  and  wrote  nearly  all  the  articles  on
that  subject.  He  has  also  contributed  freely  to
church  literature  in  magazines  and  reviews.

STEARNS,  Asahel,  educator,  b.  in  Lunenburg,
Mass.,  17  June,  1774;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  5
Feb.,  18J^9.  His  ancestor,  Isaac  Stearns,  came  to
this  country  from  England  in  ItWO,  and  was  among
the  first  settlers  of  Watertown.  Mass.  Asahel  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1797.  studied  law.  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  at  Chelmsford,
Mass.  He  was  for  several  years  county  attorney
for  Middlesex,  a  meml)er  of  congress  in  1815-'17,
and  profes.sor  of  law  at  Harvanl  in  1817-'29.  He
was  a  member  of  the  American  academy  of  art^s
and  sciences,  and  was  one  of  the  commissioners  for
revising  the  statutes  of  Massachusetts,  which  wa.s
his  last  lal>or.  He  nublishe<l  "Summary  of  the
Law  and  Practice  of  Real  Actions,  with  an  Ap-
pendix of  Practical  Forms"  (Hallowell.  1824),  and.
with  Iverouel  Shaw,  "General  I^aws.  1780-1822,"
edit^Kl  by  Theron  Metcalf  (Boston.  1823).

STEARNS.  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Leomin-
ster. Mass..  19  July,  1753;  (f.  in  Lincoln,  Mass.,
20  July.  1820.  He  was  graduAte<l  at  Harvard  in
1773,  afterward  taught  sch<Mil.  and  studie<l  theol-
ogy, and  in  1780-'l  wax  a  tutor  at  Cambridgt*.  In
1781  he  was  ordaineil  pastor  of  the  Unitarian
church  at  Lincoln,  where  he  remained  till  his  death.
He  received  the  degree  of  D,  I),  from  Harvanl  in
1810.  Ho  publishe<l  "  The  Iia<lies'  Philosoohv  of
Love,  a  Poem  in  Four  Canttw"  (1797);  "  I'n'nci-
ples  of  Morality  and  Religion"  (1798);  and  ser-
mons and  other  works.


STEARNS,  CharlM  Woodward,  phyiidaii.  It

in  Springfield,  Milhs..  in  In|n;  i|.  in  Ixininncadow.
Mam.,  8  .Sept.,  1KH7.  He  wa>  gnuluatr*!  at  Yal»  in
1837,  and  t<M)k  hii«  medical  degnw  at  the  UniTer-
Kity  of  Pennsylvania  in  IH-Vi.  After  practicing  for
Home  time  he  enten**!  the  army  aaamirgeon,  miba»-
(lUently  travellcsl  and  Htudie«l  in  Kurupe,  and  at
tlie  o|)ening  of  the  civil  war  re-enterf<l  the  aenrioe
as  surgeon  of  the  'M  New  York  regiment.  Ilewaa
on  service  at  Fort  McHenry,  BAlttmorB.  Suffolk.
Va.,  Fortress  Monroe,  and  in  I  he  field.  Dr.StcAms
was  widely  known  as  an  enthusiastic  Shakef<iieare-
an^  student  and  writer.  His  princi|ial  worlcn  ars
" Shakej<|H>are's  Medical  KnowlMlg*" "  (New  York,
18<;5) :  "  The  .Shakes|iean>  Tn^asurvof  WiMiom  and
Knowledge  "  (IH<5») ;  and  "  ( '<m<-or(lMnce  of  the  Con-
stitutioii  of  the  Unit<"<l  .States"  (1K?2),

STEARNS,  Oeorye  Lnther,  merchant,  b.  in
Me<lford.  Mass..  8  Jan..  1809;  d.  in  New  York,  9
April,  18<J7.  His  father,  Luther,  wa.H  a  teacher  of
reputation.  In  early  life  his  son  engagwl  in  the
business  of  ship-chandlery,  and  after  a  prosperous
carwr  undert(M>k  the  manufactun*  of  shwt-  and
ni|>e-lea<l,  doing  business  in  liostonand  r(>siding  in
Me<lford.  He  identified  himself  with  the  anti-
slavery  cause,  IxH-ame  a  Fn»e-sf>iler  in  1H4K,  aided
John  hrown  in  Kansas,  and  sup[H>rte4l  him  till  his
death.  Soon  after  the  o|M>ning  of  the  civil  war  Mr.
Steams  advocated  the  enlistment  of  negroes  in  the
National  army.  The  54th  and  55th  Massacthusetts
regiments,  and  the  5th  cavalry  (colored),  were
largely  recruited  through  his  instrumentality.  He
was  commissioned  major  through  there<-ommend»-
tion  of  Sec.  Stanton,  and  was  of  great  serA'it*  to
the  National  cause  l)y  enlisting  negroe*  for  the
volunteer  service  in  Pennsylvania,  Marj'land,  and
Tennessee.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  "  Common-
wealth "  and  "  Right  of  Way  "  newsfiapers  for  the
dissemination  of  his  ideas.

STE.\RNS,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Wilbraliam,
Mass.,  10  May.  1770;  d."  in  New  York  city,  18
March.  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1780,
and  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  New
York,  in  1812.  He  settled  at  WaterfonT.  N.  Y.,  in
1793,  was  in  the  New  York  senate  in  1809-'I3,  in
1810  remove<l  to  All»any,  and  in  1819  went  to  New
York  city,  where  hs  remaine<l  till  his  death.  He
originated  the  Saratoga  county  medical  society,
and  in  1807  the  MetlicalstK-ietv  of  the  state  of  New
York,  and  in  1840  was  the  first  president  of  the
New  York  academy  of  me<licine.  He  was  also  a
founder  of  the  American  tract  society.  He  iim-
tributcd  valiuible  medical  discoveries  to  the  New
York  "  Medical  Repository,"  and  published  nu-
merous addresses  (1818-'47).

STEARNS,  John  Glazier,  author,  b.  in  Ack-
worth,  Cheshire  co.,  N.  H..  22  Nov.,  1795;  d.  in
Clinton,  N.  Y.,  10  Jan..  1874.  He  was  graduated
in  the  first  class  at  Hamilton  literary  and  theologi-
cal institution  (now  Mmlis4in  university)  in  1822,
and  was  ordained  a  minister  of  the  Iia]itist  church.
He  was  for  fifty  years  a  pr»'acher  in  c-entral  New
York,  and  publisfuHl,  among  other  works,  "Dia-
logue on  the  Means  of  separating  Masonry  from
the  Church  of  Christ  "  (Utica,  1828);  "  InqiiiW  into
the  Natun»  and  Tendency  of  Freemasonry  "  (1829);
"  An  Anti<lote  for  the  iKx-trine  of  Universal  Sal-
vation "  (1829);  "Essays  on  the  Influence  of  the
Spirit  and  the  Word '  in  Regeneration " :  "  Th«
Primitive  Church"  (1853);  "The  Sovereignty  of
QiM\  and  Moral  Agency  "  (18.50) ;  -  IxMter*  on  t  ree-
masonrv  "  (1800);  ami  several  smaller  works.

STE.XRNS,  John  Newton,  tnlitor.  b,  in  New
Ipwich.  N.  H..  24  .May.  1H29.  He  was  educated  at
tue  acatlemy  in  his  native  town,  and  was  prepared


656


STEARNS


STEARNS


for  college,  but  impaired  health  prevented  his  enter-
ing. On  attaining  his  majority  he  came  t^  New
York  city  and  engaged  in  literary  pursuits.  In
1858  he  became  editor  and  proprietor  of  "  Merry's
Museum,"  and  was  widely  known  a.s  "  Rolnjrt
Merry."  He  joined  the  order  of  the  Sons  of  Tem-
perance when  it  was  in  its  infancy,  and  in  1806  was
chosen  most  worthy  patriarch,  its  highest  office  in
this  country.  At  his  suggestion,  in  1865,  the
National  temperance  society  and  publication-house
was  organized,  and  he  was  appointed  its  corre-
sponding secretary  and  publishing  agent.  In  1865
he  also  became  the  editor  of  the  "  National  Tem-
perance Advocate,"  and  he  has  since  held  that  place
as  well  as  having  charge  of  the  "  Youth's  Temper-
ance Banner."  In  addition  to  his  editorial  work,
he  has  issued  annually  since  1869  "The  National
Temperance  Almanac  and  Teetotaler's  Year-Book,"
and  ne  has  published  "The  Temperance  Chorus"
(New  York,  1867);  "The  Temperance  Spaker"
(1869);  "The  Centennial  Temperance  Volume"
(1876):  "The  Prohibition  Songster"  (1885);  and
"  One  Hundred  Years  of  Temperance  "  (1885).

STEARNS,  John  William,  educator,  b.  in
Sturbridge,  Mass.,  in  1840.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1860,  was  appointed  professor  of  Latin
in  the  University  of  Chicago  in  1865,  and  in  1874
became  director  of  the  National  normal  school  in
the  Argentine  Republic.  In  1878  he  became  presi-
dent of  the  noruial  college  at  Whitewater,  Wis.

STEARNS,  Junius  Brutns,  artist,  b.  in  Arling-
ton, Vt.,  2  July,  1810 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y..  17
Sept.,  1885.  He  was  a  pupil  at  the  Academy  of  de-
sign, New  York  city,  where  in  1848  he  became  an
associate,  and  an  academician  the  following  year.
In  the  same  year  he  went  to  Europe  and  spent
some  time  in  London  and  Paris.  On  his  return  he
became  in  1851  recording  secretary  at  the  National
academy,  holding  that  post  until  1865.  His  work
was  mainly  in  portraiture,  but  he  painted  also
numerous  historical  subjects.  Of  these  the  best
known  are  the  "  Washington  Series,"  five  paintings
representing  Wasliington  as  a  citizen,  farmer,  sol-
dier, statesman,  and  Christian.  His  "  Millennium  "
is  in  the  Academv  of  design.  New  York.

STEARNS,  Oakman  Sprague,  b.  in  Bath,  Me.,
20  Oct.,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  Waterville
college  (now  Colby  university)  in  1840,  and  at
Newton  theological  institution  in  1846,  and  was
instructor  in  Hebrew  there  in  1846-'7.  He  was
pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  at  Southbridge,  Mass.,
in  1847-54,  at  Newark,  N.  J.,  in  1854-'5,  and  at
Newton  Centre,  Mass..  in  1855-'68.  Since  1868  he
has  been  professor  of  biblical  interpretation  of  the
Old  Testament  in  Newton  theological  institution.
Colby  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1863.  He
has  translated  Sartorius's  "  Person  and  Work  of
Christ "  (Boston,  1848),  and  is  the  author  of  "  A
Svllabus  of  the  Messianic  Passages  in  the  Old
Testament"  (1884).

STEARNS,  Ozora  Pierson,  soldier,  b.  in  De
Kalb,  Lawrence  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  Jan.,  1831.  He  was
educated  at  Oberlin  college  and  Michigan  univer-
sity, where  he  was  graduated  in  the  literary  de-
partment in  1858,  and  in  law  in  1860.  Imme-
diately after  his  graduation  he  began  practice  in
Rochester,  Minn.,  and  shortly  afterward  was
elected  prosecuting  attorney  for  Clinton  county.
In  August,  1862.  he  entered  the  National  army  as
1st  lieutenant  in  the  9th  Minnesota  volunteer  in-
fantry, and  in  April,  1864,  he  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  39tn  regiment  of  U.  S.  colored  in-
fantry. His  regiment  suffered  severely  at  the
mine-explosion  before  Petersburg  on  30  July.  He
accompanied Gen.  Benjamin F, Butler on his


Fort  Fisher  expedition,  was  with  Gen.  Alfred  H.
Terry  at  the  capture  of  that  fort,  and  afterward
remained  with  nis  command  in  North  Carolina
until  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  service  in  De-
cember, 1865.  He  then  returned  to  Rochester,
Minn.,  was  soon  afterward  offered  the  professor-
ship of  agriculture  in  Cornell  university,  which
he  declined,  was  again  elected  county  attorney,
and  then  appointed  register  in  bankruptcy.  In
1871  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  for  tne  unex-
pired term  of  Daniel  S.  Norton,  deceased,  and
served  for  a  short  |)eriod.  In  the  spring  of  1872
he  removed  with  his  family  to  Duluth,  and  two
years  later  became  judge  of  the  11th  judicial  dis-
trict of  Minnesota,  which  office  he  has  held  ever
since.  He  is  in  favor  of  granting  the  right  of  suf-
frage to  women. — His  wife,  Sarah  Bnrger,  re-
former, b.  in  New  York  city,  30  Nov.,  1836,  is  the
daughter  of  Edward  G.  Burger.  She  was  educated
chiefly  at  the  Ann  Arbor  high-.school,  and  the
State  normal  school,  Ypsilanti,  Mich.  In  1858
and  afterward  she  made  formal  application  to  be
admitted  as  a  student  to  the  Michigan  state  uni-
versity, which,  though  it  was  refused,  had  an  in-
fluence in  finally  deciding  the  regents  in  1869  to
make  their  classes  open  to  women.  During  the
civil  war  Mrs.  Stearns  was  well  known  as  a  worker
on  the  sanitary  commission,  and  lectured  on  behalf
of  the  soldiers'  societies  in  Michigan  and  else-
where. She  married  Col.  Stearns  in  1863,  and  re-
moved to  Minnesota  in  1866.  For  many  years  she
has  been  vice-president  for  Minnesota  of  the  Na-
tional woman  suffrage  association.  She  is  presi-
dent of  the  Duluth  home  society,  and  was  instru-
mental in  establishing  a  temporary  home  for  needy
women  and  children  in  that  city.  She  has  been
active  for  years  as  an  advocate  of  woman's  rights.
STEARNS,  Samnel,  author,  b.  in  Bolton,  Mass.,
in  1747;  d.  in  Brattleborough,  Vt..  8  Aug.,  1819.
He  became  a  physician  and  astronomer,  practising
his  profession  first  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  then  in
New  York,  and  finally  in  Brattleborough,  Vt.  For
his  supposed  loyalty  to  King  George  III.  he  suffered

freatly  from  the  persistent  attacks  of  the  Sons  of
liberty,  and  was  confined  for  nearly  three  years  in
a  prison  in  Worcester,  Mass.  While  he  was  a  resi-
dent of  New  York  he  made  the  calculations  for  the
first  nautical  almanac  in  this  country,  which  he
published,  20  Dec,  1782.  He  edited  the  "  Philadel-
phia Magazine"  in  1789,  and  published  "Tour  to
London  and  Paris"  (London,  1790);  "Mystery  of
Animal  Magnetism"  (1791);  "American  Oracle"
(1791);  and  "The  American  Herbal,  or  Materia
Medica"  (Walpole,  N.  H.,  1801).  He  labored
twenty-eight  years  on  a  "Medical  Dispensatory,"
and  to  obtain  information  for  it  travelled  for
nine  years  in  Europe  and  this  country,  but  died
before  its  completion.  On  the  list  of  subscribers
for  this  work  were  the  names  of  George  Washing-
ton and  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  of  Philadelphia.

STEARNS,  Samuel  Horatio,  clergyman,  b.  in
Bedford,  Mass.,  12  Sept.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France.

15  July,  1837.  His  father,  Samuel,was  for  forty  years
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Bedford,
Mass.  The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1823,
became  a  minister  of  tlje  Congregational  church.and
was  pastor  of  the  Old  South  church,  Boston,  from

16  April.  1834.  till  his  death.  A  volume  of  his  dis-
courses, with  a  memoir  by  his  brother,  William  A.
Stearns,  was  published  (Boston,  1838). — His  brother,
William  Augustn.s  clergyman,  b.  in  Bedford,
Mass.,  17  March,  1805;  d.  in  Amherst,  Mass.,  8
June,  1876,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1827,
studied  theology  at  Andover,  and,  after  teaching
for  a  short  time  at  Duxbury,  was  ordained  a  min-


STEARNS

bter  of  the  Cnnerof^timml  church,  ami  in«iUlIed
pastor  of  tho  chunh  at  ('ttii)hri<lf^*iH)rt,  Maaa.,
14  IK^-..  iwn.  Whpii  tho  H.V.  VaIwhtxI  Ilitoht-ock
n'sijfinul  tho  prosulorioy  of  Amhorst  tvllojfi?  in  1854
Mr.  SUnriiM  was  chotifii  to  !iucuii>d  hiin.aiid  ho  held


8TBDIN0K


em


the  ofTlce  till  his  death.  He  puhlisht-d  "  Infant
Church  Membership"  (IJostnn.  1K44);  "Infant
Church  Memlx'r's  tiui(lo"(184r));  "  Lifo  and  St^lect
Discourses  of  Kov.  Snniuei  H.  Stonrns "  (1846);
•'Discourses  and  Address«'s  "  (IWr));  "A  Plea  for
the  Nation,"  posthumous  (1870):  an<l  sermons  and
distiourses.— William  Augustus's  son,  William
French,  merchant,  b.  in  Cambridjjeport,  Mai«.,
9  Nov.,  1834;  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,  21  Mav,  1874,
was  engag«Ml  in  the  East  India  trmle.  and  for
several  yoars  was  a  resident  of  Bombay,  India,  as
hea<l  of  the  Arm  of  Stearns.  Ilobart  aiul  Co.  On
his  return  to  this  country  he  established  a  house  in
New  York  for  the  same  class  of  trade.  He  rendered
great  services  to  the  American  Ixmrd  of  foreign
missions  during  the  civil  war,  built  a  church  for
Amhei-st  college,  and,  a.s  the  personal  friend  and
correspondent  of  Dr.  David  Livingstone,  aided
largely  in  fitting  out  his  last  exiH'dif  ion.— Another
brother  of  Samuel  Horatio,  Jonathan  French,
clergyman,  b.  in  Bedford,  Mjiss..  in  SeptenflMT,
1808.  was  grmluated  at  Harvard  in  18:30,  studied
theology  at  Andover  Seminary,  and  was  licensed  to
preach  in  18:J4.  He  was  minister  of  the  Presby-
terian church  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  in  18;i>-'4».
and  in  December,  1841),  became  pastor  of  the  1st
Presbyterian  church  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  which  con-
nection continued  about  thirty  years.  In  1836  he
was  a  commissioner  from  the  presbvtery  of  London-
derry to  the  general  assembly  in  Pittsburg,  and  he
was  m(Mlerator  of  the  general  assembly  that  met  in
Harrisburg  in  1868.  He  publisheil  '-Sermon  on
the  Death  of  Daniel  Webster"  (Newark,  18.'>2),  and
"  Historical  Discourses  relating  to  the  First  Presby-
terian Chun-h  in  Newark  "  (18.53). — Another  broth-
er. Eben  Sprrjr,  e<lucator,  b.  in  Bedford,  Mjiss..
in  1H'.»1  ;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn..  in  1887.  was  gradu-
ateil  at  Harvard  in  1841.  was  ma«*ter  of  the  normal
school  at  Framinghara,  Mass.,  of  the  Allmny  fenude
aca<lemy,  and  in  1875  be<-ame  chancellor  of  N»ish-
ville  uniyersity.  Amherst  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  I),  in  1876. -Samuel  Horatio's  cousin,  Edward  |
Josiall.  author,  b.  in  Be<lford,  Mass.,  24  Feb.,  1810,  |
was  gradualeil  at  Harvard  in  1833,  onlained  a  i
clergyman  «)f  the  Episcopal  church,  and  was  pro-
fessor of  nuKlem  languages  in  St.  John's  college.
Annapolis,  Md.,  in  1849-^53.  At  other  times  he
was  either  teaching  or  rector  of  a  parish. He  has

Sublished  "  Notes  on  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin"  (Phila-
elphia,  185;i) ;  "  Practical  Guide  to  English  Pn>-
nunciation"  (Boston,  1H57);  "Tho  After|>iece  to
the  Comedy  of  Convocation"  (Italtimore,  1870);
"  Birth  and'New  Birth,  a  New  Treatment  of  an  Old
Subje<t"(1872);  'The  Faith  of  Oui  Fon-fathers,
an  Examination  of  Archbishop  (iibbon's  '  Faith  of
roL.  T.— 42


Our  Fatherpt  *  **  (New  York,  1879) ;  and  "  The  Areb-
bi«h«»i)*!«  Champion  Bmught  lo  li«M)k  "  (1881).
STKBBINS.  Knma,  artut,  b.  in New  York

city,  I  .s.pt..  mi.*,.  ,1.  there.  25  OcU.  1888.  For
several  yiars  ^he  devot^^l  hemelf  U>  painting  in  oil
and  water-colors,  workmg  alio  in  crayon  and  paa-
tela.  She  sultMsjuently  turned  her  altentioa  to
Mulpture.  In  iK'tl  kIk*  went  to  Rome,  vImi«  ibe
stuclied  under  an  Italian  mai>ler,  and  alao  viUl
Paul  Akers.  She  executed  a  Urf(e  fountain  rnm-
senting  "The  Angel  of  the  Watem"  (1800-*^  in
Central  |>ark.  New  York;  a  »Utue  of  Horace
Mann  in  lioston  (I860);  "  Joeeph."  "Th«»  Angel  of
I'rayer,"  and  a  bust  of  Charlotte  <  1  H&) ;  a

bust  of  John  W.  Stebbin.H  in  the  M  library.

New  York;  and  other  wurkii.  Uii...-  m  ik..me  »he
won  the  friendship  of  Charlotte  Cu-hman.  with
whom  she  returned  to  the  I'nitwl  .States  in  1870.
She  pre|iared  a  memoir  of  Mim  Cuithmaii.  at  her
re«|U«^t.  after  the  actn-ss's  death  (Boston,  1878).

STECKEL.  Lonia  Joaepli  R^n^  Canadian
civil  enifineer,  b.  in  Wintz<'nheim.  .Mswee.  6  .St'pt.,
1844.  lie  was  tHlucate^l  at  B4>nfeld,  Alsace,  ana  at
Ijaval  university,  (^ueln-c-.  He  came  to  Quebec  in
1857,  and  in  the  following  year  went  to  the  west-
eni  part  of  the  Unite<l  St«tes,  remaining  till  1860,
when  he  returned  to  (^uel«>c.  .After  studying  civil
engineering  in  I>aval  university,  he  practised  hia
profession  successfully,  and  has  lieen  chief  clerk  of
the  engineering  branch  of  the  de[iartment  of  pub-
lic works,  Canada,  sin(*e  July,  1880.  In  addition
to  other  imjMrtant  work,  he  carried  on  extensive
hydrographic  surveys  in  18Ml-*2  «if  St.  I>awrenoe
ship-channel  between  Quebec  and  Cap  k  la  Rix-he,
ana  from  1884  till  1887  extensive  giHKletic  levelling
operations  along  Hichelieu  and  St.  I^wrence  rivers,
from  Ijake  Chamnlain  to  tide-water  in  the  (iulf  of
.St.  Ijawrence.  He  inventt-il  in  18<J8  a  jx-rfected
fiute,  calle<l  the  "Harmonic  flute."  and  exhibited
at  the  Indian  and  colonial  exhibition,  in  I»ndon
in  1886,  a  pi(!Colo  constnicte<l  on  his  system,  and
gecxletic  nxls  as  ixrfecteil  by  him.  He  has  pub-
lished "Treatise  on  (iiHuuetry  and  Trigonometry"
(Queljec.  1866),  and  "  Eissay  on  the  Contracted
Li(|uid  Vein  affecting  the  Present  Theory  of  the
Science  of  Hydraulics"  (Ottawa,  1884).

STEDIN<JK,  Cnrt  Bo^islauH  Loaia  Cliris-
topher.  Count  von,  .Swwlish  soldier,  b.  in  his  fa-
ther's castle  of  Pinnau,  Pomerania,  26  Oct,,  1746;
d.  in  Stockholm.  He  was  graduatixl  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Upsala  in  17«{8,  entennl  the  Swedish
army  in  his  youth,  to<^)k  part  in  the  war  a^nst
Prussiii.  and.  entering  the  French  service  in  the
Koyal  regiment  of  Sweden,  rose  to  the  rank  of  lieu-
tenant-colonel. At  Versailles,  where  he  remained
on  duty,  he  lived  on  intimate  tenn.s  of  friendship
with  Count  Axel  Fersen.  In  command  t)f  a  bn-
ga<le  of  infantry  he  sailed  in  D'Estaing's  fleet  in
1778.  and  gaine<l  creilit  in  the  o|x'rations  against
the  West  Indies,  esix»cially  in  the  attack  uix>n
(iranada.  In  the  attat^'k  u(>on  Savannah,  9  C>ct.,
177J),  the  rashness  and  j»rol»able  failure  of  which
he  predicte<l  to  D'Estaing,  he  le«l  one  of  (he  two
princifxil  assaultjs.  and.  after  planting  the  Ameri-
can fljig  on  the  la.st  intrenchnient,  waa  wounded
and  comjx?IUxl  to  retreat  with  the  loss  of  half  hi*
brigade  of  900  men.  After  his  return  to  France
the  king  mmle  him  cxilonel  of  the  regiment  of  Al-
sace and  knight  of  the  Protestant  branch  of  the
Ortler  of  St,  Louis,  while  the  king  of  Sweden,  in
recognition  of  bin  9ervic«>s  in  America,  made  him
colonel  of  dragoons  and  knight  of  the  Order  of  the
Sword.  He  also  receivetl  the  badge  of  the  Society
of  the  Cincinnati.  He  left  France  in  1787,  took
|)art  in  the  war  between  Sweden  and  Boaaia,  and


668


STEDMAN


STEDMAN


was  rewarded  for  his  services  by  being  appointed
Swedisli  ambassador  at  St.  Petersburc  in  1790.
which  post  he  long  retained.  In  1814  he  repaired
to  Pans  in  command  of  the  Swedish  army,  and
was  the  ambassador  of  the  king  of  Sweden  to  sign
the  treaty  of  peace  with  Prance.

STEDMAN,  Charles,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Eng-
land about  1745;  d.  in  London,  26  June,  1812.  He
entered  the  army,  served  as  an  officer  under  Lord
Percy  at  Lexington  in  1775,  and  subsequently  with
Lord  Howe  in  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey,  and
with  Lord  Cornwallis  in  the  south.  During  his
later  years  he  was  a  deputy  comptroller  of  the
stamp-office.  He  published  "  The  History  of  the
Origm,  Progress,  and  Termination  of  the  American
War"  (2  vols..  London,  1792;  Dublin,  1794).  This
excellent  work  is  especially  valuable  for  its  mili-
tary maps.  William  Thomas  Lowndes  ascribes  its
authorship  to  Dr.  William  Thompson.

STEDMAN,  Edmund  Clarence,  poet,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  8  Oct.,  1833.  He  is  the  son  of
Edmund  B.  Stedman,  a  merchant  of  Hartford,  and
Elizabeth  C.  Dodge,  a  sister  of  William  E.  Dodge,

who,  subsequent  to
the  death  of  Mr.
Stedman  in  1835,
married  William  B.
Kinney.  Through
his  mother  Mr.
Stedman  is  further
related  to  Will-
iam Ellery  Chan-
ning  and  to  Bishop
Arthur  Cleveland
Coxe.  He  was  pre-
pared for  college
by  his  great-uncle,
James  Stedman,
and  entered  Yale
in  1849.  As  an  un-
iergraduate  he  dis-
tinguished himself
in  Greek  and  in
English  composi-
tion. His  poem  of  "Westminster  Abbey,"  pub-
lished in  the  "Yale  Literary  Magazine"  in  1851,
received  a  first  prize.  In  his  junior  year  he  was
suspended  for  irregularities,  and  he  did  not  return
to  receive  his  degree,  but  in  1871 1  he  college  authori-
ties restored  him  to  his  class,  and  conferred  on  him
the  degree  of  A.  M.  He  became  editor  of  the  Nor-
wich "  Tribune  "  in  1852,  and  in  1854  of  the  Winsted
"  Herald,"  but  two  years  later  he  relinquished  this

F)ost  after  establishing  some  reputation  for  tlie  pure
iterary  tone  of  his  journal.  lie  then  removed  to
New  York  city,  where  for  many  years  he  con-
tributed to  "  Vanity  Fair,"  "  Putnam's  Monthly,"
"  Harner's  Magazine,"  and  other  periodicals.  After
a  hard  struggle  for  a  competence,  he  drifted  into
journalism.  His  poems, "  1  he  Diamond  Wedding,"
a  widely  read  satire  on  a  society  event,  "  How  Old
John  Brown  took  Harper's  Perry,"  "  The  Ballad  of
Lager-Bier,"  and  similar  lyrics,  appeared  in  the
"  Tribune  "  during  1859,  and  their  success  led  him
to  issue  his  "  Poems,  Lyric  and  Idvllic  "  (New  York,
1860).  In  1860  he  joined  the  editorial  staff  cf  the
"  World,"  and  he  was  its  war-correspondent  in
1861-'3,  during  the  early  campaigns  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac,  from  the  headquarters  of  Gen.
Irvin  McDowell  and  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,  and
then  from  Washington.  He  afterward  accepted
a  confidential  appointment  under  Attorney-Gen-
eral Bates,  but  in  1864  he  returned  to  New  York,
and  relinquished  journalism  to  adopt  some  pur-
suit that  would  afford  him  more  leisure  for  literary


cC&UiAjiJ  C^ .  /d^^yuii*^ til


work.  Mr.  St«dman  soon  purcha.sed  a  seat  in  the
stock  exchange,  and  became  a  broker.  His  poetry
of  this  period  is  included  in  his  "Alice  of  Mon-
mouth, an  Idyl  of  the  Great  War,  and  other  Poems  "
(New  York,  1864),  which  was  followed  by  "  The
Blameless  Prince,  and  other  Poems  "  (Boston,  1869).
A  collective  edition  of  his  "Poetical  Works"  was
published  in  1873.  With  Thomas  B.  Aldrich  he
edited  "  Cameos  "  (Boston,  1874),  selected  from  the
works  of  Walter  Savage  Landor;  also,  with  an  in-
troduction, "  Poems  of  Austin  Dobson  "  (NeW  York,
1880).  About  1875  he  began  to  devote  attention
to  critical  writing,  and  contributed  to  "  Scribner's
Monthly"  a  series  of  sketches  of  the  poets  and
poetry  of  Great  Britain  from  the  accession  of  Queen
Victoria  to  the  present  time,  which  were  rewritten
and  published  as  "  Victorian  Poets  "  (Boston,  1875 ;
London,  1876 ;  13th  ed.,  with  a  supplement,  bring-
ing it  down  to  1887).  In  a  similar  manner  he
prepared  "  Poets  of  America,"  a  critical  review  of
American  poets  and  poetry  (Boston,  1886).  At  pres-
ent he  is  engaged  with  Ellen  M.  Hutchinson
in  editing  a  "  Library  of  American  Literature,"  to
be  completed  in  ten  volumes,  of  which  thi-ee  are
now  published  (1888).  Mr.  Stedman  has  delivered
several  poems  on  public  occasions.  Of  these  the
more  important  are  "  Gettysburg,"  read  at  the  an-
nual meeting  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  Cleve-
land in  1871,  and  the  "  Dartmouth  Ode,"  deliv-
ered in  1873  before  that  college.  In  1876  he  read
"  The  Monument  of  Greeley  "  at  the  dedication  in
Greenwood  cemetery  of  the  printers'  monument  to
Horace  Greeley,  and  in  1878  he  delivered  his  poem
on  "The  Death  of  Bryant"  before  the  Century
club.  At  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  the  Yale
class  of  1853  he  read  "  Meridian,  an  Old-Fashioned
Poem,"  and  in  July,  1881,  his  "Corda  Concordia"
was  read  before  the  Summer  school  of  philosophy.
He  has  also  been  engaged  at  intervals  during  many
years  on  a  complete  metrical  translation  of  the
Greek  idyllic  poets.  His  other  publications  in-
clude "  Rip  Van  Winkle  and  His  Wonderful  Nap"
(Boston,  1870);  "Octavius  Brooks  Prothingham
and  the  New  Faith"  (New  York,  1876);  "Favorite
Poems"  (Boston,  1877);  "Hawthorne,  and  other
Poems"  (1877);  "Lyrics  and  Idylls,  with  other
Poems  "  (London,  1879) ;  "  The  Itaven,  with  Com-
ments on  the  Poem "  (Boston,  188J}) ;  and  a
"  Household  Edition  "  of  his  poems  (1884). — His
cousin.  Griffin  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  Hart-
ford. Conn.,  6  Jan.,  1838 ;  d.  near  Petersburg,  Va.,
6  Aug.,  1864,  was  graduated  at  Trinity  in  1859,
and  biegan  to  study  law,  but  in  1861  entered  the
volunteer  army  as  captain  in  the  5th  Connecticut
regiment.  He  was  transferred  to  the  11th  Con-
necticut as  major  after  seeing  service  in  the  Shen-
andoah valley,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  An-
tietani,  leading  half  of  the  regiment  in  the  charge
on  the  stone  bridge,  and  receiving  a  severe  wound.
He  commanded  the  regiment  at  Fredericksburg,
Chancellorsville,  and  Gettysburg,  and  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  overland  campaign  of  1864  was
placed  at  the  head  of  a  brigade.  He  repeatedly
won  the  commendation  of  his  superiors,  and  was
mortally  wounded  in  one  of  the  skirmishes  that
followed  the  mine-explosion  at  Petersburg.  Fort
Stedman,  one  of  the  works  near  that  place,  had
been  named  for  him.  He  had  been  strongly  recom-
mended for  promotion  to  brigadier-general,  and
was  given  that  rank  by  brevet,  to  date  from  5  Aug.,
1864.  His  grave  at  Hartford  is  marked  by  a  monu-
ment of  granite  and  bronze.

STEDMAN,  John  Gabriel,  British  soldier,  b.
in  Scotland ;  d.  in  1797.  He  lost  his  paternal  es-
tate shortly  after  his  birth,  and  expected  to  enter


STKKDMAN


STKKLR


609


tho  navy,  but  acoepUnl  hii  enwijfn'H  conimumion  in
the  ScoU'h  brigade  in  tlio  I)ut<-h  wrvire,  and  wast  a
lieutenant  when  in  1772  a  negro  inMurrect ion  b<*gan  |
in  the  colony  of  Surinam. He  vohinteered  t4)  m--  i
conijiany  tho  (>x|>e<iition  that  wa-n  sn-nt  to  Huppres*  j
it. and  wasfjivfii  the  brevt-t  rank  of  captain. On
his  return  m  1777  ho  whs  proniot«Ml  to  major,  and  j
just  Ijcfore  rexigniiig  fmm  the  servici',  iit  the  iH'gin-
ning  of  hostilities  with  Knglund  in  17K{,  was  made  {
lieutenant-colonel. He  published  a  valuable  "  Nar-  I
rative  of  an  Kxfiedition  against  the  Kevoltt^l  Ne-  !
gn>es  of  Surinam,"  which  contains  much  valuable  i
niformation  about  the  country  and  its  inhal>itant«
(2  vols..  London.  171W).

STKKHM.^N.  CliarlPH,  naval  offloer.  b.  in
ChHrU'stoii.  .S.  C.  24  Spt..  IKll ;  d.  in  Washington,
I),  v.,  Vi  Nov..  IM'.M).  lie  eMten'<l  the  navy.  lH«cau»o  '
a  passed  midshipman,  14  Jan.,  1h:{4,  and  cruised  in
the  Mediterranean  in  the  frigates  "Constitution"
and  "  Unite<l  States."  He  was  promoted  to  lieu-  j
tenant,  25  Feb.,  1B41.  and  during  the  Mexican  war
8erve<l  in  the  sloop  "St.  Mary's"  in  lH4G-*7.  At
the  bomlmrtlment  of  Vera  Cruz  ho  commuiidiHl  the  '
siege-guns  in  the  mivjil  battery  on  shon*.  and  he  '
particiitatiMl  in  other  f>iH.'rHtions  on  the  coast  and
HI  the  boat  expedition  that  capturtnl  Tampi«'o.  He
was  commissioned  comnuiiider,  14  Sept..  1  Mo,  and
in  the  Paraguay  ex|R'ilition  commandetl  the  brig  '<
"  Dolphin."  Notwithstanding  the  efforts  of  his
family  and  friends  in  his  native  state  to  induce  him
to  joni  the  seceded  states,  he  remained  loyal  and
rendcreil  valuable  service  to  the  l'ni<m.  He  im-
metiialely  tusked  forduty.  took  conunand  of  the  rail-
road ferry  steamer  "  Maryland,"  antl  conveyenl  (Jen.
Benjamin  K.  liutler  with  the  Hth  Mas>a<-husett«
regiment  from  Havre  de  Grace  to  AnnaiKilis,  M<1.,  in
^pril,  1861.  He  then  went  to  the  west  temporarily
and  assisted  Admiral  Foote  in  organizing  the  naval
forces  that  oi)erated  on  the  Mississippi  river  in  the
gun-lx>ats.  In  September,  1861,  he  commanded  the
steamer  "  Bienville,"  in  which  he  led  the  second
column  of  vessels  at  the  capture  of  I'ort  Koyal,
S.  C,  and  j«irticipate<l  in  oj^rations  on  the  coast
of  Georgia  and  Florida.  He  returned  north  in  the
spring,  and  t(M)k  comnumd  of  the  steamer  "  Paul
Jones,"  in  which  he  assisted  in  the  capture  of  Fort
McAllister,  on  Ogeechee  river,  in  August,  1862,  and
operated  on  St.  John's  river,  Fla.,  during  the  fol-
lowing month.  He  was  promoted  to  captain,  13
Sept.,  1862,  and  in  the  steamer  "  Powtiatan  "  tr>ok
part  in  the  blockade  off  Charleston  and  in  several
engagements  there.  He  then  towed  the  capture<l
ram  "  Atlanta"  to  Philadelphia,  took  command  of
the  steamer  "  Ticonderoga,'  and  went  to  the  coast
of  Brazil  in  pursuit  of  the  Confederate  cniiser
"  Florida  "  until  November,  18(54.  He  participate<l
in  the  two  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  n'maine<l  in
command  of  the  "  Ticonderoga"  on  a  cruise  in  the
Mediterranean,  and  returned  in  command  of  the
steam  frigate  "Colorado"  in  Septendn'r,  18<J7.
He  was  promoted  to  commo«lore,  25  July,  186<{,
and  was  in  charge  of  the  Boston  navy-varti  in
1869-'?2.  He  was  made  a  rear-atlmiral,  ^5  Mav,
1871,  and  retired,  24  S««pt.,  1873.

STEEDMAN.  James  Barrett,  soldier,  b.  in
Northund)erland  countv.  Pa..  :W  July,  1818;  d.  in
Toletlo,  Ohio,  18  Oct.,  188:1  He  went  to  Ohio  in
1837  as  a  contractor  on  the  Wabash  and  Erie  canal,
and  in  1843  was  chosen  to  the  legislatun<  of  that
state  as  a  Democrat.  In  184»  he  organized  a  com-
pany to  cross  the  plains  to  California  in  search  of
gold,  but  he  returned  in  185(>.  and  in  1851  became
a  member  of  the  Ohio  boartl  of  nublic  works.
During  Buchanan's  administration  ne  was  public
printer  at  Washington,  and  in  1860  he  was  a  dele-


ntc  to  the  National  Deroootmtio  ooavvotioii  at
Charleston,  advocating  the  nominatioo  of  Staphen
A.  Douglas.  At  the  o|M<nin(^  of  the  civil  war  be
liccame  colonel  of  the  4th  C)hio  regiment,  and  waa
onlere<l  t<»  we»>teni  Virginia.  After  taking  f»art  in
the  liattle  of  Philippi  he  joinc*!  (ten.  Don  Carloe
Buell  in  Kentucky,  wa.H  promot*-*!  briifadier-gienerai
of  volunt«H<rs,  17  July,  1862,  and  rendered  vslaable
service  at  Perryville,  arriving  on  the  battle-fleld
iust  in  time  to'  drive  Ijack  Uie  enemy,  who  had
oroken  the  National  line  and  were  piutiing  a  heary
column  toward  thu  gap.  In  July,  1H63,  he  was
pla(;e<l  in  command  of  the  Ut  division  of  the  n>-
wr>'e  corjjs  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumlierland.  At  the
Itattle  of  Chickamauga  he  re-enforced  (ten.  (u-orge
H.  Thomas  at  a  critical  moment,  and  it  has  been
claimed  that  he  thus  sjive<l  the  day,  though  credit
for  ordering  the  movement  is  usually  given  to
(Jen.  lionlon  Granger.  For  his  servii-es  here  be
was  prr)mote«l  major-gi«neraI,  24  April,  1864.  He
was  afterwanl  active  in  the  Atlanta  canifiai^,
relieving  th<;  garrison  at  Dalton  and  deftvting
(Jen.  Jos«'ph  (J.  Wheeler's  cavalry  in  June.  186£
When  Sherman  marchetl  to  the  »«'a  he  joiuj^l  Gen.
Thf>mas,  and  did  g»KHl  service  at  Nashville.  Ue
resigned  on  19  July,  1866,  after  serving  as  pro-
visional governor  of  Georgia,  atxl  was  appointed
U.  S.  collector  of  internal  revenue  at  Now  Orleans
liv  President  Johnson,  whoso  close  friend  he  waa.
Here  his  lack  of  business  ability  involve<l  him  in
financial  trouble,  and  he  returned  t4)  (Jhio,  where
in  1870  he  was  chosen  to  the  state  senate,  but  was
defeate<l  in  a  secon«l  canvaxs.  In  the  May  Ijefore
his  death  he  iK-canje  chief  of  police  of  Tolwlo.  and
he  was  editor  and  nominal  owner  of  the  "  Weekly
Ohio  Democrat."  On  26  May,  1887,  a  fine  monu-
ment was  dedicatcfl  to  his  memor>'  in  Tole<|o.

STEEIi,  William,  reformer,  b.'  in  Biggar,  Scot-
land, 26  Aug.,  1801>:  d.  in  Portland.  Or*-..  5  Jan..
1881.  He  came  to  the  L'nitetl  .Statt-s  with  his
parents  in  1817  and  settle<l  near  Winchester.  Va.,
but  removetl  s<H)n  afterwanl  to  Monroe  comity.  Ohio,
where,  from  IKK)  till  the  civil  war,  he  was  an  active
worker  in  the  "  Undergroun<l  railroa<l,"  fif  which  be
was  one  of  the  earliest  organizers.  During  these
years  large  numbers  of  slaves  were  assisted  to  es-
cajH?  to  Canada,  and  in  no  single  instance  was  one
retaken  after  reaching  him.  At  one  time  the  slave-
holders of  Virginia  offere<l  a  rewarti  of  $5.0(X)  for
his  hea<l,  when  he  promptly  a<ldresse<l  the  c-om-
mittee.  offering  to  brine  it  to  them  if  the  money
were  place«l  in  rt*sjx)nsiole  hands.  He  ac({uired  a
fortune  as  a  merchant,  but  lf>st  it  in  1844.  From
1872  till  his  death  he  residetl  with  his  sons  in  Ore-
gon. In  the  early  davs  of  the  anti-slaver)*  move-
ment Mr.  Steel  was  the  recognize<l  leailer  of  the
AU)litionists  in  southeastern  Ohio^  He  was  at  one
time  a  candidate  of  the  LilH>rty  |»artv  for  congreos,
and  in  1844  circulatinl  in  eastern  Ohio  the  "ereal
{letition,"  whose  signers  agreeil  to  vote  for  Henry
Clav  if  he  would  emancijiate  his  one  slave.

STEELE.  Frederick,  soldier,  b.  in  Delhi.  X.  Y..
i4  Jan.,  1819;  d.  in  San  Mateo,  Cal..  12  Jan.,  1868.
He  was  graduate<l  at  the  U.  S.  military  wademy
in  1843, and  served  as  2*1  lieutenant  in  the  .Mexican
war,  receiving  the  brevet,s  of  1st  lieutenant  and
captain  for  gallant  conduct  at  Conln-ras  and  Cha-
nultepec  respectively.  He  wa*  pmmoted  to  1st
lieutenant.  6  June,  IMK,  and  servinl  in  California
till  18.W,  and  then  principally  in  Minnesota,  Kan-
sas, and  Nebraska  till  the  civil  war,  receiving  his
captain's  commlwion  on  5  Feb.,  1855.  He  was
promotetl  to  major  on  14  Mav.  1861.  and  com-
manuetl  a  briga<le  in  Missouri  /rom  11  June.  1861.
till  April.  1862,  being  engaged  at  Dug  Spring  and


660


STEELE


STEELE


Wilson's  Creek,  and  also  in  charge  of  the  south-
eastern district  of  that  state  after  Febniary.  He
had  become  colonel  of  the  8th  Iowa  regiment  on

28  Sent.,  1861,  and  on  29  Jan.,  1862,  was  commis-
sioned brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  lie  led  a
division  in  the  Array  of  the  Southwest  from  May
till  Noveml)er,  1862,  Wing  engaged  at  Round  Hill,
7  July,  and  in  the  occupation  of  Helena,  Ark. On

29  Nov.  he  was  made  nmior-general  of  volunteers,
and,  after  engaging  in  the  Yazoo  expedition,  he
commanded  a  division  in  the  Vieksburg  campaign,
taking  part  in  the  operations  at  Youngs  Point,  the
advance  to  Grand  Gulf,  the  attack  on  Jackhon,  and
the  siege  of  Vieksburg.  For  his  services  in  this
campaign  he  i*eceived  the  brevet  of  colonel  in  the
regular  army,  4  July,  1863,  and  on  26  Aug.  he  was
promoted  to  lieutenant-colonel.  From  July,  1863.
till  6  Jan.,  1864,  he  was  at  the  head  of  the  Army  of
Arkansas,  taking  part  in  thecanture  of  Little  Rock,
10  Sept.,  1863,  and  then  till  29  Nov.  he  commanded
the  department  of  that  state.  He  led  a  column  in
the  Mobile  campaign,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war
received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,
for  services  in  the  capture  of  Little  Rock,  and  that
of  major-general  for  services  during  the  war.  He
was  then  transferred  to  Texas,  and  i)laced  in  com-
mand on  the  Rio  Grande,  and  from  21  Dec,  1865,
he  had  charge  of  the  Department  of  the  Columbia.
From  23  Nov.,  1867,  till  his  death  he  was  on  leave
of  absence.  He  had  been  promoted  colonel  of  the
20th  infantry.  28  July,  1866.

STEELE,  Joel  Doriiian,  educator,  b.  in  Lima,
N.  Y.,  14  May.  1836 ;  d.  in  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  25  May.
1886. He  was  graduated  at  Genesee  college  in

1858,  and  then  taught  at  the  Mexico  academy,  of
which  institution  he  was  appointed  principal  in

1859.  Soon  after  the  beginning  of  trie  civil  war
he  became  captain  in  the  81st  New  York  volun-
teers, and  served  in  the  peninsula  campaign,  being
severely  wounded  at  Seven  Pines.  Pie  was  chosen
principal  of  the  Newark,  N.  Y.,  high-school  in  1862,
and  in  1866  accepted  a  similar  onice  in  the  Elmira
free  academy,  which  jjlace  he  retained  until  1872.
Subsequently  he  devoted  his  time  exclusively  to  the
preparation  of  text-books.  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  the  regents  of  the  Uni-
versity of  the  state  of  New  York  in  1870,  and  dur-
ing the  same  year  he  presided  over  the  New  York
state  teachers'  association.  In  1872  he  was
elected  a  fellow  of  the  Geological  society  of  London,
and  also  in  1872  he  was  chosen  by  the  alumni  a
trustee  of  Syracuse  university,  in  which  Genesee
college  had  been  merged,  and  to  that  university  he
bequeathed  $50,000  to  found  a  professorship  of
theistic  science.  Dr.  Steele  was  the  author  of  a
popular  series  of  scientific  text-books,  each  intended
for  a  course  of  fourteen  weeks,  including  "Chem-
istry "  (New  York,  1867);  "Astronomy"  (1868);
"  Natural  Philosophy  "  (1869) ;  "  Geology  "  (1870) ;
"Human  Physiology"  (1873);  "Zoology"  (1875);
and  "  Key  to  the  Practical  Questions  in  Steele's
Sciences  "  (1871) ;  also  "  Barnes's  Popular  History
of  the  United  States  "  (1875) ;  and  with  his  wife,
Esther  Baker  Steele,  a  series  of  brief  histories,
including  "The  United  States"  (1872);  "  France  "
(1874);  "Ancient  Peoples"  (1883);  "Mediaeval
and  Modem  Peoples"  (1883);  "  General  History  "
(18a3) ;  "  History  of  Greece  "  (1883) ;  and  "  History
of  Rome  "(1884).

STEELE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Augusta  county.
Va.,  about  1755;  d.  about  1805,  He  entered  the
Revolutionarvarmv,  served  as  an  officer  at  the  bat-
tle of  Point  I^leasaht,  Va.,  10  Oct.,  1774,  and  at  the
battle  of  Germantown  was  shot  through  the  body.
He  was  for  many  years  one  of  the  executive  coun-


cil of  his  native  state,  and  in  John  Adams's  admin-
istration served  as  a  commissioner  to  treat  with
the  Cherokee  Indians.  From  1798  till  1801  he  was
secretarv  of  Mississippi  territory,

STEELE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster  county,
Pa..  15  Aug.,  1758;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  27  Feb.,
1827,  He  was  educated  for  a  Presbyterian  clergy-
man, but  on  the  breaking  out  of  the  war  of  the
Revolution  entered  the  army,  in  which  he  rose  to
the  command  of  a  companv,  23  March,  1779.  He
was  seriously  wounded  at  tfie  battle  of  the  Brandy-
wine,  and  retired  from  the  service,  1  Jan.,  1783.
In  1801  he  was  elected  state  senator,  but,  as  he
held  a  United  States  appointment,  his  .seat  was
declared  vacant.  In  1804  he  was  re-elected,  and
in  1805  became  speaker  of  that  body.  In  1806  he
was  the  Democratic  candidate  for  U.  S.  senator,
but  was  defeated  by  Andrew  Gregg.  He  served
as  one  of  the  commissioners  to  adjust  the  damages
sustained  by  the  Wyoming  sufferers  at  the  hands
of  the  Indians,  In  1808  President  Jefferson  ap-
pointed him  collector  of  the  port  of  Philadelphia,
which  post  he  filled  during  the  remainder  of  his
life.  He  also  held  the  rank  of  brigadier-general
in  the  Pennsylvania  militia. — His  brother,  Archi-
bald (1741-1832),  was  adjutant  at  the  siege  of
Quebec  under  Arnold,  afterward  deputy  quarter-
master-general, and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was
military  store-keeper  at  Philadelphia. — His  cousin,
James,  soldier,  b.  in  Lancaster  county.  Pa.,  16
Jan.,  1765;  d.  at  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  30  Sept.,  1845,
received  a  classical  education,  and  was  a  man  of
considerable  enterprise.  He  erected  a  paper-mill
on  Octorara  creek,  and  subsequently  two  cotton-
mills.  He  served  in  the  war  of  1812-'14,  and  for
meritorious  conduct  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of
brigadier-general  of  militia.  Late  in  life  he  re-
tired from  business  and  removed  to  Harrisburg,
where  he  died.  His  son,  Francis  B.  Steele,  was
military  store-keeper  at  the  Falls  of  St,  Anthony,
Minn.,  for  a  long  period.

STEELE,  John, statesman,  b.  in  Salisbury, N.  C,
1  Nov.,  1764;  d.  there,  14  Aug.,  1815.  His  mother,
Elizabeth,  entertained  at  her  house  in  Salisbury  on
1  Feb.,  1781,  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene,  who  was  then
discouraged  and  penniless,  and  insisted  on  his
accepting  two  small  bags  of  specie,  her  earning
for  years.  "  Never,"  says  Greene's  biographer,  "  did
relief  come  at  a  more  needed  moment."  John  was
educated  as  a  merchant,  but  when  he  had  arrived
at  manhood  became  a  successful  planter,  and  was
also  active  in  politics.  He  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature in  1787  and  1788,  and  in  the  latter  year,  as  a
member  of  the  convention 'to  consider  the  U.S.
constitution,  made  fruitless  efforts  to  secure  'its
adoption.  He  was  a  member  of  the  first  two  con-
gresses, from  April,  1790,  till  2  March,  1793,  hav-
ing been  elected  as  a  Federalist,  and  was  again  in
the  legislature  in  1794-'5.  On  1  July,  1796,  Gen.
Washington  made  him  first  comptroller  of  the
treasury,  which  office  he  held  through  Adams's
administration,  resigning  on  15  Dec,  1802,  though
President  Jefferson  solicited  him  to  remain.  He
was  a  commissioner  to  adjust  the  boundary  between
North  and  South  Carolina  in  1806,  and  was  again  in
the  legislature  in  that^vear  and  in  1811-'13,  serving
as  speaker  in  1811.  lie  was  elected  for  another
term  on  the  day  of  his  death.  He  was  active  in
militia  matters,  and  attained  the  rank  of  general.

STEELE,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
in  1819;  d.  in  San  Antonio,  Tex.,  12  Jan.,  1885.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S,  military  academy  in
1840,  assigned  to  the  2d  dragoons,  and  ser\-ed  in
the  Florida  war,  the  military  occupation  of  Texas,
and  the  war  with  Mexico,  being  promoted  Ist


8TEENDAM


8TRINKR


661


liputenant,  9  May,  1840,  and  Itrcvettcd  captain  for
pillaiilry  at  ContrrniM  and  ('liiirulMiMM).  Up  was
8latiuii(Hl  in  Ti'xan  from  1H4(I  till  1852.  ttcinfc  Jiro-
mottMl  cnptaiii,  10  Nov.,  IKM.and  wan  then  in  Nvw
Mexico  till  1H.'>4.  Krotn  tliat  timi*  till  the  civil  war
he  waM  chiefly  in  KHiisa-s,  I)iikota,  and  Ncbraitka,
taking;  [tart  in  Hcvcrnl  i*x|H-<lilioni(  apiinKt  hiMtilv
Indians.  He  rcsifjncd  on  Jtt)  .Mav,  INtl.  ioiniMl  th«
('onfcd»<rate  army  as  colonel  of  t'lie  7lh  'lexaM  cav-
alry, and  took  [>art  in  (>en.  Henry  H.  Sibley's  ox-
pcoitinn  to  New  Mexico.  On  its  return  he  wa«
made  bripailier-general,  12  S<'pt.,  1802.  ancl  in  Jan-
uary, 18tW,  was  ii.'isigne<l  to  the  command  of  the
Department  of  Western  Arkansas  an<l  the  Indian
territory.  He  commaii<lo<l  at  (ialve,ston.  Tex.,  in
DeeemU'r,  IKO.'i,  and  h»ul  charp!  of  a  cavalry  divis-
ion in  liouisiana  in  1804,  where  he  oppos«'d  the
R«d  river  exjM'<lition  of  (ten.  Nathaniel  r.  lianks.
In  1807  he  became  a  wjmmission  merchant  in  S«in
Antonio.  Tex.,  and  for  some  time  after  1874  he  wa.«
wljutant-^neral  of  the  sUite.  In  this  ofllcc  ho  did
g(KHl  service  by  procuring?  an<l  publishing;,  at  great
{lains  and  expen.se,  lists  of  esca|)ed  convicts  and
other  fugitives  from  justice,  wliich  he  luniishcHl
to  the  sheriffs  of  the  various  counties  in  the  state.

STEENDAM,  Jacob,  Dutch  poet.  b.  in  Holland
in  1010.  It  is  uncertain  when  or  where  he  died.
He  came  to  the  colony  of  New  Amsterdam  a)>out
16;i2,  and  stayed  there  till  1002,  when  he  returnetl
to  Holland.  During  his  residence  in  the  Dutch
settlement  he  owned  farms  at  Amersfort  and
Me.spath,  a  house  and  lot  on  what  is  now  Pearl
street,  and  another  on  Broadway.  He  left  Holland
several  years  after  his  n-turn,  and  made  a  voyage
to  Ratavia,  where  he  mav  {wssibly  have  died.  The
little  that  is  known  of  him  is  due  to  the  researches
of  Henry  ('.  Murphy,  who.  when  he  was  U.  S.  uiin-
Mster  to  the  Hague,  discovered  some  p<x'ms  written
by  Steendam  on  New  Ainst»+dam,  and  had  them
printed  with  an  Knglish  version  in  the  same  metre.
The  work  is  entitled  "  Jacob  Steendam  nin-h  viLster.
A  Memoir  of  the  F'irst  Poet  in  New  Netherlands,
with  his  Poems  descriptive  of  the  Colony"  (The
Hague,  1801).  The  poems  are  "Complaint  of  New
Amsteixlam,  in  New  Netherlands,  to  her  Mother,
of  her  Beginning,  Growth,  and  Present  Condition,"
and  "The  Praise  of  New  Netherlands:  Spurring
Verses  to  the  Lovers  of  the  Colony  and  Bn)tnership
to  be  established  on  the  South  River  of  New  Nether-
land. Peter  Comelison  PI<K'khov,  of  Zierei-kzee."

STEENSTRA.  Pot«'r  Henry,  clergyman,  b.
near  Kraiieker.  Friesland,  Netherlands,  24  Jan.,
1833.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  State's  and
entered  Shurtleff  college,  HI.,  where  he  was  grad-
uated in  1858.  He  then  became  a  minister  in  the
Baptist  church,  but  afterwanl  unitinl  with  the
K[)is<-opalian8,  and  was  ap{H)inted  rector  of  Grac*-
church,  Newton,  Mass.,  in  18<>4.  He  liecame  pro-
fessor of  Hebrew  and  Old  and  New  Testament
exegesis  in  the  Episcopal  theological  school  of
Cambridge,  Ma.s.s.,  in  1808.  He  translated  and
edited  "Judges"  and  "Ruth"  in  the  American
edition  of  Ijange's  "  Commentary "  (New  York,
18?2).  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Shurtleff  college  in  1882.

STEUiER,  Ern.st,  German- American  bibliog-
rapher, b.  in  Gnstewitz.  Saxony,  4  Oct.,  1832.  He
was  trained  as  a  lKH)k-soller,  emigrate<l  in  1855  to
New  York  city,  and  in  18(5.'{  o[)ened  an  independent
business.  Ho  became  the  publisher  of  important
works  of  German-Americans  and  of  language  text-
books, and  als<i  a  manufacturer  and  importiT  of  all
that  l>elongs  to  the  Kindergarten  system.  Mr.
Steiger  is  the  author  of  "  Der  Niu-hdruck  in  Nortl-
amerika"  (New  York,  1860);  "Das  Copyright-I.«w


in  den  Von-inigt^n  Staatrn  "  (IHW) ;  and  -  Periodi-
cal Literature,"  a  bibiiogmphy  (Itfl^).

HTKIN,  Conrad  (xtine),  Gprman  hiatorian,  b.  in
HeidellNTg  in  1701;  d.  in  Kmlau  in  1788.  Ha
wan  for  many  vean*  prufcMior  of  hiiitnry  in  the
Tniventity  of  Brrslau,  and  afterward  mmiitt  r»>
itcari'hesin  thewlate  and  [irivatt*  libntriewof  KurM|ie
and  America  u|Min  the  ancient  hiMory  of  the  Utter
continent.  Hi^  workit  include  "  Abhandlung  tlber
die  Atlantida  der  Altcn,  und  ihren  ZunminenbanfT
mit  Amerika"  (Bnwiau.  I75(i):  "Ueacbichte  der
Kntdeckungen  durch  Scandinaviaohe  8ealcut«  vom
12ten  zum  15ten  Jahrhunderte"  (17S4):  **G^
schichte  der  deutschen  An>ie4lelungpn  m  Nord-
Amerika "  (1755);  "Abhandlung  (IImt  ilio  Sf*-
nischen  Kroberer  Cortt'-s,  Pizarro.  und  Alniagro"
(1757):  "  Historische  Notiz»-n  tlU'r  die  Kn>l»i'nmg
von  Venezuela  durch  die  Wel»er  "  (1758) ;  "  Kurze
Ik>schreibung  von  Amerika"  (1759);  and  "Ab-
handlung Qlx>r  die  Indiancr-Raiwe  oder  Kothhlute,
dereii  (icM-hichte  und  Zusammenhang  mit  der  ger-
jnanis<hen  Rasse "  ( 1 7<J0).

STEINBEL,  Roger  Nelson,  naval  ofllcor,  b.  in
Middleton,  Md..  27  I)e«-..  IMIO.  He  entere«|  the
navv  as  a  midshipman.  27  .March.  1832,  and  cruiseti
in  the  .schooner"  Porpoise"  when  she  wa«  wrt<ckiHl
near  Vera  Cruz  in  1833.  He  was  on  dutv  in  New
York  at  the  naval  school  in  1834-'8,  and  \iecame  a
pa.ssed  midshipman,  2^i  June,  1838.  He  was  com-
missioned liwitenant,  iH  Oct.,  184iJ,  »erve<l  in  the
coast  survey  until  1847,  and  then  was  on  the  Brazil
station,  on  special  dutv  in  Washington,  and  in  the
steamer  "  Mississippi,'' on  the  Kast  India  station,
in  1857-'9.  When  the  civil  war  U'gaii  he  went  to
Cincinnati  to  fit  out  river  gun-lx>at».  and  then  ren-
dered gocxl  service  in  the  Mississippi  river  flotilla.
He  commandetl  the  river  gun-lK*at  "  I/cxington  "  at
Belmont  when  Gen.  (irant's  force  was  defeate<l  and
.saved  by  the  gun-l>oats  in  Noveml»er,  1801.  From
August,  1801,  until  May.  1802.  he  parti<-i|»ated  in
several  engagements,  ami  contributt^l  greatly  to
the  successes  and  victories  at Luca>i  Iteiul.  9  S*pt-,

1801.  Fort  Henry,  0  Feb.,  18<12.  Island  No.  10  from
10  March  until  its  capture  on  7  April.  1862,  and  in
the  action  with  the  rams  at Fort  Pillow  in  May.

1802.  In  this  last  engagi-ment  his  vessel,  the  "Cin-
cinnati." was  sunk,  and  he  was  seriously  wounded.
He  then  had  special  duty  at  Philadelphia  and
Pittsburg  until  1865.  He  was  commissKmed  cap-
tain. 25  July.  1800,  and  comman«le<l  the  "Canan-
daigua"  in  the  Mwliterraneaii  in  18G0-'7.  He  next
served  at  the  rendezvous  in  Bo.ston,  and  was  c<^m-
missione<l  commodore,  13  July,  1870,  and  aptKiinted
commander-in-chief  of  the  Pacific  Mpiatlron  in
1872.  He  was  retiretl  on  27  De<-..  1872,  and  subee-
quentlv  promotwl  to  rear-a<lmiral  on  the  retired
list,  5  .tune.  1874.

STEINER,  Lewl»  Henry,  physician,  b.  in  Fred-
erick citv,  .Md.,  4  May,  1827.  He  was  e<lucated  at
the  Frederick  academy  an«l  at  Marshall  college.
Pa,,  where  he  received  the  degnt'  of  A.  M.  in  1849,
and  was  graduated  the  same  year  at  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He
began  to  practise  in  Frederick,  but  in  1852  removed
to  Baltimore,  where  for  thnn?  vears  he  was  aaeori-
ated  with  Dr.  John  R.  W.  Dunliar  in  the  conduct
of  the  lialtimore  me<lical  institute,  at  the  end  of
which  time  he  n'tuniwl  to  Fn-derick.  Soon  after
he  begjin  to  practise  his  attention  waa  enpeciallr
direc'ted  to  chemistrj-  and  the  allied  scienoea,  ana
(luring  his  resi<lence  in  Baltimore  his  time  waa
largely  occupietl  in  teaching.  He  was  pmfemor  of
chemistry  and  natunil  histor>'  in  Columltian  col-
legi'.  Washington,  D.  C..  ami  al;-*!  of  chemi>tr>' and
pharmacy  in  the  National  medii-akollege.  Washing-


662


STEINHAUER


STEINWEHR


ton,  in  1853 ;  lecturer  on  chemistry  and  physics  in
St.  James  colleee,  Md.,  in  1854 ;  lecturer  on  applied
chemistry  in  the  Maryland  institute  in  1855,  and
professor  of  chemistry  in  the  Maryland  college  of
pharmacy  in  1856.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
actively  employed  as  an  inspector  by  the  U.  S.  sani-
tary commission,  and  for  a  periotl  was  in  charge
of  its  operations  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  as
chief  inspector.  In  1871  he  was  elected  by  the  Re-
publicans to  the  state  senate  for  four  years.  He
was  re-elected  for  a  like  term  in  1875,  and  again  in
1879.  From  1855  till  1858  he  was  a  contributor
to,  and  afterward  assistant  editor  of,  "  The  Ameri-
can Medical  Monthly."  In  1884  he  was  appoint-
ecl  librarian  of  the  Enoch  Pratt  free  library  in
Baltimore,  which  office  he  now  holds.  He  has  puV)-
lished  "  H.  Wills's  Outlines  of  Chemical  Analysis,"
translated  from  the  3d  German  edition,  with  Dr.
Daniel  Brud  (Cambridge,  1855) ;  "  Cantate  Domino :
a  Collection  of  Chants,  Hymns,  etc.,  for  Church
Service,"  with  Henry  Schwing  (Boston,  1859) ;  "  Re-
port containing  a  Diary  ke^t  during  the  Rebel
Occupation  of  Frederick,  Md.,  etc."  (New  York,
1862);  and  also  translations  from  the  German,  with
monographs,  reports,  lectures,  and  speechea,

STEINHAUER,  Henry  Bird,  Canadian  clergy-
man, b.  in  the  Ramah  Indian  settlement,  Lake
Simcoe,  Ontario,  in  1804;  d.  at  Whitefish  Lake,
Northwest  territory,  Canada,  29  Dec,  1885.  He
was  a  pure-blooded  Chippewa  Indian,  and  received
his  name  of  Steinhauer  from  a  German  family  that
adopted  and  educated  him.  He  accompanied  the
Rev.  John  Evans,  a  Methodist  missionary,  to  the
northwest  in  1840,  and  settled  at  Norway  House,
where  he  remained  until  1855,  and  made  himself
useful  to  the  missionaries  as  an  interpreter.  He
assisted  Mr.  Evans  in  inventing  and  perfecting
the  Cree  syllabic  characters,  in  which  nearly  all
books  in  the  Indian  languages  are  printed  in  the
nortliwest.  He  also  translated  into  Cree  the  Old
Testament  from  the  book  of  Job  to  the  end  of  the
lesser  prophets,  and  most  of  the  New  Testament.
He  was  ordained  a  minister  in  1858,  and  lived
at  Whitefish  Lake.

STEIN  HEFER,  Jnan  (stine'-hay-fer),  German
botanist,  b.  in  Silesia  about  1650;  d.  in  Sonora,
Mexico,  in  1716.  He  studied  medicine,  entered  the
Society  of  Jesus  as  lay-brother,  and  was  sent  as  a
physician  to  Mexico,  where  he  was  assigned  to  the
missions  of  Sonora,  making  a  study  of  the  flora
of  that  region,  which  was  entirely  unexplored.  He
wrote  "  Florilogio  Medicinal  Mejicano  "  (Mexico,
1712:  Amsterdam,  1719;  and  Madrid,  1732).

STEINITZ,  William  (sty-nits),  chess-player,  b.
in  Prague,  Bohemia,  17  May,  1836.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Prague,  and  finished  his  studies  at  the
Polytechnic  institute  in  Vienna.  He  gained  the
first  prizes  at  several  European  tournaments,  nota-
bly in  London  in  1872  and  in  Vienna  in  1873.  At
the  exhibition  in  Vienna  in  1872  he  tied  for  the

Erize.  Since  1862  Mr.  Steinitz  has  won  all  single-
anded  games  against  other  famous  players.  In
October,  1882,  he  came  from  London  to  New  York,
remaining  until  April,  1883.  when  he  returned  to
England  to  participate  in  the  London  chess-tour-
nament. In  the  autumn  of  1883  he  again  came  to
this  country,  since  which  time  the  United  States
has  been  his  permanent  residence.  Prom  1885
until  the  present  time  (1888)  he  has  edited  the
"Chess  Magazine,"  published  in  New  York  city.
In  1876  he  published  in  London  a  pamphlet  en-
titled "  The  Match  between  Messrs.  Steinitz  and
Blackburn."  In  his  recent  contest  with  Mr.  Zu-
kertort  in  New  York  city  his  best  efforts,  by  con-
trast with  the  great  memory  and  science  of  his


opponent,  displayed  remarkable  originality  and
fertility  of  invention.

STEIN  WAY,  Henry  Engelhard  (stine'-way),
piano-forte  manufacturer,  b.  in  Wolfshagen,  Ger-
many, 15  Feb.,  1797;  d.  in  New  York  city,  7  Feb.,
1871.  The  original  spelling  of  the  name  is  Stein-
weg.  After  receiving  a  common-school  education
in  his  native  place,  he  was  first  apprenticed  to  a
cabinet-maker,  then  worked  in  an  organ-fac^tory,
and  thereafter  studied  the  art  of  piano-forte  maK-
ing.  His  earliest  youthful  musical  constructions
were  zithers  and  guitars,  for  his  own  amusement.
At  the  age  of  fifteen  the  boy  was  left  an  orphan
and  thrown  on  his  own  resources.  After  a  time
Mr.  Steinway  began  to  make  piano-fortes  in  a  small
way  in  his  native  place,  but,  being  dissatisfied  with
the  surroundings,  came  with  his  family  to  New
York  city  in  1850.  Here  for  several  years  father
and  sons  were  employed  as  journeymen  in  noted
factories,  until  they  resolved  to  unite  their  knowl-
edge and  experience  and  established  the  firm  of
Steinway  and  Sons.  In  1862  they  gained  the  first
prize  in  London  in  competition  with  the  most  emi-
nent makers  in  Europe ;  and  this  victory  was  fol-
lowed in  1867  by  a  similar  success  at  the  Universal
exposition  in  Paris.  According  to  Liszt,  Rubin-
stein, and  other  high  authorities,  the  Steinways
have  done  more  to  advance  the  durability,  action,
and  tone-quality  of  their  instruments  than  any
other  makers  of  Europe  or  America. — Henry  En-
gelhard's  son.  Albert,  b.  in  Seesen,  Germany,  10
June,  1840;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14  May,  1877,
early  in  the  civil  war  was  advanced  to  the  colo-
nelcy of  the  6th  regiment  of  New  York  volunteers,
and  later  became  brigadier-general  on  the  staff  of
Gov.  John  T.  Hoffman.

STEINWEHR,  Adolph  Wilhelm  August
Friedricll,  Baron  von,  soldier,  b.  in  Blankenburg,
duchy  of  Brunswicl?,  Germany,  25  Sept..  1822;  d.
in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  25  Feb.,  1877.  His  father  was  a
major  in  the  ducal  service,  and  his  grandfather  a
lieutenant-general  in  the  Prussian  army.  Adolph
was  educated  at  the  military  academy  in  the  city
of  Bininswick,  and  entered  the  army  of  the  duchy
as  lieutenant  in  1841.  In  1847  he  resigned  and
came  to  the  United  States  to  offer  his  services  to
the  government  during  the  Mexican  war.  Failing
to  obtain  a  commission  in  the  regular  army,  he  re-
turned to  Germany  after  marrying  an  American
lady.  In  1854  he  again  visited  this  country  and
purchased  a  farm  near  Wallingford,  Conn.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  a  regiment,
the  29th  New  York,  which  he  commanded  at  the
first  battle  of  Bull  Run,  forming  part  of  the  reserye
under  Col.  Dixon  S.  Miles.  On  12  Oct.,  1861,  he
was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
and  placed  at  the  head  of  the  2d  brigade.  Gen.
Louis  Blenker's  division,  which  was  attached  in
May,  1862,  to  the  Mountain  department  under  Gen.
John  C.  Fremont.  When  Gen.  Franz  Sigel  as-
sumed command  of  the  corps,  after  the  organiza-
tion of  the  Army  of  Virginia,  Gen.  Steinwehr  was
given  the  2d  division,  and  with  it  took  part  in  the
campaign  on  the  Rapidan  and  Rappahannock  in
the  following  August.  He  also  retained  it  when
the  command  of  the  (forps  passed  into  the  hands
of  Gen.  Oliver  0.  Howard,  and  under  that  officer
fought  in  the  battles  of  Chancellorsville  and  Get-
tysburg. He  remained  with  the  army  until  the
close  of  the  war.  His  home  for  several  years  before
his  death  was  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  where  he  pre-
pared an  "  Eclectic  Series  "  of  school  geographies
that  was  widely  circulated,  and  published  "  A  Topo-
graphical Map  of  the  United  States"  and  "The
Centennial  Gazetteer"  (Philadelphia,  1873).


STEPHEN


STKriIENS


668


STEPHEN,  Adam.  w.Mior.  b.  In  VJrjrlnla  almnt
173<i:  <l.  ihcit'  ill  N<)v«'inlicr.  ITIH,  Ili«  jninwl  iho
oxiKMlitioii  to  tlu>  Ohio  with  h  <>oin|>nn^  in  1754,
WH.S  promoted  lieuti'MHut-coloiiol,  uml  in  the  ab-
s»«nct'  of  (ioorjji*  Wn-xhiii^fton  coiiiinMiiiiril  thc<  foircs
at  WiiichcstiT,  whoiuM'  h«<  wt  out  in  17.V<withnn
oxpfdilion  A^iinst  the  ('rwks  fur  tlie  n-lief  of  the
colon  ist.s  of  South  Carol  inn.  lie  \\iu\  charf^*  of  the
frontier  ilefenees  of  Virginia  in  li«W,  iMTfonnetl  ]
im^tortAnt  M*rvices  in  brin^^in);  to  a  termination
the  French  and  Indian  wars,  and  at  the  U'^^inning
of  the  Ucvolution  was  given  the  command  of  a
regiment.  Ho  was  made  a  brign<lier-}renei7il  on  4
S*>i)t.,  1776,  fought  at  Trenton,  and  on  19  Feb.,
17»7.  was  jinMUoted  major-gi-nenil.  lie  1«m1  one  of
the  attacking  columns  at  the  Hramlywine.  At
Germantown  his  division  Un-ame  involved  in  a
combat  witli  the  troops  of  (Jen.  Anthony  Wayne,
owing  to  a  fog.  He  was  held  resjHtnsible  f<)r  the
blunder.  ao<iise<l  of  intoxication,  and  in  the  winter
of  1777  dismisse«l  from  the  M-rvice.

STEPHEN,  Sir  (ioorgi',  Imrt..  Canadian  cani-
tulist,  b.  in  iJufftown.  lianffshire.  Scotland.  T*  Feb..
ly2y.  After  passing  s<Mne  time  as  clerk  in  a  mer-
cantile house  in  London,  he  came  to  Canada  in
lb50  and  entered  the  warehous**  of  William  Stephen

and  Co.,  Montreal.
In  a  few  years  he
obtainiHl  a  junior
partnership,  and  on
the  death  of  his
relative,  William
Stephen,  in  18«2,  he
purcha-stnl  the  lat-
ter's  interest  and
became  hea«l  of  the
firm.  Ilewaselect-
e«l  president  in  1H76

^. ^ ,  „-. of  the  liankof  Mon-

VlK^' \ ^  I  treai,  in  1878  of  the

TS^ \  i  Manitoba  and  Min-

neapolis railway,
and  in  1881  of  the
Canadian  Pacific
railway,  but  resign-
ed the  latter  post  on
7  Aug.,  1888.  He
was  granted  the  confederation  medal  in  1885,  and
crented  a  baronet  in  18S(5  for  hisservi<es  in  connw-
tion  with  the  construction  of  the  Canadian  Pacific
railroad.  With  his  cousin.  Sir  Donald  A.  Smith,
he  founded  in  1885  the  Montreal  st;holarship  of
the  lioval  college  of  music.  London,  Knglaiul.

STEPHEN,  James,  publicist,  b.  m  P(«.le,  Dor-
setshire, England,  in  1(59;  d.  in  Bath,  England.
10  Oct.,  18:^2.  He  was  educate<l  at  Winchester,
became  a  barrister,  and  sul^siKiuently  was  a  fwrlia-
mentary  n*|H)rter.  He  receive<l  an  ap|K)intment  in
the  prize  court  in  the  island  of  St.  Christopher,  W.  I.,
returned  to  England  with  an  ample  fortune,  and
obtained  a  large  practice  as  mlvo<-ate  in  prize  crises
before  the  privy  council.  He  was  returned  to  par-
liament for  Tralee,  ap{X)int«<l  under-secretary  ft)r
the  c-oloniee,  and  ma«le  a  master  in  chancery  for
his  services  ui  drawing  up  the  system  of  continen-
tal blockjule  against  N'apileon.  '  He  wju*  connecteil
by  marriage  with  William  Will)erforce,  whose  re-
ligious and  anti-slaverv  principles  he  shannl.  Mr.
Stephen  was  the  autlior  of  a  pamphlet,  which
Lonl  Hrougham  described  as  "of  great  nierit,"  en-
title<l  "War  in  Disguis*',  or  the  Frauds  of  the
Neutral  Flags"  (London,  1805-6 ;  New  York,
1806),  which  elicited  a  reply  from  Gouverneur
Morris,  "An  Answer  to '  War  in'  I  )i.sguise  * "  (I^>mK>n
and  New  York,  1806). He  also  publisheil  "S|»eech


\


\f.


of  the  Hon.  John  Randolph  in  H.  R.,  U.S., on  Noo-
Im|Mirtation.  with  OlnM-rvationH  "  (IHllll):  "Ameri*
can  Arpiments  on  Neutral  Rightn."  etc,  (1808);
"SiKHH-h  in  the  H.  of  C.  on  the  Overturm  of  the
American  (Joveniment  "  (lHCji»);  "The  History  of
Touiwaint  L'Ouv.rture"  (IHUc  and  " The Siavenr
of  the  British  We>.t  India  Coloniet*  I>p|ineated«
eU:  (2  vols..  1H24-':M)).

STEPHENS,  Alexander  Hamilton.  lUUs-
man.  b.  near  CrawfordHville,  (}»..  II  KeU.  1812:  d.
in  Atlanta,  (io..  4  March.  1MH3.  Win  grandfather.
Alexander,  founder  of  the  AmericHii  branch  of
the  Stephens  family,  waff  an  Engli>>hnian,  and  an
a«lherent  of  Prince  Charles  P^lwanl.  He  came  to
this  country  alniut  1746.  wttlwl  in  tlw  Penn  coionjr,
was  engaged  in  s«'veral  conflicts  with  the  Indians
and  in  the  old  Frt*nch  war,  wrving  under  <'ol.
( ifHirge  Washingt<»n.  1 1  is  hon«e  "-a*  at  t  he  junction
of  the  Juniata  and  Sus<|uehanna  riven*.  Ho  was  a
captain  in  the  Hevolutionary  army,  and  wMin  after
the  |)ea<'e  remov«xl  to  (ieorgia.  .Alexander  )*e<>anie
an  orphan  at  the  age  of  flftern.  I'nder  the  <-harge
of  his  uncle  he  attnicted  the  attention  of  Charles
C.  Mills,  a  man  of  means,  and  after  flvi>  months
at  school  he  was  offereil  a  home  in  Wu.'ihington,
Wilkes  CO.. and  a  pla<-e  in  the  hii;h-M>h(M>l  that  was
taught  by  the  Uev.  Alexatider  Hamilton  Welister.
|iastor  oi  the  Pn-sbyterian  church.  His  middle
name,  Hamilton,  was  taken  fn>m  this  gentleman.
He  regarded  this  charity  as  a  loan,  and  afterwanl
re|uiid  the  full  amount.  He  also  acc<-pte<l  the  offer
of  the  Presbyterian  etlucutional  s<x'iety  to  send  him
to  college,  with  a  view  to  the  ministry,  with  the
proviso  that  he  was  to  refund  the  c«»st  in  ease  of
nis  change  of  mind,  and  in  any  event  when  he
should  Ije  able.  He  entert"*!  Franklin  colleg»*(now
the  State  university)  in  August,  1828,  was  gradu-
ated in  1832  with  the  first  honor,  and  sul)se<juently
earned  money  by  teaching  to  |>ay  his  indebtedness.
At  that  j)erio<l  of  his  life  he  was  much  given  to
morbid  intros|>ection,  which  was  iwrtiy  the  result
of  constitutionally  delicate  healtn.  ('>n  22  July.
1834.  after  two  months*  stud  v.  he  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  Ix>ing  concratulate<l  by  Senator  William
II.  Crawford  an<l  Jiidge  Joseiih  Henry  Lumpkin
on  the  l>est  examiiuition  they  bad  ever  heard.  He
livinl  on  six  dollars  a  month,  and  made  $400  the
first  year.  Theri  he  U'gan  to  win  reputation,  and
he  s(K>n  owne«l  his  father's  old  homestead,  and
bought  the  estate  that  is  now  LiU'rty  hall.

In  18.'i6  he  was  electe<l  to  the  lower  branch  of
the  legislature  against  bitter  opposition  liecause  he
.strove  against  nullification,  while  lielieving  in
state  M)ycnMgnty.  and  oppcwed  vigilance  conimit-
1  tees  and  the  then  c<immon  "slicking  clul>s."  the
parent  of  the  Ku-Klux  Klan.  His  first  s|H>e<-h  in
the  legislatun'  s«H-uri'd  the  iia.vsage  of  the  appro-
priatiim  for  what  is  now  the\Vestern  and  Atlantic
railway  frcmi  Atlanta  to  Chattan<H>ga,  the  projwrty
of  Georgia,  His  a<lvocacy  secure<l  a  charter  for  the
Macon.  Ga.,  fenuile  college,  the  first  in  the  world
for  the  regular  graduation  of  young  women  in
classics  and  the  .sciences*.  In  18iJ9  he  wa»  a  dele-
gate to  the  Charleston  commercial  i*onvention.  and
ui  1H43  he  was  noniinate<l  for  ctmgress  under  the
"general-ticket  system."  there  lieing  then  no  divis-
ion of  the  state  into  congressional  di.«itrict«.  He
was  elected  by  3.000  majority.  His  first  speveh
wa.s  in  favor  of  the  jxtwer  of  congress  to  (nu«  an
act  reipiiring  the  .states  to  lie  divided  intocungrra-
sional  districtit.  He  S4'«>m)-<1  thus  to  question  his
own  right  to  sit.  as  (ieorgia  had  not  obeyed  the
law.  lie  won  Ixtth  point  lUid  seat.  It  was,  in  fact,
the  entering-we«lge  of  the  assertion  of  the  power  of
the  general  government  to  legislate  in  stale  do-


664


STEPHENS


STEPHENS


mcstic  affairs,  under  the  plea  of  regulating  its  own
organization.  On  the  same  principle  Mr.  Stephens,
as  senator-elect  from  Georgia,  in  1860,  was  not  al-
lowed to  sit,  Georgia  not  having  complied  with  the
terms  of  congress.  He  advocated  the  annexation
of  Texas  by  legislative  resolution  as  early  as
1838-'9,  and opposed  the John  Tyler  treaty  of

1844,  but,  with  seven  other  southern  Whigs,  se-
cured the  passage  of  the  Milton-Brown  plan  of

1845.  He  bitterly  opposed  President  James  K.
Polk  on  the  Mexican  war,  but  adopted  all  its  re-
sults as  a  godsend  of  southern  territory.  In  1848
he  had  a  personal  encounter  with  Judge  Cone,  of
Greensboro,  which  illustrated  the  physical  courage
for  which  he  had  been  noted  from  youth — the
courage  that  comes,  not  from  principle  or  duty,  but
from  utter  indifference  to  consequences.  The  diffi-
culty grew  out  of  a  quarrel  on  the  Clayton  com-
promise of  1848. Cone  cut  Stephens  terribly  with

a  knife  and  cried  :  "  Now, you,  retniot,  or  I'll

cut  your  throat."  The  bleeding,  almost  dying  Ste-
phens siiid  :  "  Never ! — cut,"  and  grasped  the  swift-
ly descending  knife-blade  in  his  riglit  hand.  That
hand  never  again  wrote  plainly.  Few  of  the  wit-
nesses of  the  affair,  which  occurred  on  the  piazza
of  Thompson's  hotel,  Atlanta,  expected  him  to  re-
cover. He  did,  however,  in  time  to  make  u  speech

in  favor  of  Ziicha-
ry  Taylor  for  the
presidency,  thecar-
riage  being  drawn
to  the  stand  by  the
people.  In  1850
Mr.  Stephens  op-
posed the  secession
movement  at  the
south. and  thought
the  admission  of
California  as  a  free
state  a  blessing,  as
repealing  the  Mis-
souri restrictions
and  opening  all
the  remaining  ter-
ritories north  and
south  to  slavery.
He  was  one  of  the
authors  of  the  "Georgia  platform"  of  18.50.  Its
first  resolve  wjus  "  that  we  hold  the  American  Union
secondary  in  importance  only  to  the  rights  and
principles  it  was  designed  to  perpetuate."  On  the
nominations  of  Franklin  Pierce  and  Gen.  Win-
field  Scott,  at  Baltimore,  the  lines  of  Whig  and
Democrat  were  drawn  for  the  la*;!  time.  Pierce  ap-
proved the  settlement  of  1850;  Scott  did  not.  Ste-
phens, with  Charles  G.  Faulkner,  Walker  Brooke.
Alexander  White,  James  Abercrombie,  Robert
Toombs,  James  Johnson,  Christopher  H.  Williams,
and  Meredith  P.  Gentry,  killed  the  Whig  party  for-
ever by  their  famous  card  of  3  July,  1852,  giving
their  reasons  for  refusing  to  support  Gen.  Scott.
Stephens  wrote  it.  Daniel  Webster  was  nominated
without  a  party,  but  died,  and  Toombs  and  Ste-
phens voted  for  him  after  he  was  dead.  In  1854
Mr.  .Stephens  defended  the  principles  of  the  Kan-
sas-Nebniska  act,  as  embodying  the  principle  of
1850,  "  the  people  of  the  territories  left  free  to  form
and  regulate  their  own  domestic  institutions  (in-
cluding slavery),  subject  only  to  the  constitution
of  the  United  States."  In  1859  he  retired  from
congress,  and  in  a  farewell  speech  in  Augusta,  Ga..
intimated  that  the  only  way  to  get  more  slaves  and
settle  the  territories  with  slave-holding  voters  was
to  reopen  the  African  slave-trade.
Mr.  Stephens  seemed  a  bundle  of  contradictioas,


s^r^L^<Zc,/yyJlu^^^^'^Z2tyi.^C,eylv3


but  he  always  acted  upon  reasons  and  principles.
While  a  state-rights  man,  he  supported  Harrison  in
1840.  In  1844,  though  in  favor  of  the  acquisition
of  Texas,  he  supfwrted  Clay,  who  said  it  would  re-
open the  slave  issue  and  make  war,  as  it  did.  In
1845  he  voted  with  the  Democratic  party  in  ad-
mitting Texas.  In  1846  and  1847  he  stood  with
Calhoun  and  the  Whig  party  upon  the  Mexican
war.  His  house  resolutions  in  February,  1847,  be-
came the  basis  of  the  Whig  reorganization,  and
Gen.  Zac-hary  Taylor  was  elected  jiresident  on  the
same  policy  m  1848.  In  1850  he  differe<l  with  Fill-
more on  policy,  as  he  had  with  Polk,  and  approved
the  compromise  of  Clay. In  1854  he  was  with  Ste-

ghen  A.  Douglas,  and  m  1856  aided  to  elect  James
uchanan,  his  extreme  foe.  In  1859  he  resigned
his  seiit  in  congress,  saying:  "I  .saw  there  was
bound  to  be  a  smash-up  on  the  road,  and  resolved
to  jump  off  at  the  first  station."  In  1860  he  sup-
ported Ste[)hen  A.  Douglas  for  the  presidency
against  John  C.  Breckinridge,  the  professed  expo-
nent of  state  rights,  holding  that  the  territorial
views  of  Mr.  Douglas  were  his  life-long  principles.
In  1860  he  matle  a  great  Union  speech,  and  in  1861
became  the  vice-president  of  the  Confederacy  of  se-
ceded states — both  times  on  principle.  By  1862  he
was  as  much  at  issue  with  Jefferson  Davis  as  he
had  been  with  Mr.  Lincoln  in  1860,  and  on  the
same  matter — state  rights — and  he  continued  to
differ  to  the  end.  Mr.  Stephens,  Gov.  Joseph  E.
Brown,  and  Gen.  Robert  Toombs,  one  Union  man
and  two  of  the  bitterest  of  the  original  secessionists
of  1860,  formed  the  head  of  the  Georgia  peace  par-
ty of  1804,  and  all  the  three  supported  by  speeches
and  letters  the  Linton-Stephens  peace,  and  habeas
corpus  resolutions  passed  by  the  Georgia  legis-
lature in  that  year.  In  February,  1865,  he  was  at
the  head  of  the  peace  commission  on  the  part  of
the  Confederate  government  in  the  Hampton  Roads
conference.  After  the  downfall  of  the  Confederacy
he  was  arrested  and  confined  for  five  months  in
Fort  Warren,  Boston  harbor,  as  a  prisoner  of  state,
but  in  October,  1865,  he  was  released  on  his  own
parole.  On  22  Feb.,  1866,  he  matle  a  strong  recon-
struction speech  and  plea  for  the  new  freedmen.
He  had  been  chosen  to  the  senate  by  the  legisla-
ture, but  congress  ignored  the  restoration  of  Geor-
gia to  the  Union  under  the  presidential  proclama-
tion of  Andrew  Johnson,  and  he  did  not  take  his
seat.  On  16  April,  1866,  he  was  called  to  testify
before  the  congressional  reconstniction  committee.
He  both  testified  and  spoke  on  his  life-long  theme.
In  1867  he  published  the  first  volume  of  his
"  War  between  the  States."  In  December,  1868,-he
was  elected  professor  of  political  science  and  his-
tory in  the  University  of  Georgia,  but  declined
from  failing  health.  He  was  kept  in  the  house  by
rheumatism  nearly  four  years.  In  1870  he  com-
pleted the  second  volume  of  "The  War  between
the  States."  but  in  a  more  partisan  and  less  hope-
ful tone  than  the  first  volume.  Later  in  the  year
he  conceived  the  idea  of  a  "School  History  of  the
United  States,"  which  he  carried  out  (i870-'l).
He  taught  a  law  class  in  1871  as  a  means  of  sup-
port, and  edited  and  became  in  part  proprietor  of
the  Atlanta  "Sun,"  which  was  published  chiefly  to
defeat  Horace  Greeley  for  the  presidency.  The
enterprise  proved  financially  unsuccessful,  and  ex-
hausted all  the  profits  of  nis  b<x)ks.  By  5  Sept.,
Charles  O'Conor  had  declined  the  "straight-out"
nomination  in  Louisville,  and  with  that  died  Mr.
Stephens's  last  hope.  He  was  defeated  in  his  can-
vass for  a  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate  in  November,
1871,  but  in  1874  was  elected  to  congress.  He  op-
posed the  civil  rights  bill  in  a  speech  on  5  Jan.,


STEPHENS


STEPHENS


660


1874,  and  the  repeal  of  tho  increaM  of  mlary  art.
lie  was  ro-eleotca  in  1870,  and  continuously  wrv«'«l
until  his  resignation  in  \HHi.  In  tho  contt^Kt  b«<-
fore  the  electoral  cotiiinis.>iiori,  on  the  Ilayi»-Tild(>n
issue,  ho  atlvocatinl  K^in^  iN-hiiul  tho  n'-tumsami
settiii;;  lusjilu  those  of  KlnriiU  and  lioui-^iana,  but
opposttl  all  ri'sort  to  force  for  M-atiii^'  Mr.  TiMi-n.
In  January,  187H.  he  reviewwl  the  qui'Mtion  in  thf
"International  llcview."  On  the  announcement
that  Mr.  Hayes  was  electo<l  he  advised  acquiesoence.
His  8jH.>wh  on  the  uncoverinjf  of  the  |iaintin>;.
"The  Signing  of  the  Emanei|>ation  Proclamation,"
12  Keh.,  brought  praise  from  all  quartors.  An
old  atlmirer  pn>|K)se<l  to  scud  his  crutches  to  con-
gress after  ho  should  ceas««  to  In*  able  to  go.  In
1881-'2  he  undertook  to  write  a  "  History  of  the
Unite<l  States,"  which  he  comiileted  and  published
just  before  his  death  (New  \ork,  iWHJj).  It  ha«l
neither  the  vigor  nor  the  value  of  his  "  War  U'-
tween  the  States,"  and  was  a  failun>,  carrying  with
it  his  last  bonds,  in  which  ho  had  invested  i>art  of
the  proceeds  of  his  n'ally  great  life-work.  lie  hatl
receive*!  a  bad  sprain  in  May,  1HM2,  on  the  capitol
steps,  and  at  the  close  of  the  session  left  Washing-
ton forever.  In  1882  he  was  electe<l  governor  of
Georgia,  by  (50,000  majority,  over  Gen.  Lucius  J.
Gartrell,  a  Confederate  omcer  and  lawyer.  He
worked  hard  and  was  an  excellent  goveiiior.  He
made  his  last  public  speech  at  the  Georgia  sesqui-
centennial  (celebration  in  Savannah,  12  Feb..  ItiSS.
— His  brother.  Linton,  jurist,  b.  in  Crawfordsville,
Ga..  1  .July.  1H2:J;  d.  in  Sparta,  Ga.,  14  July,  18?2,
was  left  an  orphan  at  the  age  of  three  years,  but  his
eilucation  was  carwl  for  by  friends,  and  he  was
graduate<l  at  the  University  of  Georgia  in  184^1  He
then  studied  law  at  tho  University  of  Virginia  and
,  at  Harvard,  was  admitted  to  tho  bar  in  his  native
state,  and,  taking  an  active  j>art  in  fwlitics,  repre-
sented the  counties  of  Taliaferro  and  Hancock  in
the  legislature  for  several  years.  In  1858  he  was
appointed  to  a  vacancy  in  the  supreme  court  of
Georgia,  and  his  dec^isicms,  contained  in  three  vol-
umes of  the  "  Georgia  Re|)orts,"  are  characterized
by  their  [)recision,  perspicuity,  and  power  of  logic.
Judge  Stephens  was  a  delegate  to  the  Georgia  se-
cession convention  in  1861.  and  opposed  that  meas-
ure, but  subsequently  proposed  a  preamble  and
resolution  declaring  that  the  lack  of  unanimity  in
the  convention  was  in  regard  to  the  pro{)os«Hl  remedy
and  its  a[>plication  before  a  resort  to  other  means
of  redress,  and  not  as  to  alleged  grievances.  This
was  adopte<l,  and  he  signed  tho  ortlinance.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  was  a  member  of  the  Georgia
legislature,  where  he  introduced  the  peace  reso-
lutions of  1864,  and  vigorously  denounctnl  the  sus-
pension of  the  privilege  of  the  writ  of  hal)eas  cor-
pus by  the  Confederate  congress.  He  also  servevl
ui  the  army,  and  attaine<l  the  rank  of  colonel.  He
continued  his  activity  in  jwlitics  during  the  re-
construction iMjriod,  and  prior  to  the  presidential
canvass  of  18?2  publicly  spoke  in  favor  of  the  se-
lection of  a  purely  DcmocTatic  ticket  instead  of
adopting  the  candidacy  of  Horace  Greelev.

STEPHENS,  Ann  Sophia,  author,  b.in  Derby,
Conn.,  in  IHVi ;  d.  in  Newf)ort,  R.  I.,  20  Aug.,
1886.  Her  maiden  name  was  Winterl>otham.  She
married  Edward  Stephens  in  1831,  and  shortly  af-
terward settled  in  Portland.  Me.  She  founded  the
"  Portland  Magazine  "  in  MHiH,  and  continue<l  to
edit  it  till  18;i7.  In  1836  she  issuinl  a  collection  of
writings  by  natives  or  residents  of  Portland,  which
she  entitled  "  The  Portland  Sketch-Book."  Mean-
while her  writings  were  lH>ginning  to  be  known,
and  when  her  huslmnd  received  an  appointment  in
the  New  York  custom-house  in  1837  she  made  that


were  "  Mary  I
went,"  forwl


^..'-^n/w^Zfy^nutJ


I  city  her  rwddenc*.  She  edite<l  "  The  I^liea'  Com-
I  iianinn  "  for  four  yean,  wrote  for  **  Ginhatn'a  Maf»-
i  line "  and  "  l'eter»on'ii  Magazine,"  and  waafor
M>mo  time  asMM-iato  editor  of  theae  perkxlicala.
She  found«Hl  ••  Tim  I^Um'  World  "  in  1848  and
"Tho  lUustratrtl  Now  Monthly  "  in  IH4II,  and  waa
I  during  her  life
'  a  fre<|uent  con-
tributor  to  va-
rious other  D©-
rio<lical.s.  She
also  wrote  ser-
oral  p<)em8,  one
of  which,  "The
Polish  Ik»y,"  has
long  lieen  a  fa-
vorite for  recita-
tion in  8ch«x)ls,
Her  principal
short  stories
Der-
hich
she  obtained  a
prize  of  $400,
"  Malvia  Gray,"
"  The  Patch-
work (^uilt,"
and  "A  SU)ry  of  Western  Life."  In  laV)  she
made  a  tour  through  Eurfjpe  and  the  VmA.  On
her  return  she  published  ner  first  long  novel,
"Fashion  and  Famine"  (New  York.  18.54),  which
is  the  l)est  known,  if  not  the  !>est.  of  her  stories.
In  France  thr»'e  diflen-nt  translations  of  it  were
published.  Although  Mrs.  Ste[>hen8  lielonged  to
the  intense  school  of  novelists,  her  attention  to
minute  details  and  her  clearness  of  vision  enabled
her  to  be  very  realistic  in  the  transcription  of
natural  scenes,  and  she  never  hesitate*!  to  visit
hospitals,  public  institutions,  and  even  dangerous
resfjrts,  in  search  of  striking  types  of  character.
Her  princi|>al  works  U'si<les  thos«»  mentioned  in-
clude "  Zana,  or  the  Heiress  of  Clare  Hair'(Ix)n-
don,  18,')4;  rej)ublished  as  "The  lleires.x  of  Oreen-
hurst,"  New  York,  1857):  "The  Old  Homestead"
(1855;  2  vols.,  Philadelphia.  1860);  "Sybil  Chase"
(1862) ;  and  "  Ahmo's  Plot "  (1863).  Mrs.  Stephens
also  wrote  a  "  Pictorial  History  of  the  War  for  the
Union."  A  uniform  edition  of  her  writings  was
issue*!  (Philadelphia,  1869;  new  etl..  23  v.ds.,  1888).
STEPHENS,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  on  his
father's  farm.  Licking  Creek.  littlforcl  co..  Pa.,  in
April,  1778;  d.  in  Holivar.  Tenn.,  21  Nov.,  1850.
Ho  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college.  Cannons-
burg,  Pa.,  in  1803,  at  the  end  of  a  two-years'  course,
with  the  highest  honors,  served  as  tutor  in  college
for  a  short  time,  and  then  opened  a  »<'hool  m
Easton,  Md.  Although  of  a  Baptist  family,  he  re-
solve*! to  apply  f*)r  onlers  in  the  Pmtestant  ^'pi»-
copal  church.  After  due  pre[)aration  he  was  or^
dame*!  deacon  in  Up|»er  MarllK>n>ugh,  St.  Mary'a
CO..  Md.,  in  February.  1809,  by  Bishop  Claggett,
and  priest  at  the  diocesan  convention  in  Baltimore
in  1810  by  the  same  bishop.  His  earliest  service
was  in  C'hestertown ;  thence  he  went  to  Centre-
ville,  QutH'n  Anno  co.,  where  he  laboretl  f*)r  four
years.  IKvming  a  change  necessary  for  health,  he
move*!  to  Havre  de  (ira«-«>.  Harford  c*».  In  1820  he
receive*!  the  degree  of  D.  I),  from  the  University  of
Pennsylvania.  He  was  then  *'all«?<l  to  the  church
in  Staunton,  Ya.,  where  he  remaimnl  until  1K28.
SfHjn  afterwanl  he  became  rector  of  St,  Peter's
church.  Columbia.  Tenn.,  and  from  1833  till  1849
he  was  rector  of  St.  James's  church.  Bolivar.  Tenn.
He  was  very  active  and  serviceable  in  organizing
the  church in  Tennessee  and  electing its first


666


STEPHENS


STEPHENSON


bishop.  Dr.  Stephens,  though  an  excellent  scholar
and  teacher,  published  only  a  few  ocoisional  ser-
mons.— His  son,  Abednegro,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cen-
treville.  Md.,  24  July,  1812;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,
27  Feb.,  1841,  was  ordained  deacon  in  October,
1837,  by  Bishop  Otev,  and  priest  soon  afterward  by
the  same  bishop,  ilis  record  is  thus  summed  up
by  his  bishop :  "  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  was
tiie  acting  principal  of  a  large  academy,  at  twenty-
two  professor  of  languages  in  a  university,  at
twenty-seven  the  president  of  a  college,  and  when,
in  his  twenty-ninth  year,  his  brilliant  career  was  ar-
rested by  the  hand  of  death,  he  stood  in  the  front
rank  of  scholars  and  orators."  His  published  ad-
dress (1838),  delivered  before  the  alumni  of  the
university,  on  "  The  Duty  of  the  State  to  Endow
Institutions  for  the  Promotion  of  High  Letters,"
is  marked  by  felicity  of  style  and  great  research.

STEPHENS,  Harriet  Marion,  author,  b.  in
1833  ;  d.  in  East  Hampden,  Me.,  in  1H58.  She  ap-
peared on  the  stage  under  the  name  of  "  Mrs.
Rosalie  Somers,"  but  abandoned  it  in  1851  -for  lit-
erature. She  wrote  "  Home  Scenes  and  Home
Sounds"  (Boston,  1853)  and  a  novel,  "  Ha^ar,  the
Martyr"  (1854),  and  also  edited  magazmes,  in
which  many  of  her  productions  appeared.

STEPHtNS,  Henry  Louis,  book-illustrator,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  11  Feb.,  1824 ;  d.  in  Bavonne,  N.  J.,
13  Dec,  1882.  About  1859  he  went  to  New  York
under  an  engagement  with  Prank  Leslie,  and  after
a  year  or  so  transferred  his  services  to  Harper
Brothers.  Mr.  Stephens  was  a  prolific  artist,  and
accomplished  a  great  amount  of  work  for  book  and
magazine  illustration.  He  was  well  known  as  a
caricaturist,  excelling  especially  in  the  humorous
delineation  of  animals,  and  drew  cartoons  and
sketches  for  "Vanitv  Fair"  (1859-'63).  "Mrs.
Grundy  "  (18(58),  "  Punchinello  "  (1870),  and  other
periodicals.  He  gave  some  attention  also  to  paint-
ing in  water-colors,  but  rarely  exhibited  his  works.

STEPHENS,  Joiin  Lloyd,  traveller,  b.  in
Shrewsbury,  Monmouth  co.,  N.  J.,  28  Nov.,  1805 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  10  Oct.,  1852.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  in  1822,  and,  after  studying  law
at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  New  York,  was  called  to
the  bar.  He  practised  his  profession  during  eight
years  in  the  latter  city,  at  the  same  time  figuring
occasionally  as  a  public  speaker  at  meetings  of  the
Democratic  party,  of  which  he  was  a  warm  sup-
porter. His  health  becoming  impaired,  he  under-
took a  journey  to  Europe  for  recuperation  in  1834,
and  extended  his  travels  to  some  parts  of  Asia  and
Africa  along  the  Mediterranean.  He  wrote  a  se-
ries of  letters  describing  his  journey,  which  ap-
peared in  Hoffman's  "American  Monthly  Maga-
zine." When  he  returned  to  New  York  in  1836  he
found  that  these  letters  had  been  the  most  popular
feature  in  the  periodical.  This  fact  induced  him
to  give  a  more  detailed  account  of  his  travels,  and
he  published  "  Incidents  of  Travel  in  Egypt,  Arabia
Petraea,  and  the  Holy  Land  "  (2  vols..  New  York,
1837).  This  was  followed  by  "  Incidents  of  Travel
in  Greece,  Turkey,  Russia,  and  Poland"  (1838).
These  works  achieved  success  in  England  as  well  as
in  the  United  States,  and  repeated  editions  of  them
appeared  in  London.  In  1839  he  was  sent  by
President  Van  Buren  to  negotiate  a  treaty  with
the  government  of  Central  America ;  but  the  con-
federation was  falling  to  pieces  when  he  arrived
there  and  he  did  not  succeed  in  the  object  of  his
mission.  He  resolved,  however,  to  explore  the
country  to  which  he  had  been  accredited.  Accom-
panied by  an  English  artist,  Frederick  Cather-
wood,  he  made  himself  familiar  with  the  most  im-
portant cities  of  Costa  Rica,  Nicaragua,  Honduras,


San  Salvador,  and  Guatemala,  and  was  the  first  to
give  an  accurate  account  of  the  antiquities  of  Cen-
tral America.  He  published  after  his  return  to
New  York  "  Incidents  of  Travel  in  Central  Ameri-
ca, Chiapas,  and  Yucatan  '"  (2  vols..  1841).  It  con-
tained graphic  accounts  of  the  social  and  political
condition  of  Central  Americ-a,  but  its  chief  title  to
the  celebrity  that  it  at  once  attained  was  its  reve-
lation of  a  new  and  rich  field  for  archaeological  re-
search. The  illustrations,  taken  on  the  spot  by  Mr.
Catherwood,  added  to  the  interest  of  the  work.
He  returned  to  Central  America,  making  Yucatan
the  principal  scene  of  his  next  investigations,
which  were  carried  on  in  a  more  thorough  manner.
The  fruits  of  his  labors  appeared  in  his  "  Incidents
of  Travel  in  Yucatan,"  with  120  engravings  from
drawings  by  Frederick  Catherwood  (2  vols.,  1843).
He  was  elected  delegate  to  the  New  York  constitu-
tional convention  in  1846,  and  he  also  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  organizing  the  first  line  of  ocean  steam-
ships between  New  York  and  Bremen.  He  went
to  the  latter  city  on  board  the  "  Washington  "  as
an  officer  in  the  company  and  paid  a  visit  to  Baron
Humboldt.  In  1849  he  became  a  member  of  the
company  that  was  formed  for  building  a  railroad
across  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  and  the  rest  of  bis
life  was  devoted  to  the  prosecution  of  this  enter-
prise. He  was  successively  vice-president  and  presi-
dent of  the  company  and  negotiated  with  the  gov-
ernment of  New  Granada,  and  the  constant  and
personal  supervision  that  he  gave  to  the  work
planted  the  seeds  of  the  disease  of  which  he  died.
A  monument  to  hira  has  been  erected  on  the  high-
est point  overlooking  the  railroad.

STEPHENS,  William,  president  of  the  col-
ony of  Georgia,  b.  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  England,
28  Jan.,  1671 ;  d.  in  Georgia  in  August,  1753.  He
was  educated  at  Winchester  school  and  King's  col-
lege, Cambridge,  and  studied  law,  but,  abandoning
it  for  public  affairs,  was  a  member  of  parliament
and  held  several  important  offices.  About  1730  he
went  to  South  Carolina  for  the  purpose  of  survey-
ing a  barony  of  land.  He  was  well  pleased  with
his  reception  in  the  colony,  became  intimate  with
Gen.  James  Oglethorpe,  and,  on  the  recommenda-
tion of  the  latter,  was  appointed  secretary  to  the
trustees  in  Georgia  in  1837.  His  duty  in  this  office
consisted  in  supervising  the  affairs  of  the  colony.
He  was  made  president  of  the  county  of  Savannah
in  1741,  and  of  the  entire  colony  in  1743.  He  held
this  post  up  to  1750,  when  he  gave  such  evidence
of  mental  and  physical  decline  that  he  was  re-
quested to  resign.  He  wrote  "  A  Journal  of  the
Proceedings  in  Georgia,  beginning  October  80,
1737"  (3  vols.,  London,  1742).  This  work  includes
"  State  of  the  Province,"  which  brings  the  narra-
tive doyn  to  28  Oct.,  1741.  The  latter  was  also
published  separately  (London,  1742).  The  work,
which  is  exceedingly  rare,  especially  the  third  vol-
ume, is  believed  to  be  of  great  importance  in  con-
nection with  the  early  history  of  Georgia. — His
son,  Tliomas,  was  the  author  of  "The  Castle-
Builder,  or  the  History  of  William  Stephens,  of
the  Isle  of  Wight "  (2d  ed.,  London.  1759).

STEPHENSON,  Mathew,  statesman,  b.  in
Buckingham  county,  '\'a.,  about  1776 ;  d.  after
1834.  He  removed  to  Washington  county,  Tenn.,
and  engaged  in  farming.  The  constitution  of  Ten-
nessee, adopted  in  1797,  gave  the  right  of  suffrage
to  all  free  men.  Under  it  free  colored  men  voted
until  1834,  when  a  convention  was  called  and  a  new
constitution  adopted,  which  deprived  them  of  the
right.  In  that  convention  the  party  in  favor  of
restricting  the  suffrage  was  boldly  opposed  by
twenty  members ; thirty-eight  voted  for  the  re-


8TERKTT


STKUKBRRO


607


strict  ion.  Mnthow  Stei>hen.Hon  Iwi  the  lilwnl
eloint'iit.  All  those  tlmt  votc«i  with  him  wi>re
natives  of  slave  sUtes.  while  everv  nativ«  of  a  froi>
state  votc<i  aeainst  every  propottltion  lookinir  t4»-
ward  the  friHHloni  of  the  slave.  The  friends  of  lib-
erty 8«)Uj;ht  to  have  flxeil  by  the  eonHtitution  a
|)erio<l  Ik'VoimI  whii'h  slavery  should  not  exist  in
the  state,  placing  the  ihtIihI  in  iMfWl.  The  jM>ints
that  they  made  were  defended  by  the  LilM-mls  with
Ijreat  jiower  an<l  earnest lu-ys,  luid  the  journal  of
the  convention  shows  an  ndvnnetMl  sentiment
amoni;  these  men,  of  whom  Mr.  Stephenson  was
the  amnitte*!  loader.

STERETT,  Andrew,  naval  ofTlcvr.  b.  in  Wal-
tiniore.  Md..  nlK)ut  17«M»;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru.  B  Jan.,
IH(>7.  He  enteretl  the  navy  a.s  a  lieutenant.  'iH  Slarrh,
171»8,  w»is  the  executive  oflleer  of  the  frijjate  "Con-
stellation" under  Truxtun.purtieipaled  in  the  cajH
ture  of  the  French  frirate  "  L'Insurjjente."  off  the
island  of  Nevis,  W.  I.,  9  Feb.,  ITIMJ,  and  also  t<x)k  [)art
in  the  action  with  the  "  Ije  Vengeance  "  in  February,
1800.  He  commanded  the  schcx)ner  "  Knterprise,"
in  which  he  ca|>tured  the  French  ship  "  L'.Xmour
de  la  Patrie"  ni  Decemln'r,  1800.  in  the  West  In-
dies. He  took  the  "Knterprise"  to  the  .Mediter-
ranean when  war  wasdedan'd  apunst  TrijKili,  and
in  .August,  1801,  fell  in  with  a  Trijxditan  cruiser
off  MaltA.  A  desperate  engagement  lasted  for  two
hours,  when  the  the  Tri[M)litan  hauled  down  her
colors.  The  Americans  left  the  guns  and  gave
three  cheers  for  vietorv,  whereui»on  the  Tri|)olitan
hoisted  her  colors  and  renewed  the  action.  She
was  comixdled  to  strike  again,  and  then  ordered
under  the  quarter  of  the  "  Knterprise,"  but  as  soon
as  she  got  into  that  position  she  ronewe«l  the  fight
for  a  third  time.  Sterett's  superior  skill  in  hand-
4ing  his  vessel  enabled  him  to  rake  the  corsair  fore
and  aft,  fifty  of  her  crew  were  kille<l,  and  finally
her  captain  threw  his  colors  overboard  and  begged
for  ouarter.  Sterett  then  ordered  her  to  l)e  com-
pletely dismantle<I  and  her  guns  and  ammunition
to  1h)  thrown  overboard.  A  jurj'-mast  wjis  rigged
with  a  tattered  sail,  and  she  was  sent  into  TriiK)li.
The  "  Knterprise  "  did  not  lose  a  single  man.  The
Tripolitans  were  humiliated  by  this  <lefeat  by  an
inferior  force.  The  commander  was  mounted  on  a
jackass  and  paraded  through  the  streets  as  an  olv
ject  of  scorn.  He  received  five  hundre<l  Iwstinadcx's
for  his  defeat.  Sterett  received  a  complimentary
vot«  of  thanks  from  congress,  and  the  president
was  authorized  to  present  him  with  a  sword  on
account  of  this  heroic  action,  3  Feb..  1802.  In  the
peace-establishment  act  he  was  retaine<l  as  thinl  on
the  list  of  lieutenants  in  1801.  After  his  return
from  the  "  Knterprise  "  he  was  promoted  to  master-
commandant,  and  ordered  to  a  brig  that  was  then
building  at  Baltimore.  He  ha<l  been  senior  to  .Ste-
phen Decatur,  and, on  being  informed  of  the  decision
to  promote  Decatur  above  him,  he  declined  further
service  in  the  navy,  and  resigne<l  his  commission,
29  .lune,  1805.  He  apjiears  afterward  to  have
entere<l  the  merchant  marine. — His  first  cousin,
Isaac  SearM,  naval  ofTicer,  b.  in  Ualtimore,  Md.,
2H  Oct.,  1801 ;  d.  in  IHKi.  He  entereil  the  Unitetl
States  navy  as  a  midshipman,  24  March,  1819,
was  commissione<l  lieutenant,  17  May,  1828,  and
was  variously  employe<l  on  shore  «luty  and  also  on
leave  till  ISii^,  when  he  miwle  a  two- years' cruise  in
the  sloop  "John  Adams"  on  the  Me<literranean
station.  He  served  in  the  coast  survey  in  1889-'41.
In  January,  1842,  he  sailed  as  executive  of  the
frigate  "  United  States  "  Ut  the  Pacific  station,  an«l
upon  arrival  at  Callao  took  conunand  of  the  "  Ut»-
lief "  until  April,  1844.  During  the  Mexican  war
he  rendered  valuable  services  in  command  of  the


•ohooner  **  Reefer."  of  the  Mr»Mpiito  division  of  the
U.S.  n«val  forces  in  t\f  (inlf  ..f  Mexicu.  lie  fmr-
ticifiated  in  the  ex\M<\  uft  ProatctB  and

Taba«o.  17-27  Oct.. 1  .-he  nntorBd  the

.Mexican  M'honner  "TttJjttM  4*.'  On  14  Sov..  184S,
he  took  part  in  the  attack  and  c>apture  of  Tarapico.
where  five  Mexican  veaaela,  fortn.  and  oujiplira  wer»
captured.  He  wa«  pnaent  during  the  liomliard-
inenl  of  Vera  Cnii!,  10-25  March.  1847,  a«istcd  in
covering  the  laixling  <>f  ScottV  army,  and  eaga|ted
the  Mexican  forts  and  l>Bllen(>s.  After  the  war
he  re«ume<l  duties  at  the  naval  t'  in  Ifal*

timore.  and  was  promote<l  to  «••  .  .  ."»  KeK,

1850.  He  was  governor  of  the  Nuvul  ttA>luin  at
Philadelnhia  in  18.'i2-'8  and  in  1K.'V4-T>  c<imnuuid-
»h1  the  si«Hm  "  I)e<'atur."  i>role<'ting  New  Knffland
fisheries.  He  was  place*!  on  the  resierved  list,  88
St»pt.,  18.'>.'>,  and  pnmiote*!  to  captain,  2  March,
18.57.  When  the  civil  war  liegan  he  resigne<l  hi»
commission,  23  April,  IWH,  ami  enten»<l  the  navT
of  the  sece<le<I  statics;  but  the  only  record  of  his
s««rvices  is  as  a  n>endM«r  «if  the  court  to  in%'estiffate
the  causes  that  com|»i>lled  Com.  Josiah  TatnaTl  to
destroy  the  "  .Merrinia<\"

STI^RL1N<J.  Richard,  e<lucator.  b.  in  Countv
Down,  In>land.  in  1K12:  d.  in  M<K-ksville,  N.  C,  i
Oct.,  1883.  He  was  brought  to  the  I'nited  States
at  the  age  of  twelve  by  his  |>arents,  who  settled  in
Newburg,  N.  V.  He  was  grailuateil  at  Princeton  in
18:W,  taught  in  Fre<Iericksburg  anti  Kichmoml,  Va..
till  1848,  was  professor  of  natural  philosf>phy  and
chemistry  at  Hamixlen  Sidney  college  for  the  next
three  years,  and  then  hail  charge  of  the  K<Igworth
female  seminary,  (fre«-nslK>rough.  N.  ('..  till  1804.
While  there  he  prepared  a  series  of  schiNtl-readera
and  s|>elling-lxxiks  that  came  into  general  UM
throughout  the  s«mthem  and  southwestern  states.
In  1870  he  liecame  princi|>al  of  the  female  seminary
at  Paris,  Tenn.  In  1H7:J  he  opene<l  a  boarding-
school  in  F^vansville,  Ind..  and  m  1875  removed  to
Mocksville,  N.  C.  where  he  kept  a  similar  school
till  1880,  when  he  was  elected  sufierintendent  of
the  public  schools  of  the  county.

STERMtER(i.  (ieorgo  Miller,  surjjeon,  b.  in
Hartwick  seminary,  OlM'go  co.,  N.  \ .,  H  June,
1838.  He  was  gnuluated  at  the  College  of  physi-
cians and  stirgeons.  New  York,  in  1860,  and  ajp-
nointetl  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army  on  28
Slay.  1861.  His  first  duty  was  with  Gen.'Oeorge
Sykes's  command  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,
and,  after  four  months'  hospital  duty  in  Rhode
Island,  he  jointnl  (Jen.  Nathaniel  P.  Itanks's  expe-
dition to  New  Orleans,  and  then  starved  in  the
office  of  the  metlical  director  of  the  iVfiartment  of
the  Gulf  until  January,  1864.  Sulis«H|uently  he
was  on  hospital  duty  in  Clevelan<l  and  Columbus,
Ohio,  till  April,  186<J,  and  since  he  has  l»een  sta-
tioned at  various  government  posts.  b«'ing  prt>-
mote<l  on  1  Dw..  1875.  surgeon  with  the  rank  of
nmior.  Dr.  SternU'rg  has  recently  l>een  on  dutv
in  [Baltimore,  where  he  has  l»e«>n  engaged  in  exnen-
mental  rt«searches  in  liwteriology  at  Johns  flop-
kins  university  as  a  fellow  by  coiirtesv  in  that  in-
stitution. In'  1879  he  was  sent  to  liavana  as  a
member  of  the  yellow-fever  commission  Ijy  the
Naticmal  Ixiard  of 'health,  and  in  1885  he  wasadele-
gate  to  the  Inteniational  sanitarj'  ctmfenenco  in
Rome,  Italv.  Dr.  .sternlnTg  is  an  honorary  mem-
ber of  tholioyal  aca<leniies  of  mwlicine  of  Rome.
Rio  Janeiro,  and  Havana,  and  a  fellow  of  the  Royal
microsci>pical  society  of  liondon.  and,  besides  mem-
U-rship  in  other  medical  and  scientific  societies  at
home  and  abroad,  was  in  1887  president  of  the
.\merican  ptil^lic  health  association.  The  Ix>mb
prize  of  $500  was  awarded  to  him  by  the  last  asso-


668


STERNE


STEUBEN


ciation  in  1885  for  his  essay  on  "Disinfectants,"
and  he  has  invented  automatic  heat-regulating  ap-
paratus. Besides  contributions  to  scientific  jour-
nals on  his  specialties,  he  has  published  "  Photo-
Micrographs,  and  how  to  make  them "  (Boston,
1883);  "Bacteria"  (New  York,  1884);  and  "Ma-
laria and  Malarial  Diseases  "  (1884).

STERNE,  Simon«  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  23  June,  1839.  He  was  graduated  in  the  law
department  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in
18(50,  and  established  himself  in  practice  in  New
York  city.  In  1862  he  was  elected  lecturer  on  po-
litical econoniy  in  Cooper  union.  He  was  on  the
staff  of  the  "  Commercial  Advertiser  "  in  1863-'4,
was  a  founder  of  the  American  free-trade  league  in
1864,  and  in  1865  published  the  "Social  Science
Review."  Taking  an  active  part  in  the  movement
for  the  purification  of  municipal  politics,  he  was
chosen  secretary  of  the  committee  of  seventy  in
1870,  and  drafted  the  charter  that  was  advocated
by  that  committee.  In  1876  he  was  appointed  by
Gov.  Samuel  J.  Tilden  on  a  commission  to  devise  a
plan  for  the  government  of  cities,  in  1879  acted  as
counsel  for  the  New  York  board  of  trade  and  trans-
portation and  chamber  of  commerce  in  the  investi-
gation of  abuses  in  railroad  management,  which
resulted  in  the  appointment  of  a  board  of  railroad
coramissionei-s  for  the  state  of  New  York.  He  was
also  a  leader  in  the  movement  that  resulted  in  the
creation  of  the  inter-state  commerce  commission,
drafting  the  inter-state  commerce  bill  in  conjunc-
tion with  the  committee  of  the  United  States  sen-
ate. In  1885  he  was  appointed  by  President  Cleve-
land a  commissioner  to  examine  and  report  on  the
relations  between  the  railroads  and  the  govern-
ments of  western  Europe.  An  essay  that  he  read
before  the  American  bar  association  on  "  Slip-shod
Legislation  "  led  to  the  appointment  in  1888  of  a
committee  of  the  legislature  to  consider  reforms  in
the  drafting  of  laws.  He  has  been  a  frequent
writer  on  economical  and  political  subjects,  con-
tributed articles  on  "  Cities,  '•  Legislation,"  "  Mo-
nopolies," "  Railways,"  and  "  Representation  "  to
Jonn  J.  Lalor's  "  Cyclopaedia  of  Political  Science
and  United  States  History  "  (1881-'3),  and  is  the  au-
thor of  "  Representative  Government  and  Personal
Representation"  (Philadelphia,  1870)  and  "Consti-
tutional History  and  Political  Development  in  the
United  States  "  (New  York,  1882 ;  4th  ed.,  1888).

STETEFELDT,  Carl  August,  mining  engineer,
b.  in  Holzhausen,  near  Gotha,  Germany,  28  Sept.,
1838.  He  was  educated  at  the  gymnasium  in
Gotha,  the  University  of  Gottingen,  and  at  the
mining-school  in  Clausthal,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1861.  Soon  afterward  he  came  to  this
country,  and  since  that  time  he  has  been  engaged
in  the  practice  of  his  profession  as  a  mining  en-
gineer and  metallurgist.  At  present  (1888)  he  de-
votes himself  principally  to  consultation,  and  has
his  office  in  New  York.  He  is  widely  known
through  the  mining  districts  by  his  invention  of
the  Stetefeldt  furnace,  which  is  extensively  used  in
the  west  for  the  roasting  of  silver  ores  preparatory
to  the  extraction  of  the  metal  by  either  amalga-
mation or  lixiviation.  Mr.  Stetefeldt  has  been  a
member  of  the  American  institute  of  mining  en-
gineers since  1881,  and  was  its  vice-president  in
1885-'7.  Besides  technical  papers  he  has  written
"  The  Lixiviation  of  Silver  Ores  with  Hyposulphite
Solutions  "  (New  York,  1888).

STETSON,  Charles  Augustus,  hotel-proprie-
tor, b.  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  1  April,  1810;  d.  in
Reading,  Pa.,  29  March,  1888.  His  father  was  pro-
prietor of  a  hotel  in  Newburyport.  The  son  adopted
the  same  calling,  and  after  taking  charge  of  the


Tremont  house,  Boston,  in  1830,  and  Bamum's
hotel,  Baltimore,  in  1833,  became  proprietor  of  the
Astor  house.  New  York,  in  1837,  and  kept  it  till

1875,  for  the  first  twenty  years  of  this  period  in
partnership  with  Robert  B.  Coleman.  In  1851  he
was  quartermaster-general  of  New  York,  and  he  was
usually  known  by  his  military  title.  Gen.  Stetson
acquired  a  wide  reputation  as  a  hotel-keeper  in  the
days  when  the  Astor  house  was  almost  the  only
large  hotel  in  New  York,  and  became  intimate  with
many  eminent  men.  including  Daniel  Webster,
Henry  Clay,  Rufus  Choate.  and  William  II.  Seward.
The  Astor  house  was  the  scene  of  all  the  great
public  dinners  of  those  times,  and  the  regular  rest-
ing-place of  congressmen  from  the  eastern  states
in  going  to  and  returning  from  Washington.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  Gen.  Stetson  showed  many  acts  of
kindness  to  soldiers  on  their  way  through  New
York,  and  he  wtis  publicly  thanked  by  Gov.  John
A.  Andrew,  of  Massachusetts.

STEUART,  Richard  Sprigg,  physician,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  1  Nov.,  1797:  d.  there,  13  July,

1876.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's  college,  Bal-
timore, and  studied  medicine  at  the  University  of
Maryland,  receiving  his  degree  in  1822. Beginning

Practice  in  Baltimore,  he  was  elected  in  1828  presi-
ent  of  the  Maryland  hospital  for  the  insane,
which  he  reorganized,  and  of  which  he  was  presi-
dent till  his  death.  He  was  an  active  coadjutor  of
Dorothea  L.  Dix  in  her  efforts  to  improve  the  con-
dition and  treatment  of  the  insane,  occupied  a  good
[)osition  among  the  alienists  of  the  country,  and
ectured  to  the  public  on  the  subject  of  insanity.
Mainly  through  his  efforts  the  Spring  Grove  in-
sane asylum  was  built  for  the  state  of  Maryland  at
a  cost  of  $850,000.  the  result  of  public  and  private
contributions.  —  His  son,  James  Alojsius,  phy-
sician, b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  3  April.  1828,  was
graduated  at  St.  Mary's  college  in  1847  and  at  the
school  of  medicine  of  the  University  of  Maryland
in  1850.  He  established  himself  in  practice  in
Baltimore,  and  became  physician  to  the  city  general
dispensary,  and  assistant  physician  to  the  Slaryland
hospital  for  the  insane.  Since  1875  he  has'  been
health  commissioner,  registrar  of  vital  statistics,
and  president  of  the  city  board  of  health.  Under
his  management  the  health  department  has  been
reorganized,  and  the  annual  death-rate  has  been  re-
duced from  26  to  19  per  thousand.  He  checked  an
incipient  outbreak  of  yellow  fever  in  1886,  and  has
aided  in  suppressing  two  epidemics  of  small-pox.

STEUBEN,  Frederick  William  Augustas
Henry  Ferdinand  von,  known  in  this  country
as  Barox  Steuben,  German  soldier,  b.  in  Magde-
burg, Prussia,  15  Nov.,  1730;  d.  in  Steubenville,
N.  Y„  28  Nov.,  1794.  His  father,  a  captain  in  the
army,  took  him  when  a  mere  child  into  the  Crimea,
whither  he  was  ordered.  The  boy  was  only  ten
years  old  when  the  father  returned  to  Prussia.  He
was  educated  in  the  Jesuit  colleges  at  Neisse  and
Breslau,  and  distinguished  himself  as  a  mathema-
tician. At  fourteen  he  served  with  his  father  in
the  war  of  1744,  and  was  present  at  the  siege  of
Prague.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  entered  as
cadet  in  an  infantry  regiment,  and  in  two  years
was  promoted  to  ensigli,  and  four  years  afterward
to  lieutenant.  He  served  in  the  seven  years'  war
and  was  wounded  in  the  battle  of  Prague.  In  1754
he  was  made  adjutant-general  in  the  free  corps  of
Gen.  John  von  May,  but  after  the  death  of  the
latter  he  re-entered  the  regular  army  in  1761,  and
was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Russians  at  the  capitu-
lation of  Colberg.  In  1762  he  was  made  aide  to
Frederick  the  Great,  and  took  part  in  the  celebrated
siege  of  Schweidnitz,  which  closed  the  military


STEUBEN


STEUBEN


^


oporatinns  of  the  wvon  yean'  war.  Resignin);  hiK
|M>st  it)  thu  army,  h(>  was  prenentad  with  the  cnii-
oiiry  of  tht.>  cutlit'ilml  of  liaM>il)erf;  on  a  nalary  of
1,260  HoriiLs,  Hixl  afU'rwnrd  wuk  iiiatlu  (rnincl  mar-
shal to  tl>i<  Priiicv  of  llohfi)Ztill(>rn,  with  an  aihli-
lional  salary  of  1.200  ilorins.  Although  ho  nn^ived
brilliant  otfern  from  the  kin^  of  Sanlinia  and  em-
peror of  Austria  to
enter  their  service,
he  (lec-lincHl,  and,
with  a  salary  that
enabled  him  to
live  in  elej^nt
ease,  he  felt  no  de-
sire to  re-enter
military  life.  Hut
in  1777,  while  on
his  way  to  Knjf-
Innd  to  visit  some
Knjjlish  noblemen,
he  s|>ent  some  time
at  I'aris.  Meeting
here  Count  St.  Ger-
main, the French

^a^l^m^  cLy&.J<^ XtnowinjiE

the  fjreat  woAkness
of  the  American  colonists  lay  in  their  i^'noranceof
military  tactics  and  want  of  discipline,  ciideavore<l
to  |x;rsua«Je  him  to  come  to  this  country  and  instruct
the  soldiers.  But  the  baron  dwliiicd  to  give  up  his
honors  and  his  ample  income  and  risk  everytning
on  our  desperate  fortunes.  The  French  minister,
however,  brought  about  an  interview  with  iJcnjamin
Franklin  and  Silas  Deane.  The  manner  with  which
the  former  received  him  offended  him.  and  this,
with  other  reasons,  caused  him  to  abandon  the  pro-
ject altogether.  Recalled  by  (lermain,  he  at  length
yielde<l  to  the  latter's  solicitations  and  promises,  and
resolved  to  cast  his  fortunes  with  the  struggling
colonies.  Kmlwrking  in  a  F'rench  gun-boat  under
the  name  of  Frank,  he  set  sail  from  Marseilles,  11
Dec..  1777,  and  after  a  stormy  passage  of  fifty-five
days,  during  which  the  forecastle  tt>ok  fire  three
times  while  there  were  1,700  jwunds  of  powder
aboard,  and  a  mutiny  was  suppressed,  he  arrivetl  at
Portsmouth,  N.  H.  The  entire  population  went
out  to  receive  him.  He  at  once  wrote  to  con-
gress, offering  his  services  to  the  colonics,  saying
that  the  motive  that  brought  him  hero  was  to
"serve  a  nation  engaged  in  the  noble  work  of  de-
fending its  rights  and  liberties,"  an<l  adding  that,
although  he  had  "given  up  an  honorable  title  and
lucrative  rank,"  he  asked  "  neither  riches  nor  hon-
ors." To  Washington  he  expressed  the  same  sen-
timents, and  said  he  wishwl  to  serve  simply  as  a
volunteer.  He  immediately  began  his  journey
inland  for  the  south.  A  Tory  landlord,  in  the
course  of  the  journey,  declared  that  he  had  neither
bed  nor  provisions  for  the  party.  SteulxMi  levelled
his  pistol  at  the  man's  head  and  demanded  both.
Thev  were  quickly  furnishe<l,  and  in  the  morning
the  Imron  liberally  rewarded  his  host  in  continen-
tal money.  Presenting  himself  to  congress,  he
Eropose<i  to  enter  the  army  a.s  a  volunteer,  and,  if
is  "services  were  not  satisfactory  or  the  colonies
failed  to  establish  their  independence,  he  was  to
receive  nothing."  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they
were  successful  and  he  remained  in  the  army,  he
expected  "to  be  refundetl  the  inc<ime  he  had  given
up,  and  remunerate*!  for  his  services."  This  gt^n-
erous  offer  was  accepted,  antl  he  departe<l  for  Val-
ley Forge,  where  the  .American  army  lay  encanjjwd.
When  the  aide-«le-camp  of  Fre<lericlc  the  (ireat
reached  the  wintry  encampment  and  saw  the  half-


starveil  soldien  creep  out  of  their  hut*,  |)oorljr
arnunl  und  only  half  clwl,  he  wa*  a»tounde«l  and
said  "no  Kun)|x<nn  army  (mmiJU  b«  kept  tdgeChera
week  in  Kuch  a  Ktate."  'A  \tm  noble  and  mm  xm>
lute  nature  won  It  I  have  abandoned  his  enterpriae
at  the  outset.  He  l>egan  at  once,  anil  from  thai
day  our  whole  military  Hyotem  awumed  new  ithape.
The  awkwanltiesH  of  tlic  men,  at  timni,  would  throw
him  into  terrible  rage,  but  his  kindnea^  care,  and
lil)erality  toward  the  suffering  soldMr  made  him
UdoviHl  by  all.  In  .May,  1 778,  oonmMi  aotlllg  OD*
der  the  advice  of  Washi'ngton,  made  him  inspector'
general  of  the  army  with  the  rank  uX  maior-general.
and  ho  at  once  enten-d  on  his  duties  an<l  ap|iointed
sub-inspectors  throughout  the  army.  A  thorough
system  of  discipline  and  e<-onomy  was  established,
until  the  whole  army  liecame  a  single  machine  in
his  hands.  It  is  imfKHtsihle  to  give  in  detail  the
great  work  he  accomplished.  It  was  uiiMri'n  by  the
country  in  general,  for  it  was  unattcndetl  with  out-
ward dis[ilay,  but  it  can  Im>  safely  said  that  no
major-general  in  the  field  did  half  so  much  toward
our  success  as  this  great  organizer  and  disciplina-
rian. The  result  of  this  discipline  was  seen  \\\  the
next  cam|)aign,  in  the  Imttle  of  .Monmouth,  when
he  rallied  the  retreating  and  diwinlered  troop  of
Gen.  Charles  I/ce  like  veterans.  He  commanded
here  the  left  wing,  and  Alexander  Hamilton,  who
saw  the  steady  action  of  the  tnxtjis  under  Haron
Steuben,  said  he  "  ha<l  never  known  till  that  day
the  value  of  discipline."

In  the  trial  of  Xjoa  that  followed,  the  testimony
of  Steuben  offended  the  former,  and  he  made  some
disparaging  remarks  in  regard  to  it.  Steul)en  in-
stantly challenged  him.  but  Ix-e  a|>ologized.  and
nothing  came  of  the  matter.  Steul^n  now  wished
to  take  commaiul  in  the  field  as  major-general,  but
the  American  officers  manifeste<l  so  much  opjifisi-
tion  to  it,  on  account  of  In-ing  outranked,  that  he
withdrew  his  request  and  devote*!  himself  to  his
old  monotonous  work,  much  of  which  swmed  to
him  more  )>efitting  a  drill-sergeant  than  a  major-
general.  In  the  autumn  of  1780  he  iiublished  a
manual  for  the  arniv,  funiishe*!  with  diagrams  to
explain  his  rules.  It  was  entitled  "  Regulations
for  the  Ortler  and  Discipline  of  the  TnKtps  of  the
Unitet!  States."  Each  chapter  was  written  first  in
poor  German,  then  translated  into  poor  French,
then  put  into  good  French,  and  lastly  into  good
English,  in  which  last  condition  it  was  entirely  un-
intelligible to  Steuben.  It  nevertheless  serveil  its
purpose,  became  the  law  and  guide  of  the  army,
and,  even  after  the  war,  was  adopttni  by  several  of
the  states.  In  this  year  he  was  sele<'te<l  as  one  of
the  court-martial  to'  try  Maj.  John  Andn'-.  After
the  defeat  of  Gen.  Horatio  Gates  at  Camden  he
was  sent  to  Virginia  to  aid  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene,
then  operating  in  North  CaroHna,  Althoujfh  he
now  had  his  desire — a  sejmrate  c<immand— it  was
of  little  consecjuence  to  hira,  as  his  chief  duty  was
to  forward  troops  to  Greene  as  fast  as  he  i-ould
raise  them.  The  result  was,  when  Arnold  invade*!
Virginia  lie  hat!  only  ISt)  men  under  him.  and  ho
was  com|)elUHl  to  see  the  traitor  ravage  the  coun-
try before  his  eyes;  but  he  did  everything  in  his
iKiwer  to  hara.ss  him.  .Soon  afterward  t  omwal-
lis  was  l)esiegei!  in  Vorktown,  an<!  Steuben  took
his  place  as  major-general  in  the  line.  He  was  in
the  trenches  when  the  prt>|H>»ition  to  surrender  was
received.  I^fayette  came  to  relieve  him:  but  this
he  refused,  declaring  that  Kurojwan  etiouette  re-
(juiretl  that  the  offkvr  that  receive*!  the  first  over-
tures of  surrender  must,  out  of  respect  to  his  com-
mand, ket^p  hw  i)ost  till  the  terms  of  capitulation
were  agreed  upon  or  hostilities  rvsume*L


670


STEVENS


STEVENS


After  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  sent  to  Canada
to  demand  the  surrender  of  the  posts  on  the  fron-
tier, but,  not  succeeding,  he  returned  to  headquar-
ters, lie  now  retired  to  private  life  and  resided
in  New  York  city,  where  ne  remained  for  several
years.  Congress  refused  to  fulfil  its  contract  with
him  to  pay  him  for  his  services,  but  he  was  given
grants  of  land  in  Virginia,  Pennsylvania,  and  New


Jersey.  The  latter  he  declined  to  accept  when  he
found  it  consisted  of  the  confiscated  estates  of  an
old  Tory  who  would  be  left  destitute,  and,  in  the
kindness  of  his  heart,  interceded  for  him.  He  was
given  also  a  whole  township  near  Utica,  N.  Y.,  and,
after  seven  years'  delay,  congress  at  length  allowed
him  a  pension  of  |l2,400.  He  now  retired  to  this
land,  and,  clearing  off  sixty  acres,  built  a  log-house,
seen  in  the  illustration,  and  settled  down  for  life,
though  he  returned  every  winter  to  New  York  city.
On  23  Nov.,  1795,  as  he  was  making  preparations
for  this  annual  visit,  he  was  struck  with  paralysis,
and  three  days  afterward  he  died.  As  he  had  re-
quested, he  was  buried  near  his  house,  with  his
military  cloak  around  him  and  the  star  of  honor
that  he  always  wore  on  his  breast.  Only  about
thirty  farmers  attended  his  funeral.  Col.  North,
his  favorite  aide,  to  whom  he  left  all  his  property,
erected  a  simple  monument  over  his  grave,  to  which
many  visitors  annually  resort.  Numerous  anecdotes
are  told  of  him,  illustrating  the  tenderness  and
generosity  of  his  nature.  These  traits  were  espe-
cially exhibited  at  the  breaking  up  of  the  army  at
Newburg.  His  life  has  been  written  by  Francis
Bowen,  in  Sparks's  "American  Biography,"  and
by  Priedrich  Kapp  (New  York,  1860).

STEVENS,  Aaron  Fletcher,  congressman,  b.
in  Derry,  N.  II.,  9  Aug.,  1819;  d.  in  Nashua,  N.  H.,
10  May,  1887.  He  was  educated  at  Pinkerton
academy,  Derry,  removed  to  Peterborough,  after-
ward studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845,
and  gained  a  high  reputation  as  a  lawjer.  He
was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1849.  a  dele-
gate to  the  Whig  national  convention  in  1852,  and
a  representative  in  the  legislature  again  in  1854.
He  identified  himself  with  the  Republican  party
when  it  was  first  organized,  and  was  again  sent  to
the  legislature  in  1856  and  the  following  years.
He  was  one  of  the  first  to  enlist  in  the  civil  war,
and  was  made  major  of  the  1st  New  Hampshire
volunteers,  subsequently  appointed  colonel  of  the
13th  regiment,  and  brevetted  brigadier-general  on
8  Dec.,  1864,  for  gallantry  at  Fort  Harrison,  where
he  was  wounded.  On  his  return  home  he  wa.s
elected  to  congress  and  re-elected  for  the  follow-
ing term,  serving  from  4  March,  1867,  till  3  March,
1871.  From  1876  till  1884  he  was  a  member  of  the
legislature,  and  took  part  in  its  debates.

STEVENS,  Abel,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia.
Pa.,  19  Jan.,  1815.  He  was  educated  at  Wesleyan
university,  and  in  1834  became  pastor  of  a  Method-


ist Episcopal  church  in  Boston,  Mass.  He  trav-
elled in  Europe  in  1837,  and  on  his  return  took
charge  of  a  churc^h  in  Providence,  R.  I.  He  went
to  Bostf)n  in  1840,  and  edited  "Zion's  Herald  "  till
1852.  In  1853-4  he  was  the  editor  of  the  "Na-
tional Magazine"  in  New  York  city.  In  1856,
on  his  return  from  a  second  European  journey,
he  was  elected  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Advocate
and  Journal  "  in  New  York.  He  received  in  that
year  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Indiana  univer-
sity. In  1860-'2  he  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  New
York  city,  and  in  1862-5  of  the  one  at  Mamar-
oneck,  N.  Y.  From  1865  till  1874  he  was  one  of
the  editors  of  the  "Methodist."  Subsequently  he
travelled  extensively  in  the  United  States  and
Europe,  and  finally  settled  in  Geneva,  Switzer-
land, as  pastor  of  the  Union  church  there,  and  a
correspondent  of  American  newspapers.  While
editing  church  papers,  he  became  interested  in  the
liistory  of  Methofiism,  which  he  reduced  to  a  con-
nected narrative  in  a  series  of  works  that  were  the
first  of  their  kind  and  remain  the  standard  au-
thority on  the  subject.  His  publications  include
"  An  tessay  on  Church  Polity ''  (New  York,  1847) ;
"  Memorials  of  the  Introduction  of  Methodism
into  the  Eastern  States  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1847-'52) ;
"Preaching  required  by  the  Times"  (New  York,
185.5);  "The  Great  Reform,"  a  prize  essay  (1856);
"  History  of  the  Religious  Movement  of  the  Eight-
eenth Century,  called  Methodism "  (3  vols.,
1858-'61);  "Life  and  Times  of  Nathan  Bangs"
(1863);  "  History  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
Church  in  the  United  States  of  America  "(4  vols.,
186.4-'7 ;  German  translation,  Cincinnati,  1867);
"  The  Centenary  of  American  Metho<lism  "  (1865) ;
"  Tiie  Women  of  Methodism :  its  Three  Found-
resses, Susiinna  Wesley,  the  Countess  of  Hunting-
don, and  Barbara  Heck  "  (1866) ;  "  A  Compendious
History  of  American  Methodism"  (1867);  "Ma-
dame de  Stael :  a  Study  of  her  Life  and  Times"  (2
vols.,  1881);  "Character  Sketches"  (1882);  and
"  Christian  Work  "  (1882).

STEVENS,  Charles  Ellis,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  5  July,  1853.  He  studied  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  arid  Yale,  was  gradu-
ated in  1875  at  Berkeley  divinity-school.  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  spent  one  ^ear  in  study  in  Europe,
and  was  ordained  priest  m  the  Protestant  Episco-
pal church  in  1877.  He  became  rector  of  acnurCh
in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1878  secretary  of  an
auxiliary  of  the  lx)ard  of  missions  of  his  denomi-
nation. For  several  years  he  was  associate  editor
of  the  "  Living  Church."  The  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was
given  to  him  oy  Wooster  university.  He  became
an  examining  chaplain  of  the  diocese  of  Long
Island  in  1886,  and  in  1887  was  made  archdeacon
of  Brooklyn.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Royal  geo-
graphical society  of  London  and  of  the  Society  of
antiquaries  of  Edinburgh,  among  other  learned  so-
cieties, and  in  1888  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Wooster  university,  and  that  of  D.  C.  L.  from
King's  college.  Nova  Scotia.  Dr.  Stevens  has
published  occasional  pamphlets  and  frequent  arti-
cles in  the  press,  and  nas  m  preparation  (1888)  the
"  History  and  Development  of  the  Constitutional
Law  of  England  and  the  Unjted  States."

STEVENS,  Ebenezer,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  22  Aug.,  1751;  d.  in  Rockaway,  L.  I.,  2
Sept.,  1823.  He  was  a  member  of  the  artillery
company  of  Boston,  and  participated  in  the  de-
struction of  the  tea  in  Boston  harbor  in  December,
1773.  Soon  afterward  he  removed  to  Rhode
Island,  where  he  raised  two  companies  of  artillery
and  one  of  artificers,  was  commissioned  as  lieu-
tenant, 8  May,  1775,  and  took  part  in  the  expe-


STKVEN8


8TEVEN8


671


ditinn  ai^in^  l^ueljoo.  lie  joIikh)  Henry  KnoxV
iTgimcnt  of  artillery,  vas  iiiiule  a  captHin  un  11
Jan.,  I77U.  arul  on  jf  Nov.  n'ci'ivwl  the  brevet  of
major.  lie  commanded  the  artillery  at  Ticonde-
TogH  and  Stillwater,  and  on  80  April,  177H,  wa.*«
made  lieutenant-c-olonel  of  John  Lainl>'s  repment.
lie  »erve<l  under  Ijafayette  in  Vir^rinia,  ami  for  a
part  of  tho  time  commanded  the  artillery  at  the
siege  of  Yorktown.  After  the  l{4<volution  ho  be-
came an  eminent  merchant  of  New  York  city.  He
wa8  major-(;:<Mieral  of  the  .state  militia,  anil,  with
Morgan  Ix'wis,  miistere«l  foriutive  !«4Tvi«'e  Hf^ainxt
the  uriti.sh  the  militiaof  Ihecity  in  S4'ptendHT,  1H14.
— HiM  son,  Alexander  Hodgdon,  surceoh.  b.  in
New  York  city,  4  S«'i.t.,  17H1);  d.  there,  :«»  Marth,
1869,  was  i<;raduate(i  at  Yule  in  1H(I7,  H:tidie<l  in
the  ofllce  of  I>r.  Kdward  Miller,  attende<l  me<lical
Iwtures  in  the  Collejje  of  i>hvsician.s  and  siirceons
and  at  tho  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  was

fnuluntcd  M,  I>.  by  the  latter  institution  in  IHll.
lis  thesis  on  "The  Proximat*  Causes  of  Inflam-
mation" was  praised  by  miMlical  men.  He  t<M)k
jMissage  for  I< ranee  with  the  objec-t  of  pur^ninij
sur^ii-al  studies,  but,  on  Iteine  oaptut^ed  liy  in
Kn^'lish  cruiser  and  taken  into  I'lymouth,  In-  wint
to  London  and  received  the  instructions  of  Dr.
John  Abernethy  and  Sir  Astlev  Cooper  for  a  vear,
and  then  studied  for  a  year  longer  under  Alexis
Boyer  and  Huron  Larrey  in  Paris.  On  his  return
to  the  United  States  he  was  H|){>ointed  a  surgeon
in  the  army.  Establishing  himst^-lf  in  New  York
city,  he  was  elected  professor  of  surgery  in  the
New  York  medical  institution  in  1814. When  ap-

Eointcd  surgeon  to  the  New  York  hospital  in  1818,
e  intrtMluced  the  Flurojjean  system  of  surgical
demonstrations  and  instruction  at  the  >ie<lside.
In  1825  he  became  professor  of  the  principles
^nd  practice  of  surgery  in  the  College  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons,  lie  took  the  chair  of  clini-
cal surgery  in  18;i7,  but  in  the  following  year  re-
signeil  liis  active  duties  in  this  institution  and  in
the  college,  and  thenceforth  acted  mainly  as  a  con-
sulting surgeon,  both  in  public  and  private  prac-
tice. He  was  appointed  consulting  surgeon  to
the  New  York  hospital,  and  emeritus  professor  in
the  College  of  physicians  and  surgwms,  of  which
be  WHS  mmle  president  in  1841.  He  was  president
of  the  American  medical  ass<X'iation  in  1848.  In
1849  he  received  fn>m  the  New  York  state  univer-
sity the  degree  of  LL.  D.  Ho  retired  from  the
E residency  of  the  college  faculty  in  18r)5.  Besides
is  contributions  to  medical  r»eri<Klicals.  he  pub-
lished "Inflammation  of  the  Eye "  (Philadelphia,
1811);  "Cases  of  Fungus  Hjematodes  of  the  Eye"
(New  York,  1818);  with  John  Watts.  Jr.,  and
\''alentine  Mott, '*  Medical  and  Surgical  Uegister,
consisting  chiefly  of  Cases  in  the  New  York  Hos-
pital"  (1818);  an  edition  of  Astley  CfM>|>er's
"First  Lines  of  Surgery"  (1822);  "Clinical
Ijecture  in  Injuries"  (18J17);  "  Lectures  on  Lithot-
omy" (1838);  "  Address  to  Graduates"  (1847);  and
♦'  Plea  of  Humanity  in  Behalf  of  Metlical  Educa-
tion," an  address  before  the  New  York  slat*^*  metli-
cal association  (Alliany,  1849).  —  Another  stm.
John  Austin,  iNinker,  b.  in  New  York  city,  22
Jan..  1795;  d.  there,  19  Oct,  1874.  was  gradua(»><I
at  Y'ale  in  ISIII,  entere<l  mercantile  life,  and  Ik*-
came  a  partner  in  his  father's  business  in  1818.
He  was  for  many  years  secretary  of  the  New  Yt>rk
chaml)er  of  commerce,  and  one  of  the  organizers
and  the  first  president  of  the  Merchants' exchange.
From  its  first  establishment  in  18:{9  till  1866  he
was  president  of  the  lijink  of  commerce.  He  was
a  Whig  in  |>olitics,  but  an  earnest  mlvocato  of  low-
tariffs. He was  chairman of the  committ«e  of


hanker*  of  New  York.  Itonton.  uid  PhiladtlpbiA
which  flntt  met  in  August,  1861,  and  decided  to
take  $5(i,0(X),000  of  the  g«>vemment  7-90  loan.
They  Hub^4'4|uently  advanc«'<l  f  1UO,()(M),000  mora,
and  the  terniN  of  the  tmnxMctions  weiv  amuifea
chiefly  by  .Mr.  Stevens,  aM  the  head  of  tho  tmMilirjr
note  committei*.  His  advice  was  fraqoenUy
H>ught  bv  the  offlceni  of  the  traamirj  deputaient
<luring  the  civil  war.  He  was  many  yean  gOT-
omor  of  the  New  York  hospital,  and  t<K)k  an  inter-
est  in  other  benevolent  institutions.— John  Austin's
son,  John  Aaatin,  author,  b.  in  New  York  city,
21  Jan.,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1846.
U-cttiue  a  merchant  in  New  York,  and  in  18<B
wius  chos4-n  secretary  of  the  New  York  chamU-r  of
coniinert'e,  holding  the  ofllce  for  nix  years.  He
has  been  librarian  of  the  New  York'  historical
society,  and  has  devotc>rl  himself  to  the  investiga-
tion of  topics  of  American  history.  He  founded,
and  for  many  years  etlitcd,  the  "  Magazine  of
American  History."  His  publications  include
"The  Valley  of  the  Rio  Urandc:  its  Topography
imd  Uesources"  (New  York,  1804);  "Memorial  of
t  he  Chamber  of  Commerce  on  Owan  Steam  Navi-
gation "  (18<M) ;  "Colonial  Keconls  of  the  New
York  Chamber  of  Commerce"  (1867).  containing
illustrations  and  biographical  and  hLstorieal
sketches ;  "  The  Progress  t»f  New  York  in  a  ( 'cn-
tury"  (1876);  "The  Expedition  of  I^fayette
against  Arnold."  publishe<l  b\'  the  Mar>iun<r  hi»-
toricul  society  (Iteltimore.  1878);  and  "  Alliert  (ial-
latin  "  in  the  "  American  Statesmen  "  series  ( I^wton,
1883).  He  contributed  the  historic-al  chapters  to
the  "  History  of  New|)ort  Countv"  (Bofiton,  1888).
STEVEN'S,  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  Culpeper
county,  Va.,  in  1745;  «I.  there,  17  Aug.,  1820.
He  commanditl  a  battalion  of  militia  at  the  battle
of  Great  Bridge,  9  Dec..  1775,  and  in  1776  was  ap-

1Kiinte<l  colonel  of  the  10th  Virginia  regiment,
oining  Washington's  army  in  New  Jersey  in  1777,
he  checkinl  the  attack  o^  Gen.  William  Howe's
forces  at  the  battle  of  the  Brandywine,  and.  by
holding  the  road  till  nightfall,  prevente<l  a  serious
disaster.  He  served  with  criHUt  at  Germantown,
and  was  made  a  brigadier-general.  On  14  Aug.,
1780.  he  joined  the  annv  of  (icn.  Horatio  (Sates
with  700  Virginia  militi'a,  and  urge«l  him  to  en-
gage Ijonl  Hawdon's  force  near  Camden,  believing
that  it  was  too  late  to  nMreat,  or  mistnisting  the
reiH)rt  of  the  approach  of  Ix)rd  Comwallis.  His
bripule  U'gan  tne  attack,  but,  being  unfamiliar
with  the  u.se  of  the  bayonet,  thev  gave  way
when  the  enemy  chargetl.  At  Ouiffoni  Court-
House  they  resiste<l  the  British  attack  with  steadi-
ness, although  finally  forced  back.  Gen.  Stevens,
who  was  severely  wouiuh-d,  received  the  praise  of
Gen.  Nathanael  (ireene  for  his  conduct  in  this
action.  He  also  served  with  cretlit  at  the  siege  of
Yorktown.  Fnmi  thea«loption  of  the  state  consti-
tution till  1790  he  sat  in  the  Virginia  senate.

STEVENS,  George  Barker.  e«lucat«r.  b.  in
Sneiicer,  Tioga  co.,  N.  Y..  Ill  July,  1854.  He  was
educated  at  Cornell  and  Rtwhestef,  and  was  gradu-
ate«l  at  the  latter  university  in  1877.  After  sjiend-
ing  a  year  at  Rcx-lu^ster  tlieolojjical  seminary,  he
entereA  the  ilivinity-school  at  Yale,  where  he  was
gnwiuated  in  1880.  '  He  was  pastor  of  a  Congnsa-
tional  church,  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y..  in  1880-*2,  andin
DtM-t'inber,  1882,  assumed  the  charge  of  a  Preabjr-
terian  church  at  Watertown.  N.  V.  In  1888,  after
examination  on  a  two  years*  eour>*«'  In  philosophy,
he  riH-eivi'd  the  degre**  of  Ph.  D.  fmm  Syracuse
university.  In  188.>-"6  he  studieil  tlu"ol<»gyin  the
universities  of  Berlin  and  I/eifwic.  ana  in  1886
n>ceive<l  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Jena. On  hk


672


STEVENS


STEVENS


return  to  the  United  States  he  was  appointed
professor  of  New  Testament  criticism  anu  inter-
pretation at  Yale.  He  has  contributed  theological
and  philosophical  articles  to  religious  magazines,
and  edited  the  "  Homilies  of  Chrysostom  on  the
Acts  and  Romans  "  for  Dr.  Philip  SchafiE's  edition
of  "  Post-Nicene  Church  Fathers."

STEVENS,  Isaac  Ingalls,  soldier,  b.  in  An-
dover,  Mass.,  28  March,  1818;  d.  near  Chantilly,
Fairfax  co.,  Va.,  1  Sept.,  1862.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1839.  ranking  first
in  his  class,  and  was  commissioned  as  2d  lieutenant

of  engineers.  He
was  promoted  1st
lieutenant  on  1
July,  1840,  and
served  as  adju-
tant of  the  corps
of  engineers  dur-
ing the  war  with
Mexico,  being  en-
gaged at  the  siege
of  Vera  Cruz
and  at  Cerro  Gor-
do, at  Contreras
and  Churubusco,
where  he  gained
the  brevet  of  cap-
tain, at  Chapulte-
-  pec,  of  major,  at

Xr  . ^-i^^r-^ ^ Alolino  del Rey,

ing  of  the  city  of
Mexico,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  He  su-
perintended fortifications  on  the  New  England
coast  in  1841-7  and  in  1848-'9,  and  had  charge  of
the  coast-survey  office  in  Washington,  D.  C,  from  14
Sept.,  1849,  till  17  March,  1853,  when  he  resigned,
having  been  appointed  governor  of  Washington
territory.  He  was  at  the  same  time  placed  in
charge  of  the  exploration  of  the  northern  route
for  a  Pacific  railroad.  In  1853.  at  the  head  of  a
large  exploring  party,  he  surveyed  a  route  between
St.  Paul,  ]\Iinn.,  and  Puget  sound,  and  established
the  navigability  of  the  upper  Missouri  and  Colum-
bia rivers  for  steamers,  lie  was  superintendent  of
Indian  affairs  bv  virtue  of  his  office  of  governor,
and  in  1854-'5  he  made  treaties  with  the  Indian
tribes  of  the  territory  by  which  they  relinquished
their  titles  to  more  than  100,000  square  miles  of
land.  He  also  crossed  the  Rocky  mountains  to
conclude  a  treaty,  in  October,  1855,  of  friendship
with  the  Blackfeet  Indians,  at  the  same  time  inter-
vening successfully  to  make  peace  between  them
and  the  hunting  tribes  of  Wasnington  and  Oregon.
While  he  was  absent  on  this  expedition  the  disaf-
fected Indians  of  Washington  territory  rose  against
the  whites.  He  returned  before  January,  1856,
called  out  1,000  volunteers,  and  conducted  a  cam-
paign against  the  revolted  Indians  that  was  so  vig-
orous and  successful  that  before  the  close  of  1856
they  were  subdued  and  their  chiefs  slain.  White
sympathizers  with  the  Indians  were  taken  from
their  homes  and  confined  in  the  towns,  and,  when
Chief-Justice  Edward  Lander  issued  a  writ  of  habeas
corpus  for  their  release,  Gov.  Stevens  declared  two
counties  under  martial  law,  and  on  7  May,  1856,
caused  Judge  Lander  to  be  arrested  in  his  court-
room, and  held  him  a  prisoner  till  the  close  of
the  war.  He  resigned  in  August,  1857,  and  was
elected  a  delegate  to  congress  for  two  successive
terms,  serving  from  7  Dec,  1857,  till  3  March,
1861.  In  congress  he  vindicated  his  course  in  the
Indian  war,  and  saw  his  treaties  confirmed,  and
the  scrip  that  he  had  issued  to  pay  the  volun-


teers assumed  by  the  government.  In  the  presi-
dential canvass  of  1860  he  acted  as  chairman  of
the  executive  committee  of  the  Breckinridge  wing
of  the  Democmtic  party.  But  when  the  leaders
of  his  party  afterward  declared  for  secession,  he
publicly  denounced  them,  and  urged  President
Buchanan  to  remove  John  B.  Floyd  and  Jacob
Thompson  from  his  cabinet.  At  the  intelligence
of  the  firing  on  Fort  Sumter  he  hastened  from
the  Pacific  cojist  to  Washington,  and  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  79th  regiment  of  New  York  volun-
teers, known  as  the  Highlanders.  The  regiment
had  lost  heavily  at  Bull  Run,  and  expected  to  be
sent  home  to  recruit.  Disappointment  at  being
kept  in  the  field  and  commanded  by  regular  array
officers  caused  eight  companies  to  mutiny.  The
courage  and  wisdom  with  which  he  restored  dis-
cipline won  the  respect  of  the  men,  who,  by  their
own  desire,  were  transferred  to  his  brigade  when  he
was  commissioned  as  brigadier-general  on  28  Sept.,

1861.  and  took  part  in  the  Port  Royal  expedition.
He  attacked  the  Confederate  batteries  on  the  Coo-
saw  in  January,  1862,  and  captured  them  with  the
co-operation  of  the  gun-boats.  In  June  he  was  en-
gaged in  actions  on  Stono  river,  and  commanded
the  main  column  in  an  unsuccessful  assault  on  the
enemy's  position  near  Secession ville.  After  the  re-
treat of  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan  from  his  position
before  Richmond,  Gen.  Stevens  was  ordered  to
Virginia.  He  commanded  a  division  at  Newport
News,  and  was  made  a  major-general  on  4  July,

1862,  serving  under  Gen.  John  Pope  in  the  cam-
paign in  northern  Virginia.  He  was  engaged  in
skirmishes  on  the  Rappahannock,  distingliished
himself  at  Manassas,  and  while  leading  his  division
at  the  battle  of  Chantilly  was  killed  with  the  colors
of  the  79th  regiment  in  his  hand.  lie  published
"  Campaigns  of  the  Rio  Grande  and  Mexico,  with
Notices  of  the  Recent  Work  of  Major  Ripley"
(New  York,  1851),  and  ''Report  of  Explorations
for  a  Route  for  the  Pacific  Railroad  near  the  47th
and  49th  Parallels  of  North  Latitude,  from  St.
Paul,  Minn.,  to  Puget  Sound,"  which  was  printed
by  order  of  congress  (2  vols.,  Washington,  1855-'60).

STEVENS,  Jaoies  Gray,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  25  Feb.,  1822.  His  father,
Andrew  Stevens,  was  a  writer  to  the  "  Signet,"  and
his  mother,  Grace  Buchanan,  daughter  cf  Sir  Colin
Campbell,  of  Auehinbreck,  was  an  author.  He  was
educated  at  Edinburgh  university,  came  to  New
Brunswick  in  1840.  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1847,  and  practised  his  profession  at  St.
Stephen's,  N.  B.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New
Brunswick  assembly  in  1861-5,  was  created  a
queen's  counsel  in  February,  1867,  the  same  yew
was  appointed  judge  of  four  county  courts,  and  in
1875  was  a  delegate  from  New  Brunswick  to  the
convention  in  Montreal,  which  resulted  in  the
union  of  the  various  Presbyterian  bodies  in  Canada.
He  has  been  president  of  St.  Croix  agricultural  so-
ciety thirty  years.  He  is  the  author  of  "  An  Analyt-
ical Digest  of  the  Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Courts
of  New  Brunswick  from  1825  to  1873,  inclusive"
(St.  John,  1873);  a  further  digest  of  the  same  re-
ports from  1873  to  1887  (Toronto,  1887};  "Index
to  the  Statutes,  Rules,  ^Orders,  Regulations,  Trea-
tises, and  Proclamations  of  the  Dominion  of  Cana-
da "  (St.  Stephen's,  1876) ;  and  "  Indictable  Offences
and  Summary  Convictions  "  (Toronto,  1880).

STEVENS,  John,  member  of  the  Continental
congress,  b.  in  New  York  city  about  1708 ;  d.  in
May,  1792.  He  was  the  son  of  John,  who  came
from  England  in  1699  at  about  the  age  of  seven-
teen, studied  and  practised  law,  and  became  a  large
land-owner. The  son  settled  in  New  Jersey,  and


STEVKNS


8TKVKN8


673


waB  one  of  the  joint  i><)miiiiiif«iononi  fnr  iloflning
the  boundary-iino  l>i-lwe«<ri  NVw  York  ami  that
<H)|ony  in  Xovi'iiiU'r.  1774.  KcHigninf;  a«  a  rr»yal-
i»t  councillor  in  June,  1776,  he  wat*.  from  27  Auff.,
1778,  till  1782.  vice-president  of  the  i-ounril  of  New
JerM>y,  prexidin);  over  the  joint  rnei'linKM  of  the
two  lirHiu'hes  of  the  le((ixlature.  He  waMelec>t«<l  to
the  Kwlenil  conurew  in  November,  1783.  and  on
18  l)eo.,  17x7,  he  iiresitle«l  over  the  State  c-onven-
tion  thttt  rntifltMl  the  I'nited  StAtett  constitution. —
lli»  Min,  John,  enjrin«H'r.  b,  in  New  Y<»rk  citv  in
1748  or  1741):  d.  nt  Ih.lMjken,  N.  J,,  0  March.  iVuW,
was  ffnuluated  ut  Kin);'s  (now  ('oluml)ta)  college
in  17U8,  and  wa^  a<lmilt(Hl  to  the  Itar,  but  practi^ied
bttle.  During;  the  Hcvolutionary  war  h«'  held  wv-
eral  onU-es,  amon>;  which  wa^i  that  uf  trca.surer  of
New  Jen<ey  in  177<i-'W.  and  at  its  close  ho  marrie<l
and  reside<l  in  winter  on  Hroadway,  New  York,
and  in  humnier  on  the  island  of  llol»oken,  whicrh  he
then  ownwl.  His  life  was  devoted  to  ex|K>rinient.s
at  his  own  cost  for  the  common  K'xhI.  In  171K)  lie
petitioneil  conjfn^s  for  protection  to  American  in-
ventors, and  his  iietition  was  referretl  to  a  commit-
tee, which  reporte<l  a  bill  that  became  the  law  of
10  April,  17yo.  the  foundation  of  the  American
patent  law.  He  had  ij<>gun  exi>eriments  in  the
application  of  .steam  in  1788,  and  now  continmnl
them,  having  as  his  »i.s.s(K'iates  Nichola.s  1,  Hoose-
velt  and  the  elder  Krunel,  who  afterward  built  the
Thames  tunnel.  Toward  the  close  of  the  century
he  was  engaged  with  his  brother-in-law,  KoU-rt  u.
Livingston,  and  Roosevelt,  in  building  a  steamlioat
to  navigate  Hudson  river,  the  legislature  of  the

state  of  New  York
having  previously  of-
fered a  monoiM>ly  of
exclu.sive  privilege  to
the  owners  of  a  ooat
that,  complying  with
given  conditions,
should  attain  a  speetl
of  three  miles  an
hour;  but  their ImmU
failed  to  achieve  the
required  sjrhhI,  and
their  joint  procee*!-
ings  were  interrupt-
ed by  the  apiM^int-
ment  of  Livingston
as  minister  to  France
in  1801.  In  Paris.
Livingston  met  Kob-
ert  Fulton,  and  after-
wanl  was  a.ss<M-iut«Ml
with  him  in  establishing  steam  navigation.  Ste-
vens j)ersevcred.  and  in  1804  built  a  vessel  i>ro-
pelled  by  twin  screws  that  navigate<l  the  Hud-
son. The  boiler  was  tubular  and  the  screw  was
identically  the  short  four- threade<l  s<-rew  that
is  now  use<I.  That  it  was  a  helix,  his  letter  of
1804  to  Dr.  Kol)ert  Han\  of  Philadelphia,  shows.
This  *as  the  first  apjilication  of  steam  t<»  the
»cr»'W  -  propeller.  The  engine  and  boiler  of  this
steamlMiat  are  nreser^•e<i  in  the  Stevens  institute
at  HolN>ken,  N.  J.  Mr.  Stevens  always  upheld
the  efllcieney  of  the  screw  and  its  great  advan-
tages for  ocean  navigat  ion.  Short  ly  after  his  deat  h
his  sons  placed  the  engine  and  l>«»iler  refern><l  to
in  a  lK)at,  which  wa."  tried  liefore  a  committee  of
the  Ameriian  institute  of  New  York,  and  attaineil
a  speed  of  atK)ut  nine  niih's  an  hour.

it  is  remarkable  that  after  1804  no  serious  at-
temut  was  made  for  the  practical  introduction
of  tne  screw  until  1837,  when  it  was  brought  into
use  simultaneously  in  Knglan<l  and the  United

VOL.  V. — 18


SUtM.  Still  more  rrinarka)*lr  b  the  faot  that  iu
introduction  into  u«e  in  Eofriand was  bjr  Uie  Arehi-
nuHlian  m-dw  of  a  single  tbrNMl,  and  in  AmeriM

by  a  multi-thremltMl  fcrew  on  •>• ^'-mwlmoetkm

cylinder:  that  the  flnrt  wan  •  .  inodilM  in

the  eourtM*  of  live  or  six  year-  ' itboit  four-

threaded  M-rew  tliat  wan  umnI  by  Sl«veiis  in  1804,
and  that  in  alM>ut  ten  yeant  the  multi-threaded
•crew  was  mbm  replaced  by  the  M-rew  uf  IH04.  In
\WJ,  iMistad  by  his  non  Robert,  he  built  the  fMuJ-
dle-whcvl  steamltoat  "I'hcpnix"  that  plietl  for  vis
years  on  the  IK-Iaware.  Prof.  Jarncii  Kenwiek,
who  from  his  own  oliM-rvalion  has  left  the  best
descriotion  extant  of  Fulton'*  lioat,  tl^  ••Cler-
mont, an  she  ran  in  the  autumn  of  1807,  says  that
"the  Stevensos  were  but  a  few  davs  later  in  moving
a  Ixwt  with  the  required  veloc-ity,"*  and  that  "  bi-ing
shut  out  of  the  waters  of  New  York  by  the  mo-
no|Mi|y  of  Livingston  and  Fulton,  Stevens  con-
ceived the  Ixild  design  of  conveying  his  lioat  to
the  Delaware  bv  sea,  and  this  iMiat.  which  was  so
near  reaping  the  honor  of  first  success,  was  the
first  to  navigate  the  (x>ean  by  the  |Miwer  of  steam."
Fulton  had  the  advantage  i>f  a  steam-engine  that
was  maile  by  James  Watt,  while  his  pre<leceaaora
were  provid(>d  only  with  inferior  ap|iaratus,  the
work  of  common  bla<-ksmiths  and  millwrights.
The  piston-rod  of  the  "Pha-nix"  was  uuiiled  by
slidi*s  instead  of  the  {tarallel  motion  uf  Watt,  and
the  cylinder  restetl  on  the  condenser.  Stevens  also
surrounded  the  water-wheel  by  a  guanl-bcam.
Among  the  (mtents  that  were  iaken  out  by  Stc^
vens  was  one  in  1791  for  generating  steam;  two
in  the  same  year  descril*e<l  as  improvements  in
bellows  and  on  Thomas  .Savar^-'s  engine,  Ixith  de-
signed for  pumjiing:  the  multi-tubular  Ixtiler  in
180;i.  which  was  [uitenttil  in  Kngland  in  1H05  in
the  name  of  his  ehlest  son,  John  I'. :  one  in  1816
for  using  slides;  an  imnrr»vement  in  rack  railroads
in  1824:  and  one  in  1824  to  rentier  shallow  rivers
more  naviptble.  In  1812  he  ma«le  the  first  ex|i*-ri-
ments  with  artillery  against  iron  armor.  He  then
proi>ose<l  a  circular  vessel,  to  Imj  rotattnl  by  steam
to  train  the  guns  for  the  defenc-e  «»f  New  York
harbor.  On  11  Oct.,  1811.  he  establishwl  the  first
steam-ferry  in  the  worhl  with  the  "Juliana,"  which
plied  l)etween  New  York  city  ami  HoUtken.  In
1813  he  inventtnl  and  built  a  ferry-Uwt  made  of
two  separate  Itoats,  with  a  (mddle-wheel  Itetween
them  which  was  turned  by  six  horses.  On  account
of  the  simplicity  of  its  construction  and  its  ec«»no-
my.  this<Iescription  of  horse-bottt  continued  long
in  use  lK>th  on  the  F^ast  river  and  on  the  Hudson.
In  February.  1812,  shortly  Ix'fore  the  war  with
Kngland  and  five  years  liefon*  the  tx>ginning  of
the  Krie  canal.  .Stevens  ad«ln>ss(>d  a  memoir  to
the  commission  ap|M)inti>d  to  «l«'vise  wnter-«'om-
munication  lietwe<'n  the  M'aUiard  and  the  lakes,
urging  instea<I  «>f  a  canal  the  imme<liate  constnic-
tion  of  a  railntad.  This  memoir,  with  the  ad-
verse n'|)ort  of  the  commi'^sioncrs,  among  whom
were  De  Witt  Clinlon.  (Jouverneur  .Morris,  and
Chancellor  Livingston,  wa*'  pubiishe«l  at  the  time,
and  again,  with  a  prefa(-«'.  by  Charles  Kins,  presi-
dent of  Columbia,  in  18,*)2.  and  by  the  "  KaAruad
Gazette  "  in  1882.  The  com»ctn'es«  of  his  riews
and  argtimeiit.s  wmtraM  strongly  with  the  answer
of  the  commissioners  on  the  imprncticabilitv  of  a
railnuul.  At  the  date  of  the  memoir,  although
short  railnwds  for  carrying  coal  ha<l  U-en  in  use  in
Kngland  for  upwanl  of  200  years,  there  was  not  a
liK-oinotive  or  |Hu<senger-car  in  use  in  the  world.
.Stevens's  pro|Kisal  was  to  builil  a  fiassencpr  and
freight  railroad  for  general  trafiie  fn>m  Albany  to
Lake  Krie  having  a  double  tracli,  made  with  wood-


674


STEVENS


STEVENS


en  stringers!  capped  with  wrought-plate  rails  rest-
ing on  piles  and  operated  by  loeornotives.  He  enu-
merates comprehensively  the  advantages  of  a  gen-
eral railroati  system,  naming  many  details  that
were  afterward  found  necessary,  putting  the  prol)-
able  future  speed  at  from  twenty  to  thirty  miles
an  hour,  or  possibly  at  from  forty  to  fifty.  lie
gives  a  definite  plan  and  detailed  estimates  of  the
construction  and  cost.  His  plan  is  identical  with
that  of  the  successful  South  Carolina  railroad  built
in  1830-'32,  the  first  long  railroad  in  the  United
States,  which  has  been  described  as  "a  continuous
and  prolonged  bridge."  The  accuracy  of  his  esti-
mates was  proved  by  the  cost  of  this  road.  Ste-
vens in  1814  applied  to  the  state  of  New  Jersey  for
a  railroad  charter  from  New  York  to  Philadelphia.
He  received  the  charter  in  February,  1815,  and  lo-
cated the  road,  but  proceeded  no  further.  In  1823,
with  Horace  Binney  and  Stephen  Girard,  of  Phila-
delphia, he  obtained  from  the  state  of  Pennsylvania
a  charter  for  a  railroad  from  Philadelphia  to  Lancas-
ter, on  the  site  of  the  present  Pennsylvania  railroad.
These  two  were  the  first  railroad  charters  that
were  granted  in  this  country.  On  23  Oct.,  1824,
he  obtained  a  patent  for  the  construction  of  rail-
roads. In  1826,  at  the  age  of  seventy-eight,  to
show  the  operation  of  the  locomotive  on  the  rail-
road, he  built  at  Hoboken  a  circular  railway  hav-
ing a  gauge  of  five  feet  and  a  diameter  of  220  feet,
and  placed  on  it  a  locomotive  with  a  multi-tubular
boiler  which  carried  about  half  a  dozen  people  at
a  rate  of  over  twelve  miles  an  hour.  This  was
the  first  locomotive  that  ever  ran  on  a  railroad  in
America.  Col.  Stevens  was  an  excellent  classical
scholar,  and  not  only  a  close  student  of  natural
philosophy,  but  fond  of  metaphysical  specula-
tions, leaving  several  philosophical  treatises,  which
have  never  been  published.  He  was  through
life  an  enthusiastic  botanist  and  amateur  gar-
dener, importing  and  cultivating  many  new  plants.


The  accompanying  engraving  represents  Castle
Point,  Mr.  Stevens's  residence  in  Hoboken,  N.  J.,
which  in  1835  was  replaced  by  the  present  more
spacious  mansion. — The  second  John's  son,  John
Cox,  b.  24  Sept.,  1785;  d.  in  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  13
June,  1857,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1803,
and  married  Maria  C.  Livingston  on  27  Dec,  1809.
In  the  early  part  of  his  life  he  resided  on  his
estate  at  Annandale,  on  the  Livingston  manor,
and  later  in  New  York  city.  He  was  from  his
youth  a  devoted  yachtsman.  He  organized  the
New  York  yacht  club,  was  its  first  commodore,
and  commanded  the  "  America "  in  the  mem-
orable race  in  England  in  1851. — Another  son,
Robert  Livingston,  b.  18  Oct.,  1787;  d.  in  Ho-
boken, N.  J.,  20  April,  1856,  having  a  strong  en-
gineering bias,  began  to  assist  his  father  when
only  seventeen  years  old.  He  took  the  "  Phoenix  "
to  Philadelphia' by  sea  in  June,  1808.  At  the  death
of  Fulton  the  speed  of  steamboats  on  the  Hudson


was  under  seven  miles  an  hour,  and  at  al)out  that
date  Robert  L.  Stevens  built  the  '•  Philatlelphia,"
which  had  a  speed  of  eight  miles.  He  built  many
steamboats,  increasing  the  speed  of  each  succ&ssive
one  up  to  1832,  when  the  "North  America"  at-
tained fifteen  miles.  From  1815  until  1840  he
stood  at  the  head  of  his  profession  in  the  United
States  as  a  constructor  oi  steam  vessels  and  their
machinery,  making  innumerable  improvements,
which  were  generally  adopted.  In  1821  he  origi-
nated the  present  form  of  ferry-boat  and  ferry-slips,
making  his  boats  with  guards  encircling  them
throughout,  and  constructing  the  ferry-slips  with
spring  piling  and  spring  fenders.  In  adopting  the
overhead  working-beam  of  Watt  to  navigation,  he
made  important  improvements,  inventing  and  ap-
plying, in  1818,  the  cam-board  cut-off,  substituting
m  1821  the  gallows-frame  that  is  now  used  for  the
column  that  supported  the  working-beam,  and
making  that  beam  of  wrought-iron  strap  with  a
cast-iron  centre,  instead  of  purely  of  cast-iron.
This  he  improved  in  1829  into  the  shape  that  is
now  universally  used.  He  lengthened  the  propor-
tionate stroke  of  the  piston,  and  invented  the  split
water-wheel  in  1826.  In  1831  he  invented  the  bal-
ance-valve, which  was  a  modification  of  the  Cornish
double-beat  vaJve,  and  is  now  always  used  on  the
beam  engine.  He  placed  the  boilers  on  the  wheel-
guards  and  over  the  water,  improved  the  details  in
every  part,  and  finally  left  the  American  working-
beam  (or  walking-beam)  engine  in  its  present  form.
At  the  same  time  he  strengthened  the  boiler,  be-
ginning with  a  pressure  of  two  pounds  to  the
square  inch,  and  increasing  the  strength  of  the
boilers,  so  that  fifty  pounds  could  be  safely  car-
ried. He  made  the  first  marine  tubular  boiler  in
1831,  and  was  among  the  first  to  use  anthracite
coal.  In  the  hulls  of  his  vessels  he  gradually  in-
creased the  amount  of  iron  fastening  until  it  was
finally  more  than  quadrupled,  increasing  the
strength  of  vessels  while  diminishing  their  weight.
He  reduced  the  vibration  of  the  hull  bv  the  masts
and  rods  that  are  now  used,  and  added  greatly
to  their  strength  by  his  overhead  truss-frame.

On  the  opening  of  the  Liverpool  and  Man-
chester railway  in  1830,  he  went  to  England,
where  he  had  made,  from  a  model  he  brought  over,
the  rails  for  the  road  he  was  building,  with  his
brother.  Edwin  A.,  in  New  Jersey.  This  rail  is
the  well-known  T-pattern,  used  in  this  country  and
in  a  large  part  of  Europe,  which  is  fastened  bv
spikes  without  the  intervention  of  chairs,  which
are  required  by  the  form  of  rail  that  is  still  used
in  England.  He  also  then  ordered  from  the  Ste-
phensons  the  locomotive  called  the  "  John  Fftdl,"
the  prototype  of  those  that  are  made  in  this  coun-
try, which  is  now  preserved  at  the  Smithsonian
institution  in  Washington.  Toward  the  close  of
the  last  war  with  England  Robert  was  engaged  in
making  a  bomb  that  could  be  fired  from  a  cannon
instead  of  from  a  mortar,  and  that  could  thus  be
applied  to  naval  warfare.  In  connection  therewith
he  made  many  experiments  on  the  Hoboken  marsh-
es, for  which  he  obtained  from  the  government  the
loan  of  heavy  ordnance,  and  finally  he  succeeded
in  producing  a  successful  percussion-shell.  Presi-
dent Madison  then  appointed  a  board  to  test  this
shell  in  the  harbor  of  New  York,  both  against  solid
targets  of  wooden  beams  and  against  an  actual
section  of  a  ship  of  the  line,  built  for  the  purpose.
Each  was  demolished  by  a  single  shell.  The  gov-
ernment then  adopted  the  shell,  purchasing  a  large
q^uantitv,  together  with  the  secret  of  its  construc-
tion, fn  1814  Pklwin.  under  the  direction  of  his
father,  had  experimented  with  shot  against  inclined


8TRVEN8


8TKVKK8


675


iron-plntinc.  iin«l  in  1841.  whon.  on  account  of  th«

U.  S. boundary «lis|iutfs  with  Knfrlnn<l.|iuhiic atten-
tion waa  dirwtiMl  to  niival  <li'f«'ric«'s.  Iit>  mnilr  n  •«•-
rioa  of  ex|H*riment.><,  which  ho  lunl  his  Imtthors  laiil
befoit*  the  ^venimont.  I'n»sii|i'nt  Tyler  ap|Miiiit-
ed  a  commission  of  offlccn*  of  the  army  ami  navy
to  9U|wrinten(l,  nt  Saiidv  II<M)k,  the  ex|ieriment»  of
the  brothers  on  the  a()|)licntion  of  ir«>n  to  war-vea-
seU  a.H  u  protection  apiinst  shot,  who,  after  many
trials  aptinst  in>n  tarjfets,  re|>ort«Hl  that  iron  four
and*  a  half  inches  thicit  resisfe«l  efTectualiy  the
force  of  a  sixty-four  iH)un<l  shot  fire<l  at  thirty
yards  with  Imtteriiif;  charges.  Then>u|K)n  an  act
was  paKMMl,  14  April.  1H42,  authorizing;  the  aeorv-
tar)'  of  the  navy  to  contract  with  Kohert  L.  Ste-
vens for  an  irt)n-cla«l  steam  vessel.  Stevens  im-
me<liatelv  hepin  to  excavate  a  dry  d«»ck  for  his
vessel,  which  he  had  finished  within  a  year,  and
also  ha<l  his  vessel  planne<l,  aud  lM-f;an  its  con-
struction ;  but  the  contra<'t  wa^*  chan^t^l  in  the
latter  {Mirt  of  184^1,  when  Com.  Koliert  V.  Stockton
constructwl  a  wri>ujfht-iron  cannon  having  a  lx>re
of  ten  inches  and  throwing  a  round  shot  that
pierced  a  four-and-a-half-inch  tarjjet.  At  each
successive  important  increase  of  the  power  of  the
(^n.  either  at  honie  or  abroad,  the  increa.se<l  thick-
ness of  armor  necessary  for  defence  refjuinnl  in-
creased tonnufje  in  the  vessel  that  Stevens  had  con-
tracted to  build,  causing  intermiimbie  interruption
and  conse<iuent  delay.  This  vessel,  which  wa-s
known  as  tne  Stevens  battery,  lay  in  its  bisin  at
Hoboken  for  many  years,  and  was  never  launche<l.
It  was  the  first  iron-clad  ever  projwted,  preceding
by  more  than  ten  years  the  small  iron-clad  vessels
used  by  the  French  at  Kinburn  in  1854. — Another
son,  James  Alexander,  b.  in  New  York  citv,  2U
Jan.,  17!K»;  d.  in  IlolK)ken,  N.  .1.,  7  Oct..  187:?.' was
graduated  at  ('olumbia  in  1808,  and  admitted  to
the  bar  in  New  York  city  in  1811.  In  connection
wjth  Thomas  Gibbons,  he  est«blishe«l  the  Union
steamboat  line  between  New  York  and  Phila<Iel-
phia,  which  led  to  the  suit  of  Ogden  vs.  Gibbons,
memorable  for  the  decision  that  place<l  all  the
navigable  waters  of  the  L'nitetl  States  under  the
jurisdic'tion  of  the  general  government. — Another
son.  Edwin  Augustus,  b.  in  Ilo>x)ken,  N.  J..  28
July.  17»">;  d.  in  I'aris.  France.  8  Aug..  1H(>8.  after
assisting  his  brother  Rol»ert,  in  182G  t<K)k  charge
of  the  Union  line,  which  was  shortly  after  merged
into  the  Camden  and  AmU^y  railroa«l.  the  charter
for  which  the  two  brothers  obtained  from  the  state
of  New  Jersey  in  IKW.  They  prosecuted  the  work
«:>  vigorously  that  the  road  was  ojx'ned  for  traffic
on  9  Oct.,  IMiW.  the  elder  brother  U'ing  president
and  the  younger  treasurer  and  manager.  In  the
next  twenty  ye4irs  the  railroad  system  of  the  United
States,  differing  materially  from  that  of  England,
was  formed,  and  in  aiding  this  development  the
brothers  were  conspicuous,  inventing  and  intn>-
ducing  many  appliances  on  the  road,  locomotives,
and  <'ars.  "f  he  germ  of  many  im[)rovements  after-
wanl  [terfected  on  other  roa<ls  can  Ix-  triice«l  iMick
to  the  Camden  and  Andwy.  Of  this  the  vestibule-
car  is  a  nuMlern  instance.  The  brothers,  while  en-
fraged  in  railrowl  affairs,  still  retained  their  great
interests  in  navigation,  and  mwlo  many  improve-
ments in  it.  In  1827  the  elder  brother  a|)plii*d
forced  draught  to  the  "North  America,"  and  its
use  immediately  l)ecame  genenil.  while  in  1842  the
younger  patente*!  the  air-tight  fire-nnim  for  thus
fon-ed  draught,  and  apfilied  it  on  many  veflaeis.
This  double  invention  of  the  two  brothers  is  now
use<l  in  ail  the  great  navii»s  of  the  world.  Both
brothers  spent  a  great  part  of  their  lives  in  de-
vising anu  effecting  improrements  in  the  means


of  attack  and  defence  in  navaJ  warCart.  Roban
hail  iMNiuenthnl  the  Steven*  battery  to  hit  brDtliar.
and  K<lwiti.  at  the  beginning  of  tlie  civil  war.  pr»>
viit<-<l  to  the  gr>vemment  a  plan  for  ooin|i4«uiif
(he  vi-HM'l.  together  with  a  xmall  v«Mri,  obIIm  |1m
'•  .VaugHtuck."  to  denu>n«trate  the  nraelicabnitr  of
his  plans. Thiji  Muall  vemel wn  ha

government,  anil  waM  one  of  the  l!'  ,..-<l

the  *' .Mernnuw-."  .She  wa*  a  twin  iicr«w-««Mel«
caftable  of  being  immersed  thrrw  tert  bek>«  bar
load-line,  so  as  to  lie nearly inviMible,  of beiof


raised  again  in  eight  minutes  bv  pumping  out  the
immersing  weight  of  water,  an*!  of  turning  end  for
en<l  on  her  centre  in  one  minute  and  a  quarter.
The  government  refuscnl  to  a[)pn>|triate  the  monejr
on  the  plans  that  were  propose<l  by  Mr.  .Steven*,
and  at  his  death  he  left  the  vessel  to  the  Ktate  of
New  Jersey,  together  with  $1.(XK».0(»0  for  its  com-
pletion, lie  foumled  the  .Stevens  institute  (see
dlustration).  he^pieathing  to  it  and  to  the  high-
wh<K)l  a  large  plot  of  ground  in  HolKiken.  and
lll.'iO.tNM)  for  the  building  ami  f.'WMMNIO  for  endow-
ment.—  Mis  widow.  Martha  Ha v a ri>.  has  devoted
f2()(>.0(M>  to  n>ligious  and  charitable  institulionit.
among  which  may  be  mentione<l  theent-tion  of  the
Church  of  the  Holy  Inmxvnts  at  IloUiken.

STEVKNS,  John,  clergjnmn.  b.  in  Townsend.
Mass..  O.June,  175»M:  d.  in  G'ranville.  Ohio. :«» April,
1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebur)'  college.
Vt..  in  1821,  and  studie<l  at  Audovcr  thi>ological
s«'minary.  In  1825  he  UH-anie  cla.<««ical  tutor  in
Middlebury  college,  where  he  renmined  for  three
years.  Removing  to  Ohio,  he  serv«"<l  for  seven
years  as  editor  of  the  "  I^iptist  Wi>eklv  Journal."
In  183W  he  was  ma<le  profes.«or  of  niuraf  and  intel-
lectual philosophy  in  (iranville  <-ollege  (now  I>eni-
son  university),  performing  at  the  same  time  the
main  duties  of  president.  From  184«<  till  1850  he
wa-s  eniploye<l  as  district  sei-n-tary  of  the  American
liaptist  missicmary  union.  In  the  last-named  vear
he  resumed  a  pmfesMirsliip  in  (iranville  i-olfege,
an<l  continued  in  this  relation  until  1875,  when  he
resigned  the  chair  ami  was  made  emeritus  nrt'ft^s*-
or.  He  receive<l  in  187.J  the  ilegrtx'  of  I>.  I),  from
the  University  of  Kix-hester.

STEVENS,  Paul,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  IW>1-
gium  in  \XW:  d.  in  Coteau  du  I^tc.  Canada,  in
18S2.  He  emigrated  to  Canttda.  l«>»-ame  editor  of
"  Ija  jiatrie  "  in  Montreal. and  was  afterward  profna-
or  of  literature  in  theCoIlegi-  of  Chandily.  He  n>-
tunutl  to  Montn>al  in  IWH).  and  was  for  some  time
editor  of  "  L'ArtLste."  He  then  liecanie  a  tutor  in
the  I)e  Iteaujeu  family  at  Coteau  du  Ijw,  where  be
remaimtl  till  his  death.  He  publishe«I  "FaWea'*
(Montreal.  1857).  This  work  gaine«l  him  the  title
of  the  "  liafontaine  of  Canada."  and  he  is  the  onl^
Canatlian  that  has  distingtiishetl  himself  in  this
sjiecies  of  com|>ositi«>n.  He  also  wrote  "Contee
jK>pulaires"  (Ottawa,  18(17).

STEVENS,  rhinehaa,  soldier,  b.  in  Sudbury,
Man.,  au  Feb.,  1707 :  d.  in  Chignecto.  Nora  Sootia.


676


STEVENS


STEVENS


6  Feb.,  1756.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Thomas
Stevens,  of  London,  England,  a  supporter  and
friend  of  the  Massiichusetts  colony,  whose  father,
Thomas  Stevens,  of  Devonshire,  was  one  of  the  as-
signees of  Sir  Walter  Ralegh's  patent  of  Virginia.
He  removed  with  his  parents  to  Rutland,  Mass.,
about  1711,  and  when  sixteen  years  old  was  carried
as  a  captive  to  St.  Francis  by  Indians,  among
whom  he  learned  the  savage  mode  of  warfare.
During  King  George's  war  he  was  commandant  of
Fort  No.  4,  which  was  erected  at  the  farthest  set-
tlement on  Connecticut  river,  now  Charlestown,
N.  H.  When  it  was  attacked  in  May,  1746,  he
routed  the  Indians  in  a  bold  sallv,  and  on  19  June
he  defeated  them  in  the  open  field.  The  fort  was
blockaded  during  the  summer  by  French  and  In-
dians, who  attempted  to  carry  it  by  assault  in  Au-
gust. In  March,  1747,  Capt.  Stevens,  who  had
evacuated  the  fort  in  the  wmter,  resunied  posses-
sion with  thirty  men,  and  in  April  they  sustained
an  attack  of  400  Frenchmen  and  savages.  He  held
the  fort  till  the  close  of  the  war.  In  1749  he  was
sent  to  Canada  by  Gov.  William  Shirley  to  nego-
tiate an  exchange  of  prisoners.  He  went  again  in
1752  to  treat  for  an  exchange  of  prisoners,  and
with  two  ponies  redeemed  John  Stark  from  cap-
tivity among  the  Indians.  After  the  renewal  of
hostilities  he  took  part  in  Col.  Robert  Monckton's
expedition  against  the  French  settlements  in  Nova
Scotia,  and  died  on  the  march  to  Beau  Sejour.
The  journal  of  his  trip  to  Canada  in  1749  is  printed
in  the  "New  Hampshire  Historical  Collections." —
His  son,  Simon,  soldier,  b.  in  Rutland,  Mass.,  3
Sept.,  1737;  d.  in  Charlestown,  N.  H.,  was  lieu-
tenant of  Capt.  John  Stark's  company  in  the  ex-
pedition against  Ticonderoga  in  1758,  was  taken
prisoner,  and  in  May,  1759,  escaped  from  Quebec,
sailed  down  St.  Lawrence  river  in  a  captured
schooner,  and  reached  a  British  post  after  many
adventures,  which  are  recounted  in  his  unpublished
journal.  During  the  Revolution  he  served  as  a
loyal  volunteer  in  the  British  army. — Another  son,
Eiios,  loyalist,  b.  in  Rutland,  Mass.,  13  Oct.,  1739  ;
d.  in  Barnet,  Vt,  in  1808,  was  carried  off  by  the
St.  Francis  Indians  from  Charlestown  when  ten
years  old,  and  held  in  captivity  three  months.  He
was  a  volunteer  in  the  royal  army  on  Long  Island,
and  was  engaged  in  foraging  in  privateei*s  along
the  coast  during  the  Revolution.  In  1782  he
joined  the  emigrant  refugees  who  went  to  Nova
Scotia.  After  several  years  he  returned  to  Charles-
town, N.  H.  He  subsequently  settled  at  Barnet,  Vt.
He  kept  a  journal  of  the  events  in  which  he  par-
ticipated from  1777  till  1783. — Enos's  son,  Henry,
antiquary,  b.  in  Barnet,  Vt.,  13  Dec,  1791 ;  d.  there,
30  July,  1867,  was  educated  at  Peacham  academy,
Vt,  and  early  began  to  collect  manuscripts,  tracts,
newspapers,  and  printed  volumes  relating  to  Ameri-
can history,  especially  that  of  Vermont.  He  was
the  founder  and  first  president  of  the  Vermont
historical  society.  The  most  valuable  part  of  his
collection  was  placed  for  safe-keeping  in  the  state-
house  at  Montpelier,  where  in  1857  it  was  burned.
He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  for  two  terms,
— Henry's  son,  Enos,  inventor,  b.  in  Barnet,  Vt.,
22  Jan.,  1816;  d.  there,  31  Jan.,  1877,  was  gradu-
ated at  Middlebury  college  in  1838,  and  taught  for
the  next  seven  years  in  Paradise,  Pa.  He  assisted
Dr.  Samuel  G.  Howe  in  investigating  the  condi-
tion of  the  idiots  of  Massachusetts  in  1847-'8,
and  then  returned  to  Barnet  and  engaged  in  agri-
culture and  dairy-farming.  He  invente<l  a  sys-
tem of  musical  notation,  apparatus  for  automati-
cally recording  atmosphenc  changes,  an  instru-
ment for  phrenological  measurements,  a  legislative


teller  that  was  put  in  use  by  congress  in  1853,  and
other  intricate  machines,  originated  an  astronomi-
cal theory  of  weather  indications,  and  published
pamphlets  on  astronomy,  music,  and  phrenology,
and  many  papers  on  agricultural  tonics. — Another
son,  Henry,  bibliographer,  b.  in  Barnet,  Vt.,  24
Aug.,  1819 ;  d.  in  South  Hampstead,  England,  28
Feb.,  1886.  His  early  education  was  received  at
the  school  of  his  native  village.  In  1836  he  att«nd-
ed  Lyndon  academy,  and  he  was  afterward  for  a
time  at  Middlebury  "college.  He  engaged  in  teach-
ing at  intervals,  and  also  held  a  clerkship  in  the
treasury  department  at  Washington.  In  1841  he
entered  Yale,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1843,  and
then  studied  law  a  short  time  at  C'ambridge.  Mean-
while he  became  much  interested  in  his  father's
work,  and  devoted  his  attention  to  early  colonial
history  and  the  historical  relations  between  the
states  and  England.  Through  his  acquaintance
with  collectors  of  historical  and  genealogical  books
and  manuscripts,  and  with  an  increasing  knowledge
of  their  wants,  under  their  encouragement  and  sup-
port, he  visited  London  in  search  of  Americana  m
1845,  and  remained  there  forty  years  until  his
death.  Having  good  recommendations,  he  speedily
made  the  acquaintance  of  the  principal  booksellers,
and,  to  use  his  own  expression,  "drifted  "  one  day
into  the  British  museum  and  presented  to  Sir  An-
thony  Panizzi  his  letter  of  introduction  from  Jared
Sparks.  His  coming  was  most  opportune,  for  the
authorities  had  just  discovered  that  the  museum
was  deficient  in  modem  American  books.  The
assistance  of  Mr.  Stevens  was  immediately  secured
in  supplying  the  deficiency,  and  from  that  time
until  his  death  he  was  their  trusted  agent  for  pro-
curing North  and  South  American  books  of  all
kinds,  including  state  and  national  laws,  journals
and  documents.  As  a  result,  the  library  of  the
British  museum  contains  a  larger  collection  of
American  books  than  any  single  American  library.
At  the  same  time  he  was  supplying  many  Ameri-
can public  and  private  libraries  with  the  rarest  of
Americana.  Many  books  supplied  by  him  at  mod-
erate prices  are  now  worth  fifty  times  the  amount
that  was  paid  him  for  them.  He  soon  became  an
experienced  bibliographer,  giving  special  atten-
tion to  the  early  editions  of  the  English  Bible,
and  to  early  voyages  and  travels,  especially  those
relating  to  America.  In  these  two  directions  he
became  one  of  the  highest  authorities.  John  Car-
ter Brown  was  one  of  his  early  correspondents,  and
he  may  be  said  to  have  formed  the  Lenox  library,
as  he  was  James  Lenox's  agent  to  collect  the  rarest
book  treasures.  He  was  an  indefatigable  bibli-
ographer and  a  generous  correspondent.  He  was
constantly  putting  forth  bibliographical  brochures,
and  his  catalogues  are  highly  prized  for  their  mi-
nute accuracy  and  valuable  notes,  as  well  as  for  pe-
culiar excellence  of  typography.  He  never  forgot
the  state  in  which  he  was  born,  but  frequently
signed  himself  Henry  Stevens  of  Vermont,  or  wrote
after  his  name  the  initials  G.  M.  B.,  "  Green  Moun-
tain Boy."  He  was  a  genial  friend,  full  of  quaint
savings  and  good-humor.  In  1852  he  was  made  a
fellow  of  the  Society  of  antiquaries.  In  1877  he
was  a  member  of  the 'committee  for  promoting  the
Caxton  exhibition,  and  catalogued  the  exhibit  of
Bibles.  The  same  year  he  became  a  member  of
the  Librarian's  association  and  took  an  active  part
in  all  its  meetings.  He  formed  a  large  collection
of  documents  relating  to  Benjamin  Franklin,  which
■was  purchased  by  the  U.  S.  government.  He  wrote
extensively  on  bibliographical  subjects,  and  left
several  unpublished  essays,  among  which  were  in-
vestigations respecting  Oolurabus  and  a  supple-


SITCVKNS


STKVKNS


677


riiiiit  to  liouis  Fapin'i*  "  Tiifp  <»f  Vnimizri,"  c-on-
t .'tilling  Aiunlolcs  rt'lntiri);  to  the  Hritisli  iiiiijtoiiin.
Aiiioiij;  his  |iiih)icatJon.sarc  "('atnlo(^MiiM.f  My  Kiijj-
li.H|i  liibniry  "  (liomlon.  IKW);  ••  (  atalonuc  of  a  lA-
hmryof  Works  rt'latin;?  to  AnH'rica"(IH.'V4):  "Cata-
l<ijjtio  Haisoiint'of  Kn^lish  Hililci("(lN.'>4):  •*  AiiuTi-
caii  BiltlioffrapluT"  (Chiswii-k.  IHW):  "t'atalojfiie
of  Aiuoricaii  lliwiks  in  tlu*  Lilirary  of  tli«^  Itritish
Musi'uni "  (Ix)iiclon.  1M7>;  "  Armlylical  Itulcx  to
Colonial  I)<K'uint'nts  of  Ni-w  .lorscy  in  the  State
PajMT  onUcs  of  Knj;lan<l"  (Now'  York,  iKjHj;
"CataloKiif  of  Anirrifan  Maps  ill  tho  Hritish  Mu-
w>nni "  (jjontlon.  IMJ));  "('atalopuo  of  Canadian
I^Miks  in  the  British  Museum  "  (IKW);  '•Catalo(;uo
of  Mpxican  and  othor  Simnish- American  anil  \Vi«st
Indian  Books  in  tho  British  Musoum"  (IHTiy);
**  Bihliothot;a  Am»'ricana"(lM<»l);  "  Historical  NuR-
ppts"  (1H<1'2):  -'Tim  Ilund)oldt  Lilmiry "  (IWW);
'•Historical  an<l  (ti'ogniphifal  Notes  on  tin-  h^rli-
est  Discoveries  in  America"  (New  Haven,  1N<»}»):
"  Bihiiotheca  historica"  {Boston.  1H70);  "SchtMlule
of  2,0(K)  American  Historical  Nuppets"  (Ijondon.
1H70):  "Seliastian  Cal)ot— John  Calwt  =  O"  (Bos-
ton and  London.  1870):  "  Itihliothe<-a  pi»oj;raphica
et  historica"  ([)art  i.,  London,  1K72):  "Anjerioan
BtK.ks  with  Tails  to 'Km"  (1873);  "  Bihies  in  the
Caxton  Exhibition "  (1878);  "History  of  the  Ox-
ford Caxton  Memorial  Bible"  (1878);  "  Photo-
Bibliopniphv "  (1878);  "Historical  Collections"
^  vols.,  188i-T>);  "Who  Spoils  our  New  Knplish
Books!"  (1885);  and  "  Itecollifticms  of  James
Lenox"  (188<l).  He  also  edited  im[)ortant  works
relatinu  to  American  history,  the  latest  InMnp  "The
Dawn  of  British  Trade  to  the  Kast  ln«lit«s"  (Lon-
don. 188C). — Another  s<m,  Benjamin  Franklin,
bibliojrnipher,  b.  in  Barnet,  Vt.,  1J>  Feb.,  1K{:{,  en-
tered Mimllebury  college,  but  on  ac(!ount  of  feeble
health  did  not  finish  his  course.  He  went  to  I^on-
don  to  Join  his  brother  Henry  in  1800.  enpape*!  in
the  booKselling  business  with  him,  married  a  daugh-
ter of  the  printer  Whittingham,  and  after  the
death  of  his  father-in-law  had  charge  of  the  (^his-
wick  press.  He  is  U.  S.  despatch  agent  in  London.  !
is  a  purchasing  ajjent  there  for  American  librariej*.  [
and  sends  English  publications  to  the  United
States.  Mr.  Stevens  has  e<lited  and  published
"The  Camjiaign  in  Virginia  in  1781,"  containing  I
dcKuments  relating  to  the  controversy  iM'tween  Sir
Henry  Clinton  and  I^ord  Cornwallis  (2  vols.,  Lon-  i
don,  1888),  and  is  engaged  in  compiling  a  cata-  i
logue  of  manuscript's  in  the  possession  of  KurojK'an
governments  relating  to  American  history,  and
especially  to  the  colonial  peritxl.

STEVKNS,  TiiaddeuH,  statesman,  b.  in  Dan-
ville. Caleclonia  co..  Vt..  4  April.  17!»2;  li.  in  Wa.sh-
ingt«>n,  I).  C.,  11  Aug..  1868.  He  was  the  child  of
poor  pare.nts,  and  was  sicklv  and  lame,  but  ambi-
tious, and  his  mother  toile<i  to  si-cure  for  him  an
education.  He  entered  Vermont  university  in  ,
1810.  and  after  it  was  closet!  in  1812  on  account  of
the  war  he  went  to  Dartmouth,  and  was  graduate<l  '
in  1814.  He  U'gan  the  study  of  law  in  I'eacham,
Vt.,  continued  it  while  teiu-hing  an  academy  in
York,  I*a..  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  Bel  Air.  j
M«l.,  establisheil  himself  in  1816  at  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  and  soon  gaine<l  a  high  reputation,  and  was
employed  in  many  important  suits.  He  devoted
himself  exclusively  to  his  profession  till  the  con-
test betwwn  the  strict  const  met  icmists.  who  nomi-
nated Amlrew  Jackson  for  the  presidency  in  1M2S.
and  the  national  Republicans,  who  afterwanl  Iv-
csme  the  Whigs,  drew  him  into  politics  as  an  ar-
dent 8upfM)rter  of  John  Quiiicy  Adams.  He  was
elected  to  the  legislature  in  WVi  and  the  two  suc-
ceetling  years. By  a  brilliant  »j)eech  in  1835,  he


r^Ha


-«^i^<:<-.,  ./v.


<iefi^il4N|  it  liill  to  alNilinh  tlie  rvwni:  -lied

common-M'hfMil  NVHieni  of  IVnn«yl>a  ISSS

he  was  a  iih-miInt  of  the  s*  ' •  n  utx.iwii  con-
vention, and  t<M)k  an  a^  i  n  it«  dcl«tr«,
but  liis  anti-«lavery  prinm .-.  .^il  ii«.f  iMTniit
him  to  sign  tlie  re*
|Mirt  n>cominend-
nig  an  instrument
that  restricted  the
fninchis<<  to  white
citizens.  He  was*
inemU'rof  Iheleg-
islatur*;  again  in
I8:{7.  and  in  l^JH,
when  the  election
dispute  between
the  Democratic
and  anti-Masoiiio
|>arties  I«h1  to  the
organization  of
rival  legislatures,
he  was  the  moot
prominent  mem-
U'r  of  the  Whig
and  anti-.Mas<mic
house. In  1838  ho

was  appointed  a  canal  commissioner.  He  was  re-
tume<l  to  the  legislature  in  1841.  He  gave  a  farm
to  Mrs.  Lydia  Jane  I*iers4>n.  who  had  written  |KX't-
ry  in  defence  of  the  common  s<"h<H)ls.  and  thus
aide<l  him  in  saving  them.  Having  incurre*!  losses
in  the  in>n  business,  he  n»mov«Hi  in  1842  to  Ijan-
caster.  Pa.,  and  for  several  years  devole<l  himself
to  legjil  practice.  (K'cupying  the  foremost  position
at  the  \wc.  In  184H  and  1850  he  was  electinl  t«)
congress  as  a  Whig,  and  anient ly  opisiMnl  the
Clay  compromise  mcasuri's  of  1K*)().  including  the
fugitive -slave  law.  On  retiring  fn)m  congress,
March.  185.'!.  he  ctrnfineil  hims<-lf  to  his  profession
till  1858.  when  he  was  returninl  to  congress  as  a
Hepublican.  From  that  time  till  his  death  ho  was
one  of  the  Republican  leaders  in  that  lioily,  the
chief  adv<K-ate  of  emanci|>ation.  and  the  repre-
sentative of  the  radical  secticm  of  his  |>arty.  llis
great  oratorical  i>owers  and  fore*'  of  character
earned  for  him  the  title,  applied  to  William  Pitt,
of  the  "great  commoner.'  He  urgwl  on  Presi-
dent Lincoln  the  justice  and  exiH«<liency  of  tho
emancifiation  proclamation,  took  the  lea4l  in  all-
measures  for  arming  and  for  enfranchising  the
negro,  and  initiattnl  and  prcsse<l  the  fourteenth
amendment  to  the  F'etleml  constitution.  During
the  war  he  intro<luce<l  and  carrie«l  acts  of  confisca-
tion, and  after  its  close  he  adv<H-ated  rigorous  mca«>
ures  in  reorgjinizing  the  southern  states  on  the
Imsis  of  universal  fre<>t|om.  He  was  chairman  of
the  commitU'e  <jf  ways  and  means  for  fhn'c  sessions.
Subsequently,  as  chairman  of  the  houw  committee
on  ni'onst ruction,  he  n'iH>rte<l  the  bill  which  divide*!
the  s«>uthern  states  into  five  military  districts,  am!
placw!  them  under  the  rule  of  army  ofllcers  until
they  should  adopt  constitutions  that  conceded  suf-
frage and  equal  rights  to  the  blacks.  In  a  i|)eech
that  he  iiia<le  in  congress  on  24  Feb.,  1808,  he  pro-
{H>sed  the  im|)eachment  of  Pri'sideiit  Johnson.  He
was  ap|K)inte<!  one  of  the  committe«>  of  seven  to
prt>[>ar«'  articles  of  im|)eachment,  and  was  chairman
of  the  >H>anl  of  managers  that  was  ap{tointc<!  on
the  part  of  the  hou><'  to  contluct  the  trial.  He  was
exceitlingly  |>ositivein  his c«»ny|ct ions,  andaltackeil
his  adversaries  with  bitter  denunciations  and  sar-
cjvstic  taunts,  yet  he  was  genial  am!  witty  among
his  friends,  and  was  noted  for  his  uniform,  thougn
at  times  impulsive,  a«'ts  of  cliarity.  While  skep-
tical in  his  ri'ligiuus  opinions,  he  rt»enled  slighting


678


STEVENS


STEVENS


renmrks  regarding  the  (Miristiun  faith  as  an  instilt
to  the  memory  of  his  devout  motlier.  whom  he
venen»tetl.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  by  the  University  of  Vermont  in  18G7.
He  chose  to  be  buried  in  a  private  cemetery,  ex-
plaining in  the  epitaph  that  he  pre|)ared  for  his
tomb  that  the  public  cemeteries  were  limited  by
th^ir  charter-rules  to  the  white  race,  and  that  he
preferred  to  illustrate  in  his  death  the  nrinciple
that  he  ha<l  advocated  through  his  life  of  "etjual-
ity  of  man  before  his  Creator."  The  tomb  is  in
a  large  lot  in  Ijancaster,  which  he  left  as  a  burial-
place  for  those  who  cannot  afford  to  pay  for  their
graves.  He  left  a  mrt  of  his  estate  to  found  an
()rj)han  asylum  in  Lancaster,  to  be  open  to  both
white  and  colored  children. — His  nephew,  Thad-
deus  Morrel,  phvsician,  b.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,
29  Aug.,  1830;  d".  there,  8  Nov.,  1885,  studied
medicine  at  the  Indiana  central  medical  college
and  at  Jefferson  college,  Philadelphia,  obtained
his  degree  of  M.  D.  in  1853,  and  first  settled  at
Fairland.  Ind.,  but  removed  to  Indianapolis.  Hav-
ing made  a  special  study  of  medical  chemistry,  he
was  strongly  attached  to  the  idea  of  state  medi-
cine, and  labored  unceasingly  until  a  public  board
of  health  was  established  in  Indiana,  of  which  he
was  the  first  secretary.  He  was  professor  of  medi-
cal jurisprudence  and  toxicology  in  the  Indiana
medical  college  and  in  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons  at  Indianapolis,  edited  for  some  time
the  "  Indiana  Journal  of  Medicine,"  and  was  after-
ward jvsaistant  editor  of  the  "  Lancet  and  Observer,"
published  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  His  publications
mclude  brochures  on  "  Expert  Testimony,"  '"  State
Boards  of  Health,"  and  "Automatic  Filtration."

STEVENS,  Thomas,  bicyclist,  b.  in  Great  Berk-
hamstead,  Herts,  England,  24  Dec,  1855.  He  was
educated  at  the  village  school  of  his  native  place,
and  completed  his  course  in  1869.  Subsequently
he  came  to  the  United  States,  and  became  an  en-
thusiastic bicyclist.  He  conceived  the  idea  of  mak-
ing a  tour  around  the  world  on  his  wheel,  and,
starting  from  San  Francisco  on  22  April,  1884,
made  his  wayacross  thecontinentof  America. thence
to  England,  and  through  Europe  to  Constantinople,
where  he  crossed  to  Asia.  His  progress  through
several  countries  in  Asia  was  prohibited  by  their
governments,  and  at  times  his  advance  was  very
■difficult,  owing  to  the  hostility  of  the  natives,  but
ultimately  persevering,  he  reached  Japan,  whence
he  went  by  steamer  to  San  Francisco,  landing  on
24  Dec,  1886.  His  experiences  were  given  m  a
series  of  letters  to  a  magazine  which  he  has  since
collected  in  book-form  as  "  Around  the  World  on
a  Bicycle  "  (2  vols..  New  York,  1887-'8).

STlEVENS,  Thomas  Holdup,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Charleston,  S.  C,  22  Feb.,  1795;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  22  Jan.,  1841.  He  lost  his  parents,
whose  name  was  Holdup,  in  early  life,  and  was
adopted  by  a  citizen  of  Charleston,  who  procured
for  nim  a  midshipman's  warrant  in  1809.  In  the
beginning  of  the  war  of  1812  he  volunteered  for
service  on  the  lakes,  was  assigned  to  duty  under
Capt.  Samuel  Angus  on  the  Niagara  frontier,  and
took  part  in  a  night  attack  on  the  enemy's  works
opposite  Black  Rock,  preparatory  to  the  contem-
plated descent  of  Gen.  Alexander  Smythe  on  the
Canada  shore.  He  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  a
<letachment  that  captured  the  enemy's  artillery,
and  of  a  scaling-party  that  dislodged  the  British
grenadiers  by  burning  their  barracks,  and,  although
wounded  in  the  right  hand  by  a  (canister  shot,  re-
mained after  the  naval  force  had  retreated,  and,
with  two  other  midshipmen  and  five  seamen,  crossed
Niagara  river  at  great  risk  in  a  leaky  canoe. For


his  bravery  in  this  action  he  was  made  a  lieu-
tenant, 24  July,  1813,  while  he  was  with  Com.
Oliver  H.  Perry  at  Erie.  Pa.,  assisting  in  the  build-
ing and  equipment  of  the  lake  squadron.  In  the
battle  of  ijaKe  Erie  he  commanded  the  sloop
"  Trippe,"  and  fought  against  the  rear  of  the  ene-
my's line,  passing  ah^d  of  the  "Tigress"  and
"  l*orcupine,"  pouring  grape  and  canister  into  the
"Queen  Charlotte"  until  she  struck  her  colors,
and,  with  Stephen  Champlin,  chasing  and  bringing
back  two  of  the  enemy's  vessels  when  they  tri^  to
escape.  For  these  achievements  he  was  voted  a  sil-
ver medal  by  congress,  and  presented  with  a  sword
by  the  citizens  of  Charleston.  He  was  ordered  in
1814  to  the  frigate  "Java,"  which  Com.  Perry
was  fitting  out  for  a  cruise  in  the  Mediterranean.
In  1815,  by  legislative  enactment,  he  changed  his
name  to  Stevens,  which  was  that  of  his  early
benefactor.  In  1819-'20  he  was  attached  to  the
frigate  "  Constellation."  He  performed  valuable
service  in  the  cruise  of  Com.  David  Porter  for
the  suppression  of  piracy  in  the  West  Indies,
commanding  .successively  the  "  Asp,"  the  "  Jackal,"
and  the  schooner  "  Shark,"  of  the  Mosquito  fleet,
being  promoted  master-commandant  on  3  March,
1825.  His  last  command  afloat  was  the  "Onta-
rio "  sloop,  which  was  attached  to  Com.  James  Bid-
die's  Meaiterranean  squadron  in  1830-'2.  He  was
made  a  captain,  at  that  time  the  highest  rank  in
the  service,  on  27  Jan.,  1836,  and  commanded  the
navy-yard  and  station  at  Wiu>;hington  until  his
sudden  death. — His  son,  Thomas  Holdnp,  naval
officer,  b.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  27  May,  1819,  was
appointed  a  midshipman  on  14  Dec,  1836,  served  as
aide  to  President  lyler  in  1842,  received  his  com-
mission as  lieutenant  on  10  May,  1849,  and  in
1852-'5  commanded  the  schooner  "  Ewing  "  in  sur-
veys of  the  California  and  Oregon  coasts.  When
the  civil  war  be-

fan  he  applied  fftr
uty  at  the  front,
was  ordered  to
command  the"Ot-
tawa,"  one  of  the
ninety -day  gun-
boats then  build-
ing, raised  a  crew
of  volunteers  at
Erie,  Pa.,  and
joined  the  South
Atlantic  block-
ading squadron  of
Admiral  Samuel
P.  Du  Pont.
While  command-
ing a  division
of  gun-boats,  he
drove  the  fleet  of
Com.  Josiah  Tat-
nall  under  the
protection  of  the

forts  at  Port  Royal,  4  Nov.,  1861.  In  the  battle
of  Port  Royal  he  engaged  Fort  Walker  at  short
range.  On  1  Jan.,  1863,  he  had  an  engagement
with  Com.  Tatnall's  Mosquito  fleet  in  Savannah
river.  His  command^was  the  leading  vessel  in  a
combined  attack  of  the  navy  and  land  forces  on
Fort  Clinch,  3  March,  1862,  and  in  the  capture  of
the  town  of  St.  Mary's,  Ga.,  and  commanded  the
first  expedition  up  St.  John's  river,  occupying  May-
port,  Jacksonville.  Magnolia,  and  Palatkaand  Fort
Steele  and  Fort  Finnegan,  and  capturing  the  yacht
"America."  He  left  the  South  Atlantic  block-
ading s<niadron  early  in  May,  1862,  to  take  com-
mand oi  the  steamer  "Maratanza," was  present


STEVENS


8TKVRNH


67»


At  tho  Imttlo  of  W«(t  Point,  mimI  comnMndMl  th«  I
first  ex|)tMlition  to  CiiinU'rlniul  ami  Whit4^>  llotue
to  opt'ii  Jhiih'5  riv««r.  tnkiiif;  |ttirt  in  the  ilonioii-  !
stretion  iipiinxt  I'utonthuri;  iiiul  tli<<  Imttle  of  Mul-
vern  Hill.  On  4  July,  18(12,  he  c>«|itim><l  the  ConfcMl-
emte  gun-lM>Ht  "Tettzer." lli-  wan  pruinotcNl  roni-
niandcr  on 16  July,  and  ordered  t«>  the  inm-i-ltid
"  iMonitor,"  with  which  be  covered  the  flank  of  the
army  on  James  river  and  itJi  rear  durinj;  the  with-
drawal from  the  iN'tiinsulo. In  .S-plemlter,  while
attached  to  Com.  Charles  Wilkw's  flvinjj  M|uailron,
he  captured  Ave  prizes,  and  chaMe<I  tlie  privateer
"  Florida"  on  the  liahanm  Itanks. On  7  Oct.,  IHU'i.
off  St.  (tc*)rire,  Ik*rmuda,  he  stnp|)t««l  the  i^eanier
"(ila^liator,*  which  ha<l  the  apiM'arunce  of  a  ItliN-k-
a»le-runner,  while  .xhe  was  under  the  convoy  of  the
British  sl<K>p-of-war  "  I>t'.siK>rato,"  ami  both  c<»m-
manders  cleanMl  their  dwRs*  for  action. FWly  in
August,  1803,  he  a!»ume<l  command  of  the  iron-  i
clad  "  l'at«p8co,"  and  in  the  enpigements  with  the  |
fortfl  in  Charleston  harlM)r  he  |K>rformiHl  callant  i
services. After  a  severe  engagement  with  tne  liat-  i
teries  on  Sullivan's  island,  he  led  a  lx>at  attwk
against  Fort  Sumter. Afterward ho  commandeil
the  "Oneida,"  of  the Westeni (Julf  blockading
squadron,  but  was  temporarily  transferre<l  to  the  >
iron-clad  "  Winnel>ago '  for  tho  o[»erations  before
Mobile  in  Julv,  18(S4,  in  which  he  was  conspicuous
for  the  hantlling  of  his  vessel  and  his  (M'rsonal  dar-
ing. He  eommande<l  the  "  Oneida  "  off  the  coast  I
of  Texas  in  1865,  was  commissioned  captain  on  26  '
July,  1866,  commrKiore  on  20  Nov.,  1872.  and  rear-  ^
a^lminil  on  27  Oct.,  1879,  and,  after  commanding
tho  Pacific  fleet  and  acting  as  president of  the
board  of  visitors  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academv.  he  was
retireti  on  27  May,  1881. — His  son,  Thomas  Holdup,  ,
is  a  lifMitenant  in  the  U.  S.  navv.
' STEVENS,  Walter  Hustcd,  soldier,  b,  in  Penn  I
Yan,  N.  Y..  24  Aug..  1827 ;  d.  in  Vera  Cruz,  Mexi-
co, 12  Nov..  1867. lie  was  gnuluated  at  the  U.  S.  ^
military  academy  in 1848,  and  commissioned  as
lieutenant  of  engineers. He  was  engaged  in  con-
structing and  repairing  fortifications  at  New  Or-
leans, Ija.,  built  two  forts  on  the  coast  of  Texas,
removed  the  great  Colonwlo  river  raft  by  order  of
congress,  and  built  the  Shi{)  shoal  light-house  in
18.5S-'6,  and  superintended  the  erection  of  the  cus-
tom-house at  New  Orleans  after  Maj.  Pierre  T.  (t,
lieauregard was  ealleil  away,  and  also built  the
custom-house  at  Galveston.  Tex. In May. 1861.
having  resigned  his  comnnssion  and  enten^i the
Confctlerate  sen'ice,  he  accompanied  (ten.  lk>Hun'-
g»ni  U)  Virginia  as  his  chief  engineer. Ho was
made  a  brigadier-general,  and  was  the  chief  engi-
neer of  the  Army  of  Northern  Viririnia  until  the
autumn  of  18(J2.  when  he  was  placed  in  charte  of
the fortifications  of Kichmond. He  completed
these  defences  and  again  liecame  chief  engineer  of
Ivce's  army,  and  continueil  as  such  to  the  close  of
the  war. He  then  s<iught  and  <»btain«Hl  employ-
ment as  an  engineer  on  the  Mexican  railway  be-
tween Vera  Ouz  and  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  at
the  time  of his  death  was  its  su|>erintendent  an<l
constructing  engineer. An  Knglish  company  was
building  this  road,  and  during  the  revolution  in
which  .Maximilian  was  dethrontnl  (ten.  Stevens  re-
maine<l  in  s<ile  charge  of  it,  and  he  skilfully  pre-
servfvl  thej»ro|K>rtv  through  that  difllcult  peri<Ml.

STEVENS,  Walter  Le  Conte,  physicist,  b.  in
C.onlon  county,  (la..  17  June,  184*.  He  is  the
nephew  of  John  and  Joseph  I^'  Conte.  After  his
gnwl nation  at  the  University  of  South  Carolina  in
1868  he  sf)ent  the  year  1876-'7  at  the  University
of  Virginia,  and  meanwhile  had  held  I  he  professor-
ship of  chemistry  at  Uglethor|»e  college,  Atlanta,


QtL.  in  1R71-*3.  and  taught  phyMm  at CI
■OMnny.  .Savannah,  (iit..  in  1N7J^'6. Pmf.  StoTMW
then  aettled  in  N'  md,  after  ti'vching  wv*

enl  yemm,  vrmiM'n  -J  l«i  ih**<-hairnf  mnth«^

niaticH  and  phyM<  >•  m I'a- 1
in  HnMtklyn. In  C4>nni-<'ti<>ii

has  invented  varioui*  imprw.,^.  i  <■.-!. m

ap|Miratiis,  of  which  his  orsan-p  ter  and

revers»il»le  stervo»<"o|i«'  are  tne  Ik-'  .  <j«"»crip-

tions  of  which  have  Uvn  publiHhM  in  the"  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Science."  He  is  a  menilicr  of  ari-
eiitific  wK-ietiea  and  Mcretanr  of  the  Brookljn
acailemv  of  science  and  art.  Ilie  honorary  degrN
of  Ph.  b.  was  conferral  on  him  by  the  I'nireraitjr
of  (ie«)rgia  in  \*<H2,  in  recognition  <if  his  writings
on  "  Physiological  Optii>,"  which  won>  publiidied
simultaneously  in  the  "  Ameri<-an  Journal  of  8ci*
eiice  "  and  the  liondon  "  Philosophical  Magazine  "
in  1881 -'2.  Pn»f.  Stevens  has  written  for  tha
"  North  American  Iteview,"  the  "  Popular  Sdenoa
Monthly,"  and  other  journals.  pre|iared  the  parta
relating  to  the  physics  of  the  earth's  crust,  the
ocean,  and  the  atmosphere  in  "  Apjiletons'  Physical
(ieognifihy  "  (New  York,  IHmT).  ami  rewn»tc  J.  Dor-
man  St«'<'l'es's  "  Poimlar  Phvsics"  (Inhh).

STEVENS.  William  Haron,  P.  K.  bi«hop.  b.
in  IWh.  Me..  V.i  Julv,  iHirt;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  11  June,  1887.  He  n>c«'ived  his  early  educa-
tion at  I'hillips  Andover  academy,  but,  bis  health
failing,  he  went
abroad  and  spent
two  years  in  trav-
el. At  the  end
of  that  time  he
retunied  and  pur-
sued the  study  of
medicine  at  Dart-
mouth, receiving
his  degree  from
this  college  in
1837,  and  also  one
from  the  Mwlical
college  of  South
Carolina.  He  went
to  Savannah.  Ga.,
upon  graduating,
where  he  prac-
tise«l  his  profes-
sion for  five  vears.
In  1H41  he  re-
ceivetl the ap-

iMiintment  of  sUte  historian  of  Georgia,  and  pub-
lished several  volumes,  among  which  were  "  The
Historical  Collections  "  (.Savannah.  1841^'2).  AUmi
this  time  his  attention  was  directwl  t<»wanl  the
ministrv  of  the  Protestant  Kpis4'opal  chun-h,  and.
relinquishing  the  pn>fession  of  me<licin€>.  ho  liegaii
a  course  of  stu<ly  in  pn-paration  for  onlers.  Ik-
was  onlainetl  deacon  in  Christ  church,  .Savannah,
Ga..  by  Bishop  Elliott.  28  Feb..  1843,  and  organ-
izeti  and  Utok  charge  of  Kminanuel  church,  Athens,
Ga.,  of  which  he  Uvame  re<-tor  on  his  advance-
ment to  the  priesthood,  7  Jan..  1844.  In  this  year
als<i  he  was  electc<l  professor  of  U'lles-lettroa,  ora-
tory. an«l  moral  philivwiphy  in  the  University  of
(}e«')rgia.  In  184v  he  was  sent  as  a  deputy  to  the
general  convention  from  hw  diocese.  In  1848  he
actvpte<I  the  nvtorship  of  St.  Andrew's  church,
Pbilatlelphia,  Pa.,  an<l  receive*!  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  The  con-
vention of  the  diocese  having  elwte<l  him  assist-
ant bishop,  he  waa  oonaecratwl  in  Su  Andrew**
chunh.  2  Jan..  1889.  and  Union  college  conferred
uiM>n  him  the  degn«  i>f  LL.  D.  Upon  Um  datthof
Bi«hop  Alonzo  Potter  in  1865,  he  baoaiM  biahop  of


^V/,9aje.<rp\/  d^eZ^.j


680


STEVENSON


STEVENSON


Pennsylvania.  The  diocese  of  Pennsylvania  was
divided  in  1865,  the  western  counties  l)eing  erected
into  a  new  dio<!e.se,  which  took  the  name  of  Pitts-
burg. Again  in  1871  another  division  v/aa  made
by  the  setting  off  of  the  diocese  of  central  Penn-
sylvania. In  the  mean  time  Bishop  Stevens  had
been  appointed  to  the  charge  of  the  American
Episcopal  churches  on  the  continent  of  Euro[)e,
and  matle  one  or  more  visits  of  supervision  during
the  six  years  of  his  oversight.  At  the  Pan-Angli-
can council  in  1878  he  was  chosen  to  preach  the
closing  sermon,  which  he  did  in  St.  Paul's  church,
London.  He  was  in  feeble  health  for  many  years
during  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  and  at  last,  in
1886,  Bishop  Whittaker  was  elected  his  assistant,
and  took  upon  himself  most  of  the  duties  of  the
episcopate.  His  works  include  "  Discourses  before
the  Historical  Society  of  Georgia  "  (Savannah,  1841) ;
"  Historv  of  Silk-Culture  in  Georgia"  (1841);
"  History  of  Georgia"  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1847) ;
"  Parables  of  the  New  Testament  Unfolded "
(1855) ;  "  The  Bow  in  the  Cloud  "  (1855) ;  "  Home
Service"  (1856);  '■  The  Lord's  Day  "  (1857);  "  His-
toiy  of  St.  Andrew's  Church,  Philadelphia  "  (1858) ;
"  Sabbaths  of  Our  Lord  "  (1872) ;  "  Sermons  "  (New
York,  1879) ;  and  many  essays,  charges,  and  tracts.
STEVENSON,  Alexander Allan, Canadian

Srinter,  b.  in  Riccarton,  Ayrshire,  Scotland,  in
anuary,  1829.  He  came  with  his  family  to  ('an-
ada  in  1846,  and  learned  the  printing  trade  in
Montreal.  In  1853  he  aided  in  establishing  the
"  Sun  "  newspaper,  and  subsequently  embarked  in
a  general  printmg  business,  which  he  conducted  till
1879.  In  1855  he  assisted  in  organizing  the  Mon-
treal field-battery,  in  1856  he  became  its  com-
mander, and  he  participated  with  this  corps  in
1858  in  the  military  celebration  in  connection  with
the  laying  of  the  first  Atlantic  cable,  his  command
thus  being  the  only  British  military  organization  to
carry  the  union  Jack  through  the  streets  of  New
York  since  the  evacuation.  In  1874  he  received
the  Conservative  nomination  to  the  Dominion  par-
liament for  Montreal,  west,  but  was  defeated,
though  his  opponent  was  afterward  tmseated  on
the  charge  of  britery  by  agents.  He  has  since
been  nominated  twice,  but  refused  to  serve.  He
has  taken  an  active  part  in  municipal  matters  in
Montreal,  and  is  president  of  the  council  of  arts
and  manufactures  of  the  province  of  Quebec.

STEVENSON,  Andrew,  statesman,  b.  in  CiJ-
peper  county,  Va.,  in  1784;  d.  at  Blenheim,  his
estate,  in  Albemarle  county.  Va.,  25  Jan.,  1857.  He
studied  law,  won  a  high  place  in  his  profession,
and  in  1804  was  chosen  to  the  state  house  of  dele-
gates, of  which,  after  serving  several  terms,  he
l)ecame  speaker.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
Democrat,  serving  from  1  Dec,  1828,  till  2  June,
1834,  when  he  resigned.  From  1827  till  1834  he
was  speaker  of  the  house.  From  1836  till  1841
Mr.  Stevenson  was  minister  to  England.  On  his
return  he  became  rector  of  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia, and  he  devoted  the  rest  of  his  life  to  the
duties  of  that  office  and  to  agricultural  pursuits. —
His  son,  John  White,  senator,  b.  in  Kichmond,
Va.,  4  May,  1812 ;  d.  in  Covington,  Ky,,  10  Aug.,
1886,  was  educated  at  Hampden  Sidney  and  the
University  of  Virginia,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1832,  and  in  1841  settled  in  Covington,  Ky.,  where
he  practised  law  with  success,  and  served  in  the
Kentucky  legislature  in  1845-'7.  He  was  a  leatit^r
of  the  State  constitutional  convention  of  1849,  was
chosen  a  delegate  to  the  Democratic  national  con-
ventions of  1848,  1852,  and  1856,  and  from  1857
till  1861  sat  in  the  lower  house  of  congress.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  Union  conven-


tion of  1866,  and  in  1867  he  was  chosen  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  state.  The  governor,  John  L.
Helm,  died  five  days  after  his  inauguration,  and
Mr.  Stevenson  acted  as  governor  till  1868,  and  then
was  elected  to  the  office  by  the  largest  majority
that  was  ever  given  to  a  candidate  in  the  state,
serving  till  1871.  In  the  last  year  he  took  his  seat
in  the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  served  till  1877.  On
the  expiration  of  his  term  he  became  professor  of
commercial  law  and  contracts  in  the  law-school  at
Cincinnati,  Ohio.  In  1880  he  was  chairman  of  the
Democratic  national  convention  that  nominated
Gen.  Winfield  S.  Hancock  for  the  presidency.  In
1884  he  was  president  of  the  American  bar  associ-
ation. He  was  a  commissioner  to  prepare  a  "  Code
of  Practice  in  Civil  and  Criminal  Cases  for  Ken-
tucky" (1854).

StEVENSON,  James,  ethnologist,  b.  in  Mays-
ville,  Kv.,  24  Dec,  1840 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25
July,  1^88.  Before  he  was  sixteen  years  old  he
was  engaged  in  geologic  work  for  the  government
surveys  of  the  northwest  under  Ferdinand  V.  Hay-
den.  He  spent  several  winters  among  the  Black-
foot  and  Sioux  Indians,  studying  their  languages,
customs,  and  traditions,  and  made  an  exploration
of  the  Yellowstone  country.  When  the  civil  war
began  he  joined  the  National  army,  and  served  till
the  close  of  hostilities.  He  then  resumed  his  ex-
plorations in  the  northwest  in  connection  with  the
engineer  corps,  and  afterward  with  the  U.  S.  geo-
logical survey,  of  which  he  became  the  executive
officer.  He  followed  Columbia  and  Snake  rivers
to  their  sources,  made  the  ascent  of  Great  Teton
mountain,  discovered  a  new  pass  across  the  Rocky
mountains,  assisted  Prof.  Hayden  in  the  sun'ey  of
Yellowstone  park,  and  was  instrumental  in  having
it  made  a  government  reservation.  He  was  con-
tinued as  executive  officer  of  the  survey,  under
Maj.  John  W.  Powell,  and  detailed  for  research  in
connection  with  the  bureau  of  ethnology  of  the
Smithsonian  institution,  exploring  the  cliff  houses
of  Arizona  and  New  Mexico,  and  mvestigating  the
history  and  religious  myths  of  the  Navajos  and
the  Ziiiii,  Moqui,  and  other  Pueblo  Indians.

STEVENSON,  John  D.,  soldier,  b.  in  Staun-
ton, Va.,  8  June,  1821.  He  spent  two  years  in  the
College  of  South  Carolina,  was  graduated  in  law
at  Staunton  in  1841,  and  in  1842  began  practice  in
Franklin  county,  Mo.  He  organized  a  volunteer
company  in  1846,  and  served  in  Gen.  Stephen  W.
Kearny's  invasion  of  New  Mexico.  After  his  re-
turn he  removed  to  St.  Louis,  was  frequently  a
meiiiber  of  the  legislature,  president  for  one  term
of  the  state  senate,  and  in  1861  was  an  earnest  sup-
porter of  the  Union.  In  that  year  he  raised  tne
7th  Missouri  regiment,  and  during  the  siege  of
Corinth  commanded  the  district  of  Savannah.  He
then  led  a  brigade  in  Tennessee,  was  made  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  29  Nov.,  1862,  served  in
the  Vieksburg  campaign,  and  made  a  charge  at
Champion  Hill  that  broke  the  enemy's  left  flank.
He  led  a  successful  expedition  to  drive  the  Con-
federates from  northern  Louisiana,  commanded
the  district  of  Corinth,  and  then  occupied  and
fortified  Decatur,'  Ala.  On  8  Aug.,  1864,  being  left
without  a  command,  he  resigned ;  but  he  was  re-
commissioned  and  given  the  district  of  Harper's
Ferry.  During  the  reconstruction  period  he  was
in  charge  of  northern  Georgia.  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  was  made  brevet  major-general  of  vol-
unteers, and  in  1867,  for  his  services  at  Champion
Hill,  brevetted  brigadier-general  in  the  regular
army,  in  which  he  had  been  commissioned  a  colo-
nel on  28  July,  1866.  He  left  the  army  in  1871,
and  has  since  practised  law  in  St.  Louis.


STKVKNSON


STKWART


681


STKVENSON.  Surah  llarkMt,  nhvaidHn.  b.  in
Buffnl"  (irovi>.  111.,  a  Koh..  IK4H.  Shi«  wiw  (friMlu-
•teil  at  tho  StitU'  university,  HlfMimiiiKton,  III.,  in
1868,  and  ton  yt-ars  later  wils  studying  nt  tho  Stnith
KonMinffton  wiontiflo  »oli<x)ls.  liontlon.  On  hor
r»'turn  to  tlio  L'nitoil  States nho  ontoro^l  thoW«>man*H
mwiioal  colloffc,  CliicHtro,  wliore  s|jo  wiu»  ((mduutitl
in  1875,  Sinof  that  time  !»ho  has  hold  ««vrml  i»ri>-
fossorship!*  in  tho  Haino  collcp'  and  inanv  |MM«t><  of
honor  in  othor  mo«li<'al  assiH-iationH  am"!  institu-
tions. In  IH70  slio  was  adolopito  from  tho  lUinoiH
state  mwlical  wx-ietv  to  tho  .Vmorioan  n»o<lioal  as-
sociation at  I'hiladolphin,  and  was  the  nrst  woman
physician  to  l»  olo«!to<l  a  niondn'r  of  that  Ixxly.
She  was  one  of  tho  promoters  of  tho  Homo  for
incurables  and  Tniininjj  school  for  nursi-s  in  Chi-
cago, and  outsitlo  of  her  larije  nrwtice  has  found
time  to  publish  works  on  "  Hiolouv  "  (2  vols..  New
York.  IHTr))  and  "  Phvsiolopv"  (("h'icjiKo.  1HH()).

STKVENSOX.  ThoniaM  "(ireely,  s<ildior,  b.  in
Boston.  Mjiss.,  :{  Feb..  \KU\;  d.  near  S|Mittsylvania,
Va..  10  May.  1H(M.  He  early  onton-d  tho 'militia,
antl  at  tho'o|H>nin>;  of  the  civil  war  wivs  major  of
the  4th  infantry  battalion.  He  ha«l  a  liijfh  reputa-
tion Jis  a  drill-master,  ami  traintnl  a  larjre  numltor
of  youii}?  men  that  afterward  «'nten'd  the  National
army.  After  doing  a  month's  pirrison  duty  at
Fort  Independence,  he  n*cruitod  the  24th  Massa-
chusetts rejjiraent  in  tho  autumn  of  1861,  and  com-
manded it  in  tho  capture  of  Koanoke  island  and
New  Ik>nie  in  18<12.  After  holding;  the  outpost
defences  of  the  latter  place  for  seveml  montlit>.  he
conducttnl  several  expeditions  within  the  enemy's
lines,  and  on  6  Sept.  successfully  defciidetl  Wash-
inpton.  N.  ('.,  ajjainst  a  sui)orior  force,  lie  knl  a
brigade  against  GoldslH>ro  and  Kinston  later  in
the  year,  and  in  the  ex{KMliti«>n  against  Charleston
'  in  February,  ISiiS,  having  been  ma«le  briga«lier-gon-
eral  of  volunteers  on  27  Doc.,  18U2.  He  aidwl  in
the  rwluction  of  Morris  ishi'id.  and  led  the  rewrves
in  the  assault  on  Fort  Wagner.  After  a  visit  to
the  north  to  recruit  his  health,  he  was  placeil  at
tho  head  of  the  1st  division  of  the  9th  cor[>s.  He
wius  killeil  at  the  head  of  his  tr(X)j)s  in  the  Imttleof
Sp«ittsvlvania.  A  memoir  of  (len.  Stevenson  was
printed  j)rivatelv  after  his  death  (( ■and>ridge).

STEW ARD.TIieopliilus  (ilould, clergyman,  b.
in  (touldtown,  N.  J.,  17  April,  1H4:{.  His  jwrents
were  of  African  descent.  He  was  liccnso«l  to  pn-ach
at  twenty  years  of  ago.  and  at  tweiitv-ono  entore<l
the  ministry  of  the  Afrit-an  MetluMiist  Episconal
chun-h,  and  was  stationed  in  Camden.  N.  .1.  lie
went  to  the  south  in  lH(W).and  preache«l  and  tonight
in  South  Carolina  and  (leorgia. He  wrote  the

filatform  upon  which  the  Kepublican  party  of
leorgia  wiis  first  organized.  an<l  returning  to  the
north  in  1871,  bv  apjiointment  of  his  church,  ri--
oiHjnod  the  missions  in  the  island  of  Hayti.  On
his  return  he  took  a  full  course  in  theology  at  the
Protestant  Kpiscopal  divinity-s<-hool  in  I'liiladel-
phia,  and  alst)  studied  in  the  S<'hool  of  elocution
there.  He  has  written  an  "  Kssjiy  on  Death,  Hades,
and  the  Resurrection  " ;  "  Tho  Knd  of  the  Wt>rld  " ;
and  "(ionosis  He-roa<l"  (Philadelphia,  1885).

STEWARUSON,  Tlionia.H.  physician,  b,  in
Philadelphia.  Pa..  10  July.  1807:  d.  there,  30  June.
1878.  He  was  gnuluated  at  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  Tniversitv  of  Pennsylvania  in  1830,
ami  continued  his  studies  in  Paris'.  On  his  return
he  wjus  ass<KMatod  with  various  hospitals  in  Phila-
delphia, and  was  an  active  ineml)or  of  the  boarti  of
health  for  many  years.  Aljout  1845  he  removed  to
Savannah,  (ta.,' where  he  mrnle  a  s|>ecialty  «>f  the
treatment  of  yellow  fever.  In  IWJO  he  intr<Klu««il
into this country the new silk-worm, Bourbyx


I  eynthia.  which  hp  fml  on  Imrm  of  thr  ailantna-
'  tree. Ilo  was  the  author  «>f  ■


l.ifr


f  I»r.  Ow-

Ixiuia's

•  fPhlla-

U).
r.  l>.  in


hani"  (Philndet^.hia.  1M4):  t
"  K«>s«irchoM  on  Kmphrwma  of  i
dolphin.  1h:{M):  and  «<4ni<Nl.  will
son's  "  Principlos  of  MiNliejne  "  1 1

STEWART.  A Ipxandrr  HnuMi  ~.i.ii
Knglaml  alsait  1740:  d.  in  Deivmbi-r.  171>4.  llr
was  Hp|M)iiited  captain  in  the:{7th  fiMit  in  KHl.i^d
reacho<l  the  gnwlo  of  cohmd  in  I7H0.  During  the
Uovolutionary  war  ho  mtvo<1  in  the  noulh.  In  May.
17K1.  ho  commando4l  the  Hhli<h  torx'i'*  in  Soiitii
Carolina,  and  was  defeated  at  Kutnw  Sprinfr*  on
8  S»«pt.  by  (ten.  Nathanaol  (invne.  l<oing  «iuli»«-
quently  compoll»-<l  to  retreat  t**  < 'harlojtton.  In
171H)  he  wa.«»  made  a  major-gonernl.

STEWART.  Aloxandor.  Cannilian  iurist.  b.
in  Halifax.  Nova  Scotia.  :{0  Jan..  171M;  u.  there,  1
Jan.,  18<{8.  He  was  the  M»n  of  a  Scottish  Presby-
terian minister,  was  educated  at  the  Halifax  gram-
mar-school. an<l  became  a  clerk  in  the  onlnance
department.  He  afterwanl  ontoro<l  a  house  that
wasengagi'd  in  tho  West  India  tnwie.  and  Mx>n  be-
came a  momlier  of  the  firm,  but  »>tudi«-<l  law  and
was  admitted  to  tho  hir  in  |h22.  He  liecame  a
meml)er  of  tho  Nova  Scotia  as)«»-nd»lv  in  182fl.  the
legislative  council  in  1K37,  and  in  1846  of  the  execu-
tive C4iuncil.  In  1840  he  lM«came  master  of  the  rolls
and  judge  of  the  vice-admiralty  court,  and  in  1856
he  was  made  a  com|)ani<>n  of  the  Hath.

STEWART.  Alexander  Peter,  siddicr.  K  in
Rogersvillo,  Hawkins  co.,  Tenn.,  2  Oct.,  1821.  Oe
was  graduato<l  at  the  l'.  S.  military  academy  in
1K42,  l»ocame  2<1  lieutenant  in  the  :Ul  artillery,  and
was  acting  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  at
the  wademy  from  lH4ii  till  31  May,  1845,  when
he  resigned.  He  was  then  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  natural  and  exiH>rimental  philosophy
in  Cuml>erland  university.  Tcnn.,  in  1845- '9,  and
in  Na.shville  university  in  lK'»4-'5.  and  became
citv  surveyor  of  Nashville  in  1H55.  Ho  was  ai*-
|)ointed  by  (lov.  Isham  (».  Harris  major  of  the
corps  of  artillery  in  the  provi.*ional  army  f>f  Ten-
nessee, 17  May,  18(Jl,and  U-came  brigmlior-general
in  the  Confe<!erato  army,  8  Nov.,  184J1,  major-gen-
eral, 2  June,  18(K{,  and  lieutenant-general,  2^{  June.
18<M.  He  was  engaged  in  the  liattles  of  Ih'lmont.
Shiloh,  Perry villo,  MurfnH>sls)ro', and  thecam|Miign
about  HtMtver's  (tap,  Tullahoma,  ChattaiUM>gn,  and
through  the  Dalton-Atlanta  iain|>aign  un<ler  (ten.
Joseph  K.  Johnston.  He  was  with  (ien.  John  B.
HcHxl  in  his  movements  in  the  n^ar  of  (»on.  .Sher-
man's army,  and  destrovtHl  tho  railroa4ls  and  cap-
turoil  tho  garrison  at  Uig  .Shantv  and  Acworln.
He  was  at  Franklin  and  Na.shvifle  under  Hood,
and  at  Cole's  Farm,  in  North  Camlina.  under  John-
ston. In  1H«»8  he  Ix'camo  professor  of  mathematics
and  natural  philosophy  in  the  I'niversity  of  Mi»-
sissippi.  and  chancellor  of  the  university.

STEWART.  Alexander  Turnej.  nierihant.  I*,
in  Lisbum.  nmr  Iklfast.  Ireland.  12  Oit..  1MK»;  d.
in  New  York,  10  April.  187U.  He  was  the  des<'ond-
ant  of  a  Scotch  emigrant  to  the  north  of  Ireland
and  the  only  son  of  a  farmer.  whodi«>«l  when  he  waa
a  sc-h«s»l-ls)y.  Ho  studied  with  a  view  to  entering
the  ministry. but. with  his  guanlian's  consent,  aliati-
done«l  this 'pur|M(so  ami  came  to  New  York  in  the
summer  of  1823.  without  anv  definite  plans  for  the
Juture.  He  was  f<ir  a  |>orio«\  employed  as  a  teach-
er in  a  scloi't  sch«x»l  in  Roosevelt  stn«»'l  near  Pearl.
then  one  of  tho  fashioiuible  lo(>alili«-s  of  the  city.
Returning  to  Ireland,  he  rweivwl  the  moderate  fof'
tune  his  father  had  left  him.  lM>ught  a  stock  of
itelfuM  la«-«-sand  linens,  and  on  rouihing  New  York
ojiciuhI  a  store  at  No.  283  BnuidwiiV.  2  S.'pt..  1K25.


682


STEWART


STEWART


for  which  he  paid  a  rent  of  $250  per  annum,  giving
as  a  reference  Jacob  Clinch,  whose  daughter,  Cor-
nelia, he  soon  afterward  niaiTied.  The  amount  of
the  capital  invested  was  about  $3,000.  The  young
merchant  had  a  sleeping-room  in  the  rear  of  hisshop,
and  under  these  humble  conditions  was  formed
llie  germ  of  the  most  extensive  and  lucrative  dry-
goods  business  in  the  world. In  1820  he  removed

to  a  larger  store
at  262  Broadway,
and  soon  after-
ward he  again  re-
moved to  257
Broadway.  He
displayeil  a  ge-
nius for  business,
met  with  remark-
able success  from
the  first,  and  in
1848  had  accu-
mulated so  much
capital  that  he
was  enabled  to
build  the  large
marble  store  on
Broadway  be-
— ^  .  >>'  , tween Chambers

(S^£^^^^^^ Thlih^^'afterward
^  was devoted to

the  wholesale  branch  of  his  business.  In  1862  he
erected  on  the  block  bounded  by  Ninth  and  Tenth
streets,  Broadway  and  Fourth  avenue,  the  five-
story  iron  buildmg  used  for  his  retail  business.
This  was  said  to  be  the  largest  retail  store  in  the
world  at  that  time.  Its  cost  was  nearly  $2,750,-
000.  About  2,000  persons  were  employed  in  the
building,  the  current  expenses  of  the  establish-
ment were  more  than  $1,000,000  a  year,  and  the
aggregate  of  sales  in  the  two  stores  for  the  three
years  preceding  his  death  amounted  to  about  $203,-
000,000.  Besides  these  two  vast  establishments,  Mr.
Stewart  had  branch  houses  in  different  parts  of
the  world,  and  was  the  owner  of  numerous  mills
and  manufactories.  During  the  war  his  annual
income  averaged  nearly  $2,000,000,  and  in  1869
he  estimated  it  at  above  $1,000,000.  In  1867  Mr.
Stewart  was  chairman  of  the  honorary  commis-
sion sent  by  the  United  States  government  to  the
Paris  Exposition.  In  March,  1869,  President  Grant
appointed  him  secretary  of  the  treasury;  but  his
confirmation  was  prevented  by  an  old  law  which
excludes  from  that  office  all  who  are  interested
in  the  importation  of  merchandise.  The  presi-
dent sent  to  the  senate  a  message  recommending
that  the  law  be  repealed  in  order  that  Mr.  Stewart
might  become  eligible  to  the  office,  and  Mr.  Stew-
art offered  to  transfer  his  enormous  business  to
trustees  and  to  devote  the  entire  profits  accruing
during  his  term  of  office  to  charitable  purposes;
but  the  law  was  not  repealed,  as  it  was  believed
that  Mr.  Stewart's  proposed  plan  would  not  effectu-
ally remove  his  disalbilities.  His  acts  of  charity
were  numerous.  During  the  famine  in  Ireland  in
1846  he  sent  a  ship-load  of  provisions  to  that  coun-
try and  gave  a  free  passage  to  as  many  emigrants
as  the  vessel  could  carry  on  its  return  voyage  to
this  country,  stipulating  only  that  they  should  be
able  to  read  and  write  and  of  good  moral  character.
After  the  Franco-German  war  he  sent  to  France  a
vessel  laden  with  flour,  and  in  1871  he  gave  $50,000
for  the  relief  of  the  sufferers  by  the  Chicago  fire.
When  Prince  Bismarck  sent  him  his  photograph
requesting  that  of  Mr.  Stewart  in  return,  he  for-
warded instead  a  draft  for  50,000  francs  for  the


benefit  of  the  sufferers  by  the  floods  in  Silesia,  as
he  would  not  permit  his  portraits  of  any  descrip-
tion to  be  made.  He  was  also  one  of  the  largest
contributors  to  the  sum  of  $100,000  presented  by
the  merchants  of  New  York  to  Gen.  Ulysses  S.
Grant  as  an  acknowledgment  of  his  great  services
during  the  civil  war.  At  the  time  of  his  death
Mr.  Stewart  was  completing,  at  the  cost  of  $1,000,-
000,  the  iron  structure  on  Fourth  avenue  between
Thirty-second  and  Thirty-third  streets,  New  York,
intended  as  a  home  for  working-girls.  He  was  also
building  at  Hempstead  Plains,  L.  I.,  the  town  of
Garden  City,  the  object  of  which  was  to  afford  to
his  employes  and  others  airy  and  comfortable
houses  at  a  moderate  cost,  Mr.  Stewart's  wealth
was  estimated  at  about  $40,000,000.  His  real  es-
tate was  assessed  at  $5,450,000,  which  did  not  in-
clude property  valued  at  more  than  $500,000  on
which  the  taxes  were  paid  by  the  tenants.  He
had  no  blood  relatives,  and  by  his  will  the  bulk  of
his  estate  was  given  to  his  wife.  He  bequeathed
$1,000,000  to  an  executor  of  the  will  apj)ointed  to
close  his  partnership  business  and  affairs.  Many
bequests  were  made  to  his  employes  and  to  other
persons.  He  left  a  letter,  dated  29  March,  1873,
addressed  to  Mrs.  Stewart,  expressing  his  intention
to  make  provision  for  various  public  charities,  by
which  he  would  have  been  held  in  everlasting  re-
membrance, and  desiring  her  to  carry  out  his  plans
in  case  he  should  fail  to  complete  them.  Unfor-
tunately, his  noble  schemes  of  benevolence  were
"  turned  awry,  and  lost  the  name  of  action,"  and  a
large  portion  of  his  wealth  passed  to  a  person  not
of  his  name  or  lineage,  verifying  the  words,  "  He
heapeth  up  riches  and  cannot  tell  who  shall  gather
them."  After  Mr.  Stewart's  death  his  mercantile
interests  were  transferred  by  his  widow  to  other
persons,  who  continued  the  business  under  the  firm-
name  of  A.  T.  Stewart  and  Co.,  which  was  soon
changed  to  E.  J.  Denning  and  Co.  Mr.  Stewart's
residence,  on  the  corner  of  Fifth  avenue  and  Thir-
ty-fourth street,  a  marble  mansion,  seen  in  the
accompanying  illustration,  is  perhaps  the  finest
private  house  in  the  New  World.  His  art-gallery,
among  the  largest  and  most  valuable  in  the  coun-
try, was  sold
at  auction  in
New  York  in
1887.  Two  of
his  most  im-
portant paint-
ings were  pre-
sented to
the  Metropol-
itan museum
of  art.  There
was  no  satis-
factory por-
trait of  Mr.
Stewart,  and
that  from
which  the  ac-
companying vignette  is  taken  was  painted  after
death  by  Thomas  Le  Clear.  He  was  slight  and
graceful,  of  medium  height,  with  fair  hair  and
complexion,  and  light-blue  eyes.  He  possessed  re-
fined tastes,  a  love  of  literature  and  art,  and  was
fond  of  entertaining,  which  he  did  in  a  delight-
ful manner.  At  his  weekly  dinners  might  be  met
men  of  distinction  in  all  the  various  walks  of  life
— from  the  emperor  of  Brazil  and  a  Rothschild,
to  the  penniless  r)oet  and  painter.  Wltat  was  said
of  Stewart  in  trie  dedication  of  a  volume  pub-
lished in  1874  was  but  the  simple  truth  —  that
he was  "the  first  of  American m«rchants  and


;.,-V Mi-.


STEWART


STKWART


683


Shilantliropwts." — His  widow.  (kiRNiUA  Cuncb,
M  in  New  York  city.A'i  Oct..  I88fl. She  erect-

e<l  lit  Garden
City.  li.  I.,  the
('athislral  of
the  Incanm-
tion  an  a  ine-
inorial  of  her
huMtNiml  and
a-H  his  inau.Ho-
leiui).  whi-ri"
shi'  iiow  rests
by  his  side.  It
is  n-present-
e*\  in  the
vignette.  an<l
was  formal-
iv  transferred
by  Mrs.  Stew-
art.  together
with  various
buildingscun-
necte<l  with
it.  and  also
an  endowment  of  about  f  15.000  per  annum,  to  the
diocese  of  Ijonp  Island,  N.  Y.,  2  June.  18M.

STEWART.  Alvan,  reformer,  b.  in  South  Gran-
ville. Wasliinffton  co.,  N.  Y..  t  Sept..  17JK);  d.  in
New  York  city.  1  May.  1849.  His  parents  removed
when  he  was  five  months  old  to  Crown  Point,
N.  Y.,  and  in  1795.  losing  their  possessions  through
a  defective  title,  to  Westford.  Chittenden  co.,  Vt.,
where  the  latl  was  brought  up  on  a  farm.  In  1808
he  began  to  teach  and  to  study  anatomy  and  medi-
cine. In  1809  he  entered  Burlington  college.  Vt.,
supporting  himself  by  teaching  in  the  winters,  and,
visiting  Canada  in  1811,  he  receivetl  a  commission
under  Gov.  Sir  George  Prevost  as  professor  in  the
Royal  school  in  the  seigniory  of  St.  Armand,  but
he  returned  to  college  in  June.  1812.  After  the
declaration  of  war  he  went  again  to  Canada,  and
was  held  as  a  jtrisoner.  On  his  return  he  taught
and  studied  law  in  Cherry  Valley,  N.  Y..  and  then
in  Paris.  Ky.,  making  his  home  in  the  former  place,
where  he  practised  his  profession  and  won  reputa-
tion. He  was  a  persistent  advocate  of  protective
duties,  of  internal  improvements,  and  of  education.
He  removed  to  Utica  in  1832,  and.  though  he  con-
tinued to  try  causes  as  counsel,  the  remainder  of  his
life  was  given  mainlv  to  the  tem|)erance  and  anti-
slavery  causes.  A  volume  of  his  sjieeches  was  pub-
lished in  1800.  Among  the  most  conspicuous  of
these  was  an  argument,  in  1837,  l)efore  the  New
York  state  anti-slavery  convention,  to  prove  that
congress  might  constitutionally  aljolisn  slavery;
on  the  "Right  of  Petition"  at  Pennsylvania  haii.
Philadelphia,  and  on  the  "Great  Issues  l)etween
Right  and  Wrong"  at  the  same  place  in  IKW;  lie-
fore  the  joint  committee  of  the  legislature  of  Ver-
mont ;  and  before  the  supreme  court  of  New  Jersey
on  a  habeas  corpus  to  determine  the  unconstitu-
tionality of  slavery  under  the  new  state  constitu-
tion of  1844.  which  last  occupie<l  eleven  hours  in
delivery.  His  first  published  siKvch  against  slavery
was  in  1835.  under  threats  of  a  mob.  lie  then  drew
ac«ll  forastiite  anti-slavery  convention  for  21  Oct.,
1835,  at  Ulica.  As  the  clock  struck  the  hour  he
<-alled  the  convention  to  order  and  address*^!  it,  and
the  programme  of  business  was  completed  ere  the
threatenetl  mob arri veil,  as  it  soon  did  and  disjK'rsed
the  cfmvention  by  violence.  That  night  the  doors
and  windows  of  fiis  house  were  Imrred  with  large
timl)ers.  an<l  fifty  loadwl  muskets  were  provide<l.
with  determined  men  to  handle  them,  but  the
(treparations  kept  off  the  menaced  invasion. "He


waa  the  flnt."  mrn  William  OiMMlem  Um  hiitoriaii
ofatMilitioin  iiudstflamcaUy,  inoareoMol-

tations.  in  <  and  alMwherB,  on  the  nans*

sity  of  forui.i.K  •>  ••■^^iiiict  political  party  to  promoto
the  aljolitioii  of  ulavery.  He  pvdualljr  brought
the  lua<lers  into  it.  was  itjt  randidatc  for  gnvenior.
and  this  new  |tarty  gri-w,  year  by  year,  till  at  Lwt
It  held  the  balance  of  fiower  between  the  Whin
and  lV'm»x'rats.  when,  uniting  with  the  former.  It
constitul«'«l  the  Republi«-an  jwrty.  The  character*
isticsof  Mr,  Stewart's  elrN|ueii<-(- and  convenation
wen?  a  strange  and  aUiunding  humor,  a  memory
that  held  large  resources  at  njinmaiid.  rrailineM  in
emergency,  a  rich  philo«o|>hy.  stnmg  jKiwen*  of
rea.s(>ning.  and  an  exuUrant  imagination.  A  ool-
le<-tion  of  his  »|H>eche»,  with  a  memoir,  is  in  prepa-
ration by  his  son-in-law,  Luther  R.  Marxh.

STEWART,  Archibald,  memWr  of  the  Conti-
nental congress.  He  reside*!  in  Sumex  county,
N.  J.,  prior  to  the  lU-volution,  nnd  was  active  m
the  movements  that  hasteniMi  it.  In  July,  1774,  he
was  apfxiinte<l  one  of  the  committee  to' nominate
deputies  to  the  (Continental  congress,  which  was  to
me«'f  in  Philadelphia  the  following  St'ptrmtier,  and
in  1775  he  was  chosen  a  n>pn>sentative  from  Suaaex
county  in  that  congress  to  fill  a  vacancy.

STkWART,  AiiKtin,  author,  b.  in  Prince  Will-
iam iounty.  Va,.  aljout  1793;  d.  afU-r  18fl0.  He
was  Ixjrn  in  slavery,  and  when  a  lad  w»is  taken  to
I^th.  N.  Y.  He  afterwanl  fle«l  to  Canandaigua,
and  in  1817  he  engaged  successfully  in  business  in
R<x;hester.  In  1826  he  delivered  aii  oration  at  the
celebration  of  the  New  York  emancipation  act,
and  in  1830  he  was  elected  vice-president  of  the
National  convention  of  negroes  at  Pliiladelphia.
The  following  year  he  remove<l  to  a  small  colony
that  had  \n-eii  established  in  Canada  West,  named
the  township  Wilberforce.  and  was  chosen  its  presi-
dent. He  use<l  his  own  funds  to  (airry  on  the  af-
fairs of  the  colony,  but.  finding  that  no  more  land
would  be  sold  to  the  colonists  by  the  Canada  cr»m-
I)any.  n-tumed  to  Rochester  in  1837.  He  after-
ward o|N>ne<l  a  sch(N)l  in  Canandaigua,  and  after
two  years  became  an  aeent  for  the  "  Ant i-.Sla very
Stanilanl."  He  nublisned  "Twenty-two  Yean»  a
Slave  and  Fortv  Years  a  Freeman  "  (2d  ed.,  Roch-
ester. N.  Y..  IK'iO).

STEWART,  I'harleH,  soldier,  b.  in  County
Donegal.  Ireland,  in  1729;  d.  in  Klemington.  N.  J.,
24  July.  1800.  His  grandfather,  of  the  same  name,
was  a  Jicottish  officer  of  dragoons,  who,  for  services
in  the  battle  of  the  Ik)yne.  was  given  an  estate  in
Ireland.  The  younger  Charles  came  to  this  coun-
try in  1750  and  Ix'came  a  deputy  surveyor-general
of  the  province  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1774  he  was  a
memlwr  of  the  first  convention  in  New  Jersey  tliat
issuinl  a  dtn-laration  of  rights  against  the  aggrea-
sions  of  the  crt>wn.  an<l  in  1 775  a  «lelegate  to  its  first
Provincial  congress.  By  his  adopte<l  state  he  waa
made  colonel  of  its  first  regiment  of  minute-men,
then  of  the  2«1  regiment  of  the  line,  and  in  1777
was  apitointed  by  congress  commissary-general  of
issues  in  the  Continental  anny.  S4>rving  as  such  on
Washington's  staff  till  the  close  of  the  war.  In
1784-'5  he  was  a  reprcMMitative  fmm  New  Je»»ev
in  congress.— His  grandson.  Charlm  Samaef,
clergyman,  b.  in  Flemington.  N.  J..  1(5  Oct..  1795;
d.  in  C<xjperstown.  N.  Y.,  15  Dec..  1870.  was  gnwiu-
ate«l  at  Princeton  in  1815,  when,  after  stutiying
law.  he  took  a  theological  course.  He  was  or-
daineil  and  sent  as  mtt»ionarT  to  the  .Sandwich
islands  in  1823.  but.  owing  to  l\\p  failing  health  of
his  wife,  returnjtl  in  1825.  and  afterwanl  lin-tured
through  the  northern  states  in  8<lv<H'acy  of  foreign
miaaions. In  18S8  ha  waa  a{>pointed  chaplain  in


684


STEWART


STKWART


the  U.  S.  navy,  and  during  his  visits  to  all  parts  of
the  world  he  crollected  material  for  his  worts,  lie
was  subsequently  stationed  for  nmny  years  at
New  York,  where,  in  183(5-'7,  he  edited  the  "  Naval
Magazine."  In  1862  he  was  retired,  and  at  his
death  he  was  the  senior  chaplain  in  the  navy.  Tiie
degree  of  D.  D.  was  given  hnn  in  18G3  by  the  Uni-
versity of  New  York.  His  works  include  "Resi-
dence at  the  Sandwich  Islands,  lb23-'25,"  which  is
an  authority  on  the  early  history  of  that  mission
(New  York,  1828) ;  "  Visit  to  the  South  Seas  in  the
U.  S.  Ship '  Vincennes,'  with  Scenes  in  Brazil,  Peru,
etc."  (2  vols.,  1831 ;  improved  ed.,  by  Rev.  William
Ellis,  2  vols.,  1839) ;  "  Sketches  of  Society  in  Great
Britain  and  Ireland  in  1832 "(2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1834);  and  "Brazil  and  La  Plata  in  18oU-o3:  the
Personal  Record  of  a  Cruise  "  (New  York,  1856). —
Charles  Samuel's  son,  Charles  Seaforth,  soldier,
b.  at  sea,  11  April,  1823,  was  graduated  in  1846  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  was  assistant
professor  of  engineering  in  1849-54.  He  was
made  1st  lieutenant  in  the  corps  of  engineers  in
1853,  serving  as  assistant  engineer  in  1854-"?',  and
as  superintending  engineer  in  the  construction  of
fortifications  in  Boston  harlior  till  1861,  having
been  promoted  captain  in  1860.  He  served  during
the  civil  war  in  the  corps  of  engineers,  was  made
major  in  1863,  and  was  chief  engineer  of  the  Mid-
dle military  division  in  1864-'5.  He  was  made
lieutenant-colonel  in  1867,  colonel  in  1882,  and  was
retired  in  1886.

STEWART,  Charles,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  28  July,  1778;  d.  in  Borden  town,
N.  J.,  6  Nov.,  1869.  His  parents  were  Irish ;  his
father  died  in  1780,  and  his  mother  was  left  with
scant  means  to  provide  for  four  children.  He
entered  the  merchant  marine  as  cabin-boy  in  1791,

and  quickly
rose  to  the
command  of
an  Indiaman.
Entering  the
navy  as  lieuten-
ant, 9  March,
1798,  he  served
in  the  frig-
ate "  United
States "  in

the  West  In-
dies, operating
against  French
privateers.  On
16  July,  1800,
he  was  appoint-
ed to  command
the  schooner
"Experiment"
in  the  West
Indies,  where
he  captured  the
French  schooner  "Deux  Amis."  He  was  also
chased  by  two  French  vessels,  which  he  skilfully
avoided,  and  by  following  them  he  fought  and
captured  one,  tlie  schooner  "  Diana,"  before  the
other  vessel  could  assist  in  the  engagement.  On
16  Nov.,  1800,  he  took  the  privateer  "  Louisa
Bridger,"  and  the  next  month  he  rescued  sixty
women  and  children  that  had  been  wrecked  while
flying  from  a  revolution  in  Santo  Domingo.  The
Sjjanish  governor  of  the  island  wrote  a  letter  of
thanks  to  the  president  for  Stewart's  services.  He
was  retained  on  the  list  of  lieutenants  in  the  naval
reorganization  of  1801.  In  1802  he  served  as  execu-
tive of  the  "  Constellation,"  blockading  Tripoli,
but  returned  in  1803  and  was  placed  in  command


/^^^^V:^^^>-:^v^-^


of  the  brig  "  Siren,"  in  Preble's  squadron,  off  Trip-
<ili,  where  he  convoyed  Decatur  in  the  "  Intrepitl "
to  de.stroy  the  '*  Philadelphia,"  and  participated  in
all  the  attacks  on  Tripoli,  Ix'ing  included  in  the
vote  of  .thanks  by  congress  on  3  March,  1805.  to
Preble's  officers.  While  blockading  Tripoli  he
captured  the  Greek  ship  "Catapoliana"  and  the
British  brig  "Scourge  for  violating  the  block-
ade. Asmas-
tor-comman-
dant  he  took
charge  of  the
"  Essex  "  and
went  with
the  fleet  to
Tunis,  where
he  convinced
his  comman-
der-in-chief
that  it  was
illegal  to
make  war  ex-
cept by  dec-
laration of  congress.  He  returned  home  in  1806,
commanding  the  "Constellation,"  and  was  pro-
moted to  captain,  22  April,  1806.  He  superintend-
ed the  construction  of  gun-boats  at  New  York  in
1806-'7,  was  engaged  in  the  merchant  marine  in
1808-'12.  but  returned  to  the  service  in  1812.  and
with  Bainbridge  dissuaded  the  cabinet  from  the  pro-
posed policy  of  not  sending  the  navy  to  .sea  agamst
the  British.  He  was  assigned  to  command  the  "  Ar-
gus "  and  "  Hornet  "  in  a  special  expedition  to  the
West  Indies  on  23  June,  1812,  but  the  order  was
cancelled,  and  he  was  appointed  to  command  the
"  Constellation."  In  going  to  Norfolk  he  met  a
British  fleet,  which  he  skilfully  avoided,  and  then
participated  in  the  defence  of  the  town.  In  the
summer  of  1813  he  took  command  of  the  "  Consti-
tution," destroyed  the  "  Pictou,"  an  armed  merchant
ship,  and  the  brigs  "  Catherine  "  and  "  Phcenix,"
chased  several  British  ships-of-war  and  the  frigate
"  La  Pique,"  and  narrowly  escaped  two  British
frigates  near  Boston.  With  new  sails  he  left  Bos-
ton in  December,  1814,  captured  the  brig  "  Lord
Nelson  "  off  Bermuda.  24  Dec.  1814,  and  the  shin
"  Susan  "  off  Lisbon,  and  on  23  Feb.,  1815,  took
two  British  ships-of-war,  the  "  Cyane  "  and  "  Le-
vant," after  a  spirited  engagement  of  fifty  minutes.
While  he  was  at  anchor  at  St.  Jago,  Cape  de  Verde,
a  British  fleet  approached,  from  which  he  adroitly
escaped  with  the  "  Constitution  "  and  "  Cyane,"  the
"  Levant "  being  recaptured  by  the  fleet  in  the
neutral  harbor  which  she  had  just  left.  He  received
from  congress  a  vote  of  thanks,  a  sword,  and  a  gold
medal,  from  the  Pennsylvania  legislature  a  vote  of
thanks  and  a  sword,  and  the  freedom  of  the  city  of
New  York.  Like  the  famous  frigate,  represented
in  the  illustration,  Stewart  received  the  soubriquet
of  "  Old  Ironsides."  He  commanded  the  Mediterra-
nean squadron,  in  the  "  Franklin."  in  1816-'20,  and
the  Pacific  squadron  in  1820-'4,  where  he  caused  a
paper  blockade  to  be  annulled,  and  vindicated  the
rights  of  American  commerce.  He  was  commis-
sioner of  the  navy  in  1830-'2,  commanded  the
Philadelphia  navy-yard 'in  1838-'41,  and  in  1841
was  mentioned  as  a  candidate  for  president,  but
was  not  nominated.  He  had  charge  of  the  Home
squadron  in  1842-'3,  commanded  the  Philadelphia
navy-yard  again  in  1846,  and  from  1854  till  1861.
He  was  retired  as  senior  commodore  in  1856  and
flag-officer  in  1860,  and  on  16  July.  1862,  was  com-
missioned rear-admiral,  after  which  he  was  on
waiting  orders  until  his  death.  He  was  in  the
service  seventy-one  years,  and  the  senior  officer  for


STEWART


STKWART


660


(teventoeii  yean.  On  21  May,  183A,  hU  daughter,
Delia  Triwa.  marrioil  Charl'fs  lloury  I'ttnH-lT,  and
she  becamt'  tlu>  mothor  of  ("hrtrU-s  Stcwiirt  I'lirni-ll,
thoIriHh  linmt'-riilt' leader  in  tlx'  Hritisli  iMirliuiiu-nt.

STKWAKT,  <'harl('H  JanicH,  ('ariHilinii  Anfcli-
can  bishop,  h.  at  (iullnway  IIoum-,  Wijftonsliin",
Scotland,  13  April.  1775;  d.  in  Ixtndon,  Kn)(iand,
13  July,  1H:}7.  He  was  the  fifth  son  of  .John,
Hc^vcnth  H^arl  of  (iallowny,  wilh  odiicatotl  at  honu'
and  at  Oxfonl,  whore  ht>  was  (;radiiHtf<l  in  17tM),
and  thr  same  year  was  ordaiiii-d  in  the  Chun-h  of
Kn^laiid.  He  was  first  si-ttled  as  a  |>astor  at  Orton
Ijoiiffueville  and  Ik>tolph  Hrid^e.  near  Peterltor-
ou^h,  in  ITOi),  whem  he  roniaine«l  eicht  yean<,  and
s<Kin  afterwanl,  having;  o(Tere<l  hinist-If  t«>  the  Sfxri-
ety  for  the  pro|Ni);at ion  of  the  );os|)<*l,  he  watt  ap-
|K)inte<l  to  the  mission  of  St.  Armand,  F^stern  town-
ships. Ijowvr  ('ana«la.  There  was  no  church  in  his
mission,  hut  he  erectwl  one  at  his  own  exi>enst«.  In
INl!)  he  was  a|)|Miiiited  a  visiiinj;  missionary  in  the
diocoM'  of  (^ucIk'c,  which  then  incluiliMl  the  whole  of
C'anatla,  and  sutTered  much  luirdship  in  travelling;
over  a  vast  extent  of  sjMirsoly  settled  country,  with-
out roads  or  adi^quate  means  of  convevance.  On
the  death  of  Hishop  Mountain  in  IM'-W,  I)r.  Stewart
was  nominated  to  the  see  of  Quelx'c  as  his  suc-
(•essor.  and  he  was  consecratetl  on  1  Jan.,  1M2(5,  by
Archbishop  Sutton,  at  liamU^th  palace.  In  May,
1827,  Bishop  Stewart  returned  to  (^ucl»ec  and  was
installed  in  the  cathedral  of  that  city.  Henceforth
till  his  death  he  was  unwearied  in  advancing  the
interests  of  his  church  and  the  cause  of  C'hristiauity
in  general.  While  he  was  in  Canada  he  s|)ent  the
whole  of  his  private  fortune  in  the  service  of  the
church  and  in  charity,  and  promoted  the  erection
of  many  churches  in  various  jmrts  of  the  cfiuntrv.
.  In  iyi7  Oxfonl  gave  him  the  degree  of  I).  I).  He
published  "  Short  View  of  the  h^astern  Townships
m  Lower  Canada"  (London.  1817).  See  "The
Stewart  Missions,  a  Series  of  Letters  and  Journals,
with  a  Brief  Memoir  of  Bishop  Stewart,"  editetl  by
Rev.  W.  J.  I).  Waddilove,  A.  M.  (London,  18:i8),
and  "Life  of  Bishop  Stewart,"  by  the  Rev.  John
N.  Norton  (18.J9).

STEWART,  Darid,  senator,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md..  13  S'pt.,  IHOO ;  d.  there,  5  Jan..  18.58.  He  was
graduate<l  at  Tnijm  college  in  1819,  and,  after
studying  law.  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1821.  Mr.
Stewart  had  a  large  practice,  and  acquired  reputa-
tion as  a  successfid  lawyer.  In  18^W  he  was  elected
to  the  Maryland  senate,  and  sultsequently  he  was
appointe<I  to  succeed  Reverdy  Johnson  in  the  V.  S.
senate,  where  he  serve<l  from  8  I)e<-.,  1849,  till  14
Jan.,  ISoO.  For  some  time  he  held  the  oflice  of
commissicmer  of  public  buildings  for  the  District
of  Columbia.  He  was  one  of  the  contributors  to
an  ephemeral  publication  called  "  The  Rainljow,"
that  was  issuetl  during  1821  in  Baltimore.

STEWART,  Electra  Marin  Sheldon,  author,
b.  in  Le  Roy.  (Jenesee  co..  X.  Y..  (i  S«'|)t..  1817.
She  was  educate<l  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  whither  she
remove<l  with  her  parents  when  she  was  very  young.
She  wlited  the  "Literary  Cabinet"  in  iK'troit  in
1853-'4.  contributed  ten  sketches  to  the  state  pioneer
collections  of  Michigan,  and  is  the  author  of  several
Sunday-school  books,  under  the  natne  of  Klectra
Maria "Sheld<m ;  and  "The  Early  History  of  .Michi-
gan" (New  York.  IK.'iH).

STEWART.  Ferdinand  Campboll.  physician,
b.  in  Williamsburg.  Va..  10  Aug.,  1815.  lie  was
educate<l  at  William  ami  Mary,  and  graduat*Ml
at  the  niiHlicnl  department  of  the  I'niversity  of
Pennsylvania  in  1H;J7.  Subs«Mjuently  he  s|K«nt  five
years  in  professional  study  in  h^linbur^h  and  Paris.
On  his  return he  began  the practice  of medi-


cine in  Williamsburg,  but  wan  eneounmed  bjr  hi*
HUcccM  to  remove  to  New  Ytirk  city,  where  be  wae
«(!tive  until  1H40.  lie  obtainc^l  charge  of  iiicdkal
and  Kurgical  wants  in  lh'll<-^"-'  >"-"!tal,  and  at  the
itaine  time  n>ceivctl  in  hin  •  nt*  that  had

the  tN>nefltNof  this  clini<-al  .  u. In  IMi-'S

he  voluiitecnMl  hisM'rvic**!.  during:  the  pn-valrni-enf
typhus  fever,  and  pn-si-riUnl  daily  for  tw<»  hundrpd
cfangeroiisly  ill  |iatientH.  When  liellevue  honpilal
was  n-organiyANl  Dr.  Stewart  wan  apixiintMl  a  mem-
Ix'r  of  the  commit t4'e  to  nK-ommcnii  a  new  aiid  im-
provetl  plan,  and  after  its  mloption  wiui  ma<le  one
of  the  visiting  medical  officers.  In  1H49  he  wa«
ap(K)inte4l  the  first  physician  of  the  marine  h<N«pit«l
on  Staten  island  in  conne<-tion  with  thequamntino,
and  continued  in  that  office  until  IHSI.  meanwhile
reorganizing  that  institution.  Dr.  Stewart  <-on-
tinue<l  to  n>side  on  Staten  island  until  IK.V>.  when
the  death  of  his  father  le<l  to  his  n-moval  to  Kng-
hind  in  onler  to  obtain  estates  to  which  he  liad
fallen  heir.  He  was  a  menil>er  rif  nuHlicnl  societies
l*<)th  in  the  United  .States  and  Kun>|ie.  and  in  1847
aided  in  founding  the  New  York  acailemr  of  medi-
cine, whose  success  was  principally  owing  to  hi*
exertions.  He  was  its  secretary  until  his  removal
from  New  York  city,  held  the  office  of  victvpresident
three  times,  and  on  throe  different  <K*casion8  was

I  anniversary  orator. In  lH4K-'y  he  was  chainnaii

I  of  the  ccmimittiH*  on  typhus  fever,  when  the  «li»-
eas<>  had  almost  caus<'d  a  jianic  in  the  city. He

'  was  active  in  promoting  the  National  medical  con-
vention that  held  its  first  meeting  in  New  York  in
1846,  and  was  secretary  of  the  meeting  in  Phila-
delphia in  1H47,  and  he  was  also  a  memlier  of
the  committee  that  drafted  the  constitution  of  the
American  nunlical  a.ss4>ciation  in  1H47.  Dr.  Stewart
wjis  for  many  vears  the  family  physician  of  Presi-
dent Tyler,  and  refustnl  .several  diplomatic  ap[H>int-
ments  that  were  offered  him  by  the  pn^sident.
He  invented  and  introductnl  several  instruments
that  have  found  ust?  in  genito-urinary  «li.seases. In

I  addition  to  his  contributions  to  me<Iical  journals.

I  he  was  in  1844-'5  editor  of  the  "  New  York  Journal
of  Medicine."  and  he  iiublishe<I  a  translation  of

'  "Scoutetten  on  ClulvpV.t  "  (Philadelphia,  lH3t»):
"Hospitals  and  Surgt'oiis  of  Paris"  (New  York,
1843) ;  and  a  n-port  on  "  Me<Iical  fxlucation  "  to
the  American  me<]ical  asstK-iation  (1849- '50),  em-
bracing statistics  and  n>gulations  of  the  me<lical
colleges  of  the  l'nite<l  States,  and  an  iu*count  of
similar  institutions  in  all  imrts  of  the  world.

STEWART,  (ieorire,  Cana<lian  journalist,  h.  in
New  York  city,  20  Nov..  1848.  At  an  early  ag»>  he
n'lnoveii  with  his  pan-nts  to  Canada,  settlwl  in  St.
John,  New  Brunswick,  and  was  cducate<l  in  the
grammar-scluxd  then-.  He  U-gan  the  publication
of  the  "Stamp-Collector's  Monthly  Oaxette"  in
1805,  but  relinquishe«l  it  in  lH<i7  and  founded
"Stewart's  Literary  (Quarterly  Magazine."  which
he  publishe<l  and  '»Hlite<l  f«ir  five  years.  He  was
for  a  short  time  city  wlitor  <»f  the  .St.  John  "  Daily

!  News."  for  two  years  literary  e«litor  of  "  The  W«««>k-

I  ly  Watchman,"  and for  one  year  t»f  "  Rose-IW-

I  fonl's  Canadian  Monthly."  which  he  left  in  1H79
to  IxK'ome  e<litor-in-chief  of  the  Oueliec  "Morning
Chnuiicle." In the  same  yt-ar Mr.  Stewart was

1  elect««<l  a  meml>er  of  the  Kuropiean  Societe  Interna-
tionale <le  litteratun-.  and  in  IHH2  he  was  named

I  one  of  the  original  luendK'rs  «»f  the  H4>yHl  socielT
of  Canada  by  the  Manpiis  of  Ix>me.  Since  IHSh
he  ha>  ln-en  annually  elwted  jm'sident  of  the  Lit-
erary and  historical  s^viety  of  (^ucUt.  and  in  18KS
he  lie«-ame  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  geographical  t<u-
ciety  of  Knglaiid. In  l«8fi  the  degnv  of  D.V.I*.

I  wa«' conferred  on  him  by  King's  uniTerrity,  Not*


686


STEWART


STEWART


Scotia,  and  by  the  University  of  bishop's  college  in
1888,  and  he  was  given  that  of  doctor  of  letters
in  1888  by  Laval  university,  Quebec,  for  his  ser-
vices to  literature  in  Canada.  Mr.  Stewart  has
contributed  Canadian  articles  to  the  "  Encyclo-
pa»dia  Britannica,"  and  to  English,  American,  and
Canadian  periodicals,  and  is  well  known  as  a  lec-
turer on  literary  and  historical  subjects.  He  has
yublishcd  "The  Story  of  the  Great  Fire  in  St.
ohn,  N.  B."  (Toronto,  1877) ;  "  Evenings  in  the
Library"  (1878);  and  "Canada  under  the  Admin-
istration of  the  Earl  of  DuflFerin  "  (1878) ;  and  is
at  present  writing  a  *'  History  of  the  Lower  Cana-
dian Rebellion  of  1837."

STEWART,  Gideon  Tabor,  lawyer,  b.  in
Johnstown,  N.  Y.,  7  Aug.,  1824.  He  removed  with
his  parents  to  Oberlin,  Ohio,  where  he  was  edu-
cated. Subsequently  he  studied  law  in  Norwalk
and  then  with  Noah  H.  Swayne  in  Columbus.  In
1846,  after  his  admission  to  the  bar,  he  began  prac-
tice in  Norwalk,  where  in  1846  he  became  editor
of  the  "  Reflector."  He  was  elected  county  auditor
as  a  Whig  and  held  that  office  during  three  terms.
In  1861  he  removed  to  Iowa,  where  he  purchased
the  Dubuque  "  Daily  Times,"  and  published  it
during  the  civil  war.  At  the  time  of  its  purchase
it  was  the  only  daily  Union  paper  in  the  north-
ern half  of  the  state.  Previously  he  was  one  of
the  proprietors  of  the  Toledo  "  Blade,"  and  after-
wara  of  the  Toledo  "Commercial,"  but  in  1866
he  returned  to  Norwalk,  where  he  has  since  con-
tinued his  law-practice.  Mr.  Stewart  was  three
times  elected  grand  worthy  chief  templar  by  the
Good  Templars  of  Ohio.  In  1853  he  took  part  in
the  Maine  law  campaign  of  that  year,  and  then
endeavored  to  organize  a  permanent  Prohibition
party.  He  was  chairman  of  a  state  convention  in
1857  in  Columbus  for  the  purpose  of  forming  such
a  party,  but  the  movement  failed  on  account  of
the  troubles  in  Kansas  and  the  civil  war.  In  1869
he  was  one  of  the  delegates  from  Ohio  to  the  Chi-
cago convention  that  formed  the  National  prohibi-
tion party.  Since  that  time  he  has  been  nominated
three  times  for  governor,  seven  times  for  supreme
judge,  once  for  circuit  judge,  once  for  congress,
and  once  for  vice-president  in  1876,  when,  with
Green  Clay  Smith  a^s  candidate  for  president,  he  re-
ceived a  popular  vote  of  9,522.  For  fifteen  years
he  was  a  member,  during  four  of  which  he  was
chairman  of  the  national  executive  committee  of
his  party.  In  1876,  1880,  and  1884  the  Prohibi-
tion state  convention  unanimously  instructed  the
Ohio  delegates  to  present  him  in  the  National  con-
vention as  their  choice  for  presidential  candidate,
but  each  time  he  refused  to  nave  his  name  brought
forward.  Mr.  Stewart  has  written  much  in  advo-
cacy of  the  temperance  reform,  and  many  of  his
public  addresses  have  been  extensively  circulated.
STEWART,  Jacob  Henry,  physician,  b.  in
Clermont,  N.  Y.,  15  Jan.,  1829;  d.  in  St.  Paul,
Minn.,  25  Aug.,  1884.  He  studied  at  Yale  for
three  years,  and  was  graduated  at  the  medical  de-
partment of  the  University  of  New  York  in  1851.
Four  years  later  he  began  practice  in  Peekskill,
N.  Y.,  but  in  1855  he  removed  to  St.  Paul,  where  he
obtained  recognition  as  one  of  the  most  skilful  prac-
titioners of  that  city.  In  1856  he  was  appointed
Ehysician  of  Ramsay  county,  Minn.,  and  in  1857-'63
e  was  surgeon-general  of  Minnesota,  also  serving
as  a  member  of  the  governor's  staflf  and  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  senate  in  1858-'9.  On  17  April,
1861,  he  joined  the  1st  Minnesota  volunteers,  which
was  the  first  regiment  that  was  received  by  Presi-
dent Lincoln,  thus  making  Dr.  Stewart  the  mnking
surgeon  in  the  volunteer  service. He  remained  on


the  battle-field  of  Bull  Run,  was  paroled,  and  al-
lowed to  care  for  his  wounded  at  Sudley-church
hospital  until  they  were  able  to  be  removed  Ui
Ricnmond,  when  he  was  permitted  to  return  home
without  exchange  "for  voluntarilv  remaining  on
the  battle-field  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty."  The
sword  taken  from  him  when  he  was  miule  prisoner
was  given  back  to  him  by  Gen.  Beauregard  in  rec-
ognition of  his  faithfulness  to  duty.  On  his  return
to  Minnesota  he  was  appointed  surgeon  of  the
board  of  enrolment,  and  held  that  office  until  the
close  of  the  war.  In  1864  he  was  elected  mayor  of
St.  Paul,  and  he  was  re-elected  for  four  terms
(1869-73).  Dr.  Stewart  was  the  only  Republican
that  has  ever  held  that  office  in  St.  Paul,  as  the
vote  of  the  city  is  Democratic.  From  1865  till
1870  he  was  postmaster  of  St.  Paul,  and  he  was
then  elected  to  congress  as  a  Republican,  serving
from  15  Oct.,  1877,  till  4  March,  1879. He  was  ap-

Eointed  surveyor-general  of  the  state  in  1880,  and
eld  that  office  for  four  years.  Dr.  Stewart  was
president  of  Minnesota  state  medical  society  in
1875-'6,  and  president  of  the  board  of  physicians
and  surgeons  to  St.  Joseph's  hospital  in  St.  Paul.

STEWART,  James,  physician,  b.  in  New  York
city,  7  April,  1799 ;  d.  in  Rye,  N.  Y.,  12  Sept.,
1864.  He  was  educated  at  Queens  (now  Rutgers)
college,  and  then,  after  studying  medicine  with
Dr.  Valentine  Mott,  was  graduated  at  the  College
of  physicians  and  surgeons.  New  York  city,  in
1823.  Dr.  Stewart  began  practice  in  New  York
city,  and  made  a  specialty  of  pulmonary  com-
plaints and  diseases  of  children.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  northern  dispensary  and  its  second
consulting  physician.  For  more  than  twenty  years
he  was  medical  examiner  of  the  Mutual  benefit
life  insurance  company,  and  during  the  four  years

S-evious  to  his  death  held  a  similar  place  with  the
onie  life  insurance  company.  In  1857  his  essay
on  "  Cholera  Infantum  "  received  the  prize  that
was  offered  by  the  New  York  academy  of  medi-
cine. He  published  anonymously  "A  Few  Re-
marks about  Sick  Children  in  New  York  and  the
Necessitv  of  a  Hospital  for  them"  (1852),  and
collected  funds  for  a  church  hospital  for  chil-
dren, to  be  conducted  on  the  same  plan  as  St.
Luke's  hospital  and  to  be  called  Christ's  hospital
for  children.  He  also  published  a  translation  of
Charles  M.  Billard's  "  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  of
Children,"  with  an  appendix  (Philadelphia,  1839) :
"  A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  of  Children  "
(New  York,  1841) ;  and  "  The  Lungs  "  (1848).

STEWART,  John,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Musselburgh,  Scotland.  24  Nov.,  1773;  d.  in  Que-'
bee,  Canada,  5  June,  1858.  He  engaged  in  busi-
ness, was  president  of  the  Board  of  trade  and  of
the  Bank  of  Montreal,  and  master  of  Trinity
house.  Under  the  administration  of  Sir  George
Prevost  he  was  appointed  deputy  pavraaster-gen-
eral  to  the  incorporated  militia,  which  office  he
held  till  the  forces  were  disbanded.  On  the  acces-
sion of  Lord  Dalhousic  in  1819,  Mr.  Stewart  be-
came a  member  of  the  legislative  and  executive
councils,  and  was  appointed  sole  commissioner  of
the  Jesuit  estates,  of  whiph  he  had  been  for  many
years  previously  a  member  of  the  board  of  manage-
ment. He  was  for  a  long  time  president  of  the  ex-
ecutive council  of  Canada.

STEWART.  Robert  Mercellns,  governor  of
Missouri,  b.  in  Truxton,  N.  Y.,  12  March,  1815;  d.
in  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  21  Sept.,  1871.  He  went  to
Kentucky  as  a  boy,  and  in  1838  settled  in  Buchanan
county.  Mo.  In  1845  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  State
constitutional  convention,  and  for  ten  years  he  was
a  member  of  the  state  senate. He  was  §lected  gov-


STEWART


STILUS


687


emor  of  Miswotiri  in  1857.  and  «»rv«l  for  four
years,  during;  which  time  ho  wa.H  active  in  found-
ing the  systfin  of  niilnMids  that  eontron  in  that
state.  At  the  lK>f;iniiin);  of  the  civil  war  he  en-
tereil  the  National  army,  but  failing  health  pr»*-
vente<l  him  from  serving  and  ho  (mmhj  rr'tirc<l.

STKWAKT.  ThniiiaM  McCantM.  lawyer,  b.  in
ChHrltstoii.  S.  C.  2M  1)»H-..  1K'>4.  He  is  dt  African
d«*scfiit.  After  his  gni4liiHti<>n  at  the  University  of
S>uth  Carolina  in  1^75  he  pnn-tisi'*!  law  in  Colum-
bia, S.  ('.,  and  wjis  profi-ssor  of  nmthematics  in  the
State  agricultural  college,  (Orangeburg,  S.  C.  He
entered  the  ministry  in  1H7H,  after  ^tudving  at
Princeton.  In  1882  he  became  i)rofessor  ot  belles-
lettres  and  law  in  LilH>ria  college,  and  spent  a  year
on  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  servinjf  also  as  gtnieral
agent  for  industrial  etlucation  in  Ldwria.  In  Janu-
ary. 188(J,  he  was  admitteil  to  the  bar  of  New
York  city.  Mr.  Stewart  has  contributwl  to  news-
papers and  magazines  and  is  the  author  of  ''  Libe-
ria, the  A merico- African  llepublic"  (New  York,
1887) ;  and  "  Perils  of  a  Great  City  "  (1887).

STKWART.  Virgil  Adam,  b.  in  Jackson  co..
Oa..  27  Jan.,  1809.  In  IM;^*)  he  U'cnme  at(|uainted
with  John  A.  Murrell,  who  was  the  chief  of  an
organization  that  existed  throughout  the  south
and  southwest  and  made  a  practice  of  enticing
negroes  from  their  owners,  with  promise  of  free-
dom, and  then  selling  them  in  u  distant  part  of
the  country.  The  members  of  the  conspiracy
recognized  one  another  by  signs,  and  dexterously
concealed  their  identity.  Their  crimes  include<l
robbery  and  murder.  Mr.  Stewart  succeeded  in
gaining  full  information  concerning  the  plans  of
the  organization,  which  included  an  extended  u|>-
rising  of  the  negroes,  who  were  incited  by  promises
»of  freeilom  to  rebel  and  slay  all  the  whites  on  the
night  of  25  Dec,  18;J5.  Meanwhile  the  members
of  the  conspiracy  were  to  take  advantage  of  the
condition  of  affairs  and  plunder  generally.  A
knowledge  of  this  plot,  which  was  divulged  to
Stewart  by  Murrell,  led  to  the  arrest  of  the  latter,
and  his  subsequent  sentence  to  imprisonment  for
ten  years.  After  the  conviction,  Stewart  i)ublished
a  pamphlet  account  of  the  affair,  under  the  title  of
••The  Western  I>and  Pirate"  (18:35),  giving  the
nami>s  of  the  conspirators.  This  quickly  disa[>-
peared,  statements  were  industriously  circ-ulattnl
that  Stewart  was  a  meml>er  of  the  band,  and
efforts  were  made  to  murder  him.  See  "The  His-
tory of  Virgil  A.  .Stewart  and  his  Adventure  in
capturing  and  exposing  the  Great  Western  Land
Finite  niid  his  Gang"  (New  York,  IS-Hi).

STEWART,  Walter,  soldier,  b.  ab^iut  1756:  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  June,  1790.  Ho  esfKiused
the  American  cause  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revo-
lutionary war,  raised  a  company  for  the  3d  Penn-
sylvania battalion,  was  commissioned  captain,  0
/an.,  1776,  and  appointed  aide-<le-camp  to  (Jen.
Gates,  26  May,  1776.  in  which  capacity  he  served
until  17  June,  1777,  when  he  was  commissioned  by
the  supreme  executive  council  of  Pennsylvania
colonel  of  the  state  regiment  of  f(H)t.  He  took
command  on  0  July.  1777.  and  led  it  at  Brandy-
wine  and  Germantown.  By  resolution  of  congress.
12  Nov.,  1777,  his  regiment  was  annexcNl  to  the
Continental  army,  becoming  the  13lh  n-giment  of
the  Pennsylvania  line.  On  17  Jan.,  1781,  it  was
incorporated  with  the  2d  iVnnsvlvunia,  under  Col.
Stewart's  command.  He  serve<l  with  gn'at  credit
throughout  the  war,  retiring.  1  Jan.,  1783,  with  the
brevet  rank  of  brigadier-geneml.  He  was  said  to
be  the  handst)mest  man  in  the  American  army.
He  was  afterward  well  known  as  a  merchant  of
Philadelphia,  and became major-geueral  of the


Htat«  militia.  His  full-length  |K>rtraU  is  in  Col.
Tnimbuirs  picture  of  the  nurreiider  of  Cornvallla.
on  tlx'  left  <if  th)-  liiii>  of  tlu-  Amerieui  ofBcem

STKWART.  William.  (  anadian  member  of
iMirliament,  b.  in  Scotland  in  1802;  d.  in  Torrmto.
0  March,  IKM.  He  was  e<lucate<i  privately,  en-
gaged in  buHinem  as  a  merchant,  and  was  one  of
tne  founders  of  the  lumlicr  tnwle  in  Cana<]a.  He
was  a  memlM>r  of  the  |<arliament  of  Canada  for
Bytown  (now  Ottawa)  and  for  the  i-dunty  of  Ruik-
s4-ll,  and  framed  the  cullers'  bill  Hud  other  imfxir-
tant  acts. — His  son,  MrLeod,  lawyer,  b.  in  Otuwa
in  1847.  was  graduate*!  at  Toronto  univfrxity  in
1867.  He  studieil  law,  was  a<imitte<i  to  the  liar  in
1870.  and  established  himself  succesMfullv  in  prac-
tice at  Ottawa.  He  was  eU«cte«l  mayor  of  that  citv
in  1887.  and  was  re-ele<ted  in  1888.  Mr.  Stewart
is  actively  connectetl  with  many  financial  and  in-
du.strial  cor[>orat ions,  and  is  president  of  the  Cana-
da Atlantic  railway  com[>any.  He  is  a  Lilteral-
Conseni'ative  in  jwlitics  and  has  rendertNl  impor-
tant services  to  his  party.  He  was  aj)|M)int«d  a
lieutenant  in  the  govemor-generars  lout-guanls
on  the  formation  of  that  Ixxly.

STEWART,  William  iCorrlK.  senator,  b.  in
Lyons,  N.  Y..  9  Aug.,  1827.  He  entered  Yale  in
1848.  and,  although  he  was  not  graduated,  his
name  was  afterwarti  enn)lled  among  the  memWrs
of  the  cla.ss  of  1852.  and  he  receive<l  the  degree  of
A.  M.  in  1865.  In  185()  he  set  out  for  California
by  the  way  of  Panama  and  engaged  in  mining  in
Nevada  county,  where  he  duKJOvered  the  celebrated
Eureka  dicrgings.  He  disposed  of  his  mining  in-
terests and  l)egan  the  study  of  law  earlv  in  1852.
and  was  ap[Kjinted  district  attonj<'_v  in  Ik-c-ember
of  that  year,  and  in  1K54  became  attorney-general
and  settle<l  in  San  Francisco.  I^ter  he  moved  to
Downieville,  Cal.,  where  he  <levotiHl  himself  to  the
study  and  practice  of  the  laws  thift  relate  to  mining,
ditcli-  and  water-rights,  and  similar  priK-esses.  In
1860  he  move<l  to  V  irginia  City,  Nev..  and  was  re-
taineil  in  almost  every  ca.so  of  importance  Itefore
the  higher  courts.  To  his  efforts  is  mainly  due
the  permanent  settlement  of  the  titles  of  nearly  all
the  mines  on  the  great  Comsto<.'k  hnle.  In  1861
he  was  chosen  a  meml>er  of  the  territorial  council,
and  in  1868  he  was  electeil  a  raemU'r  of  the  Con-
stitutional convention.  Subsequently  he  was  twice
elected  as  a  Republican  to  the  I'.  ^^.  st>nate,  and
served  from  4  Dec..  1864.  till  3  Marth.  1875.  On
his  retirement  he  resume<I  the  practice  of  his  pro-
fession on  the  Pacific  coast,  where  his  great  famil-
iarity with  mining  law  and  mining  litigation  create<l
a  demand  for  his  services.  In  1887  he  was  again
electetl  to  the  U.  S.  senate  for  a  full  term,  taking
his  seat  on  4  Man>h.  He  has  publi^Iied  various
addresses  and  sjHH'ches.

STICK NEY,  John,  musician,  b.  in  Stoughton.
Mass.,  in  1742:  d.  in  South  Hadlev.  Mass.,  in  1826.
lie  was  taught  music  while  a  l»<»y.  and  subse-
quently settle<l  in  Hatfield,  where'  he  gave  lea-
sons.  Later  he  travelle<l  extensively  through  the
New  England  statc-s,  and  ac<piire«l  n-iiutation  as  a
teacher  and  composer,  but  finally  setlie<l  in  South
Hadlev,  where  he  continuwl  his  teaching.  Ue
publislietl  "The  Gentlemen  and  I^lii-s'  .Musical
Companion"  (New bury [wrt.  1774),  a  valuable  col-
lection of  (isalms  an<l  anthems  together  with  ex-
planatory ruli's  for  Iruniing  to  sine.

STILfeS.  Exra,  clergyman  and  educator,  b.  in
North  Haven,  Conn..  29  N«»v..  1?27:  d.  in  New
Ilaven.  Conn..  12  .May.  1795.  His  ancestor.  John,
came  fn)m  Itt'dfonlshire.  Englaml.  an*!  settled  in
Winds4ir.  Conn.,  in.  16:)5.  and  John's  grandson.
Isaac,  the  father  of  Ezra,  was  gnwluated  at  Yala


688


STILES


STILES


-z^^Ljer^^z^j


in  1722  and  ordained  pastor  of  the  church  in
North  Haven,  then  a  part  of  New  Haven,  which
charge  he  held  until  his  death.  14  May,  1700. He

fmblished  the  "  Prospect  of  the  City  of  Jerusa-
ein "  (New  London,  1742);  "  Looking-GIass  for
Changelings"  (1743);  "The  Declaration  of  the  As-
sociation of  the  County  of  New  Haven  concerning
the  Itev.  (xeorge  Whitefield"  (Boston,  1745);  and
"  The  Character  and  Duty  of  Soldiers  "  (New  Lon-
don, 1755).  Ezra  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1746,
and  in  1749  was  chosen
tutor  there.  Aiaout
this  time  Benjamin
Franklin  sent  an  elec-
tric apparatus  to  Yale,
and,  becoming  inter-
ested in  the  new  sci-
ence, Mr.  Stiles  made
some  of  the  tirst  ex-
periments in  electrici-
ty in  New  England,
liaving  studied  theol-
ogy, he  was  licensed  in

1749,  and in April,

1750,  preached  to  the
Housatonic  Indians  in
Stockbridge,  Mass.,
but,  owing  to  religious
doubt, resolved to

abandon  the  ministry  for  the  law,  and,  being  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1758,  practised  for  two  years
in  New  Haven.  In  February,  1755,  he  delivered
a  Latin  oration  in  honor  of  Dr.  Franklin  on  the
occasion  of  his  visit  to  Yale,  and  formed  a  friend-
ship with  Franklin  that  lasted  until  death.  In
1756  he  became  pastor  of  the  2d  church  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  and  during  his  residence  there,  in  ad-
dition to  his  professional  duties,  devoted  himself
to  literary  and  scientific  research,  corresponding
with  learned  men  in  almost  every  part  of  the
world.  In  1767  he  began  the  study  of  Hebrew  and
other  Oriental  languages.  His  congregation  hav-
ing been  scattered  by  the  occupation  of  Newport
by  the  British,  he  removed  in  1777  to  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  to  become  pastor  of  the  North  church,  and
thence  to  New  Haven,  to  accept  the  presidency  of
Yale  college,  which  post  he  held  from  23  June,
1778,  until  his  death,  serving  also  as  professor  of
ecclesiastical  history,  and  after  the  death  of  Prof.
Naphtaii  Daggett  as  professor  of  divinity,  also
lecturing  on  philosophy  and  astronomy.  He  was
accounted,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  as  the  most
learned  and  accomplished  divine  of  his  day  in  this
country.  He  received  the  degrees  of  A.  M.  from
Harvard  in  1754,  and  that  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Edin-
burgh in  1765,  Dartmouth  in  1780,  and  Princeton
in  1784.  Princeton  also  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  the  last-named  year.  His  publications
are  "Oratio  Funebris  pro  Exequis  Jonathan  Law"
(New  London,  1751);  "Discourse  on  the  Chris-
tian Union"  (Boston,  1761;  2d  ed.,  1701);  "Dis-
course on  Saving  Knowledge"  (Newport,  1770);
"  The  United  States  Elevated  to  Glory  and
Honor,"  a  sermon  before  the  legislature  (Hart-
ford, 1783);  "Account  of  the  Settlement  of  Bris-
tol, R.  I."  (Providence,  1785);  and  "History  of
Three  of  the  Judges  of  Charles  I.,  Major-General
Whalley,  Major-General  Goffe,  and  Col.  Dixwell,
etc.,  with  an  Account  of  Mr.  Theophilus  Whale,
of  Narragansett,"  who  was  supposed  to  have  been
also  one  of  the  judges  (Hartford,  1794).  Dr.  Stiles
left  unfinished  an  "Ecclesiastical  History  of  New
England."  His  diary  and  forty-five  volumes  of
manuscripts  are  preserved  in  the  library  of  Yale.
His  daughter,  Mary,  married  Dr.  Abiel Holmes,


who  wrote  his  "  Life  "  (Boston,  1798).  See  also  the
"  Life  of  Ezra  Stiles,"  by  James  Luce  Kingsley,  in
Sparks's  "  American  Biography."

STILES,  Henry  Reed,  physician,  b.  in  New
York  city,  10  March,  1832.  He  is  a  kinsman  of
Ezra  Stiles,  and  was  educated  at  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York  and  at  Williams.  After
graduation  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  the  city  of  New  York  and  at  the  New
York  Ophthalmic  hospital  in  1855,  he  practised
in  New  York  city,  in  Galena,  111.,  and  Toledo,  Ohio.
In  1856  he  removed  to  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  in
1857-'8,  under  the  firm  of  Calkins  and  Stiles,  pub-
lished educational  works  and  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  Education."  In  1859-'63  he  practised  medi-
cine in  Brooklyn  and  Woodbury,  N.  Y.  In  1863
he  became  librarian  of  the  Long  Island  historical
society,  of  which  he  was  a  founder  and  director.
In  1868-'70  he  served  in  the  Brooklyn  office  of  the
Metropolitan  board  of  health,  and  in  1870-'3  he
was  a  health  inspector  in  the  board  of  health  of
New  York  city.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  medical
superintendent  of  the  State  homoeopathic  asylum
for  the  insane  in  Middletown,  N.  Y.,  and  under  his
direction  the  first  two  buildings  were  erected  and
its  service  was  organized.  In  1877  he  removed  to
Dundee,  Scotland,  to  take  charge  of  the  Homoeo-
pathic dispensary  there,  remaining  until  1881,  when
tie  returned  to  New  York,  where  he  practised  until
1888.  He  then  opened  a  private  establishment  for
the  care  of  mental  and  nervous  diseases  at  Hill
View,  N.  Y.  From  1882  till  1885  he  was  professor
of  mental  and  nervous  diseases  in  the  New  York
woman's  medical  college  and  hospital.  Dr.  Stiles
was  an  organizer  of  the  Public  health  association  of
New  York  city  in  1872,  a  founder  and  officer  of  the
Society  for  promoting  the  welfare  of  the  insane  in
New  York  city,  and  has  lectured  on  hygiene  and
sanitary  laws  in  the  New  York  homoeopathic  medi-
cal college.  He  was  an  organizer  of  the  American
anthropological  society  in  1869,  and  one  of  the
seven  founders  of  the  Kew  York  genealogical  and
biographical  society,  serving  as  its  president  from
1869  until  1873.  Williams  gave  him  the  degree  of
A.  M.  in  1876.  He  is  the  author  of  numerous  me-
moirs, has  annotated  and  edited  several  works,  and
published  "The  History  and  Genealogies  of  An-
cient Windsor,  Conn."  (New  York,  1859;  supple-
ment, Albany,  186:3) ;  "  Monograph  on  Bundling  in
America"  (Albany,  1861);  "Genealogy  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts Family  of  Stiles  "  (1863) ;  "  The  Walla-
bout  Prison-ShipSeries  "  (2  vols.,  1865) ;  "  The  Gene-
alogy of  the  Stranahan  and  Joselyn  Families"
(1865) ;  and  "  History  of  the  City  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.!'
(3  vols.,  Brooklyn.  1867-70).  lie  edited  the  "  Illus-
trated History  of  the  County  of  Kings  and  City
of  Brooklyn""  (2  vols.,  1884),  and  in  part  "The
Humphreys  Family  and  Genealogy  "  (1887).

STILES,  Israel  Newton,  lawyer,  b.  in  Suffield,
Conn.,  16  July,  1833.  He  is  a  relative  of  Ezra
Stiles.  He  received  a  common-school  education',
began  the  study  of  law  in  1849,  and  three  years
later  removed  to  Lafayette.  Ind.,  where  he  taught
and  continued  his  studies  till  his  admission  to  the
bar  in  1855.  He  was  prosecuting  attorney  two  years
and  a  member  of  the'  legislature,  and  became
active  as  an  anti-slavery  orator  during  the  Fre-
mont canvass,  delivering  more  than  sixty  speeches.
When  the  civil  war  be^an  he  enlisted  as  a  private,
but  was  soon  made  adjutant  of  the  20th  Indiana
regiment.  He  was  taken  prisoner  at  Malvern  Hill,
but,  after  six  weeks  in  Libby  prison,  was  exchanged.
He  was  subsequently  major,  lieutenant-colonel,  and
colonel  of  the  63d  Indiana,  and  finally  brevet
brigadier-general,  his  commission  being  ^ated  31


STILES


STILLft


Jan.,  1865. He  removed  to  Chicago,  wh«re  he  has
earne<l  n  hi(;h  ro|>iitntii>ii  ax  a  lawyer.

STILKS,  JoH4>ph  (iajr,  ilornfyman,  b.  in  S«-
VBtiimh,  (la.. «  [h'v.,  171».'i ;  d.  thcr»»,  27  Man-h,  iMiS.
Aftor  (rnwlimtiuti  at  Yale  in  1814  he  htuditNl  law
at  Litchflflil,  and  {inu-tised  in  bin  native  citv.  but
in  1N22  ent«.>rtMl  Andovcr  theological  M>minary.
when?  he  \ia*i  >,'raduatt><l  in  1888.  After  hi«  onli-
nation  by  the  |)rt'sl»ytt'ry  in  lH2fl  he  lalH)r(>«l  tm  an
♦'vanfjelist  in  (Jeorjjia  and  Florida  from  IHiU  till
183.'>.  and  ^'ave  an  iin|>etU8  to  Presbyterianisin  in
his  native  state,  revivinjj  ol<l  ehunht's  and  biiil.l-
ing  new  ones. In  IXiTi  he  reniovtHl  to  Kentuekv


and  spent  nine  years  in  the  west,  where  ho  fnv

ouently  en^aj^l  in  public  theolof>:ii'nl

tnat  grew  out  of  the  division  of  his  denomination.


In  1844  he  at-cepted  a  call  to  Richmond,  Va.,  an<l
in  1848  he  lH>c'amo  jtastor  of  the  Meri-er  strwt
church.  New  York  city,  which  charj^e  he  resij^iunl,
owin^  to  impaire<l  health,  and  IxK-ame  general
agent  for  the  American  Hilde  sKK-iety  in  the  south
in  18.50.  In  lHr>:}  ho  Int-ame  |>a.stor  of  the  South
church  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  organized  a  southern
aid  society,  an«l  in  1860  labon^d  a.s  evangelist  in
the  south,  serving  in  this  capacity  until  his  death.
He  receive*!  the  degroeof  I).  I),  from  Transylvania
university  in  184».  and  that  of  Mj.  I),  from  the
University  of  Georgia  in  1800.  Dr.  Stiles  was  the
author  of  a  "Siwech  on  the  Slavery  Kesolutions  in
the  General  Assembly"  (New  York,  1850);  "  M<k1-
em  Reform  Examine<l,  or  the  Union  of  the  North
and  South  on  the  Subject  of  Slavery"  (Phila<lel-
phia,  1858);  "The  National  Controversy,  or  the
Voice  of  the  Fathers  ujwn  the  Stale  of  the  Coun-
try" (New  York,  18«1);  and  "Future  Punish-
ment Discussi'd  in  a  Letter  to  a  P>iond  "  (St.  Ix)uis,
,1868).— His  brother.  William  Henrv,  lawyer,  b.
in  .Savannah,  Ga.,  in  January.  1808;  d.  there,  20  Deo.,
1865,  received  an  academic  education,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  l)ar  in  18Jil,  and  pnictised  in
Savannah.  He  was  solicitor-general  for  the  east-
ern district  of  Georgia  in  18:i3-'0,  and  afterwanl
elected  to  congress  as  a  Demot;mt,  serving  from  4
Dec.,  1843,  till  3  March,  184,5.  On  19  April,  1845,
he  wa-s  aj)|iointed  charge  d'  afTain>s  in  Austria,  hold-
ing this  oflicc  until  .1  Oct.,  1849,  and  on  his  return
he  resumeil  law-practice  in  .Sivannah.  At  the  Ix"-
ginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  a  regiment  for  the
Confederate  army,  in  which  he  servetl  as  colonel,
but  resigned,  owing  to  impaired  health.  Yale
college  gave  him  the  decree  of  .\.  M.  in  1837.  He
was  the  author  of  a  "  Hi.story  of  Austria,  1848-'9  "
<2  vols..  New  York,  1852).

STILL,  William,  i^»hilanthropist.  b.  in  Sha-
mony,  Hurlington  co.,  N.  .1.,  7  Oct.,  1821.  He  is  of
African  descent,  and  was  brought  up  on  a  farm.
Coming  to  Philadelphia  in  1844,  he  obtainetl  a
clerkship  in  1847  in  the  office  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania Anti-slavery  so<'iety.  He  was  chairman  and
corresponding  secretary  of  the  Phila<lel|>hia  branch
of  the  "underground  railmml  "  in  1851-'<J1,  and
busifMl  himself  in  writing  out  the  narratives  of
fugitive  slaves.  His  writings  constitute  the  only
full  account  of  the  organization  with  which  he  was
connected.  Mr.  Still  sheltered  the  wife,  daugh-
ter, and  sons  of  John  Brown  while  he  was  awaiting
execution  in  Charlcstown,  Ya.  During  the  civil
war  ho  was  commissione«l  [wst  -  sutler  at  Camp
William  Penn  for  coloretl  tnxjps,  and  was  a
member  of  the  Freetlmen's  ai«l  union  and  i-ommis-
sicm.  He  is  vice-pre>idcnt  and  chairman  of  the
board  of  managers  of  the  Home  for  aged  and  infirm
colored  |>crsons.  a  meniU'r  of  the  Ixtard  of  trus-
tees of  the  .Soldiers'  and  sailors'  ori>hans'  home,  and
of  other  charit«ble  institutions. In  1885  he  was


■ent  by  the  preibjrtMy  of  PhiUdelphla  m  a  eofn-
mimioner  to  the  general  aiHwmblv  at  ''  tj.

He  was  one  of  the  original  nlockhoM
Nation,"  and  a  menilifr  of  the  Ibmnl . .  '

I'hiladeljihia. His  writings  include  "  The  I
ground  RHil-R«»air'  (Philadelphia,  IHTH);  ••  \
and  l^atxirinir";  and  "Struggle  for  the  Ki);hia  uf
the  Colonel  People  of  Philadelphia."

STILLfi,  Alfrpd.  phvMcian.  b.  in  PI,
iihia,  P«i..  30  0<-t.,  IM13.  lie  wa»  grB4luato.l
Univen.it v  of  Pennsylvania  in  IXtt  and  hi  hk-
medical  iie|Mirtment  of  that  university  in  IKWI.*
after  whi<'h  he  was  eU<<'te<l  n«ident  physician  of
the  Philadelphia  hospital.  Dr.  Stillc  then  i«{Nmt
two  years  in  higher  nuHlical  studirit  in  Pariji  ami
elsewhere  in  Kurofie,  and  in  1851  resumeil  them
in  Vienna.  During  18:)9-'41  he  was  resident
physician  to  the  Pennsylvania  hospital.  In  1H44
lie  began  to  l«><-ture  on  jtatliolo^^v  and  the  practice
of  minlicine  l)cfore  the  Penu'.ylvania  aKsocialiou
for  medical  instntction.  and  continue^l  do  m>  until
1850.  also  liecoming  physician  to  .St.  JoM-jih's  hos-
pital in  1849.  He  wa.s  elect*-*!  prt^fessor  of  the
theory  and  practice  of  me*licine  ni  IVniisvlvania
meilicai  college  in  18.54,  and  flllc*!  that  chair  until
18.59.  In  18<>4  he  was  chosen  to  a  similar  pla<f  in
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania, which  he  held  until  1HH4.  when  he  was
made  pr*»fesM»r  emeritus. During  186.5-*71  he  was

t)hysician  and  lecturer  cm  clinical  nie*licine  in  the
Philadelphia  hospital.  The  degree  of  LIj.  D.  was
conferred  <»n  him  in  1876  by  Pennsylvania  college.
He  is  a  meml>er  of  various  medical  s<^i*-icties,  and
was  president  of  the  Philiulelphia  countv  medical
s<KMetv  in  1862,  and  of  the  .\inerican  me4ii(»l


ciation  in  1871.  an*l  of  the  College  *if  physicians  of
Philadelphia  in  18K5.  Dr.  St  ilk*  has  ciditributed
to  medical  journals,  and  was  ahMH-iated  with  Dr.
J.  Forsvth  Meigs  in  the  translation  of  Andral's
"Pathological  HH-matologv"  (Phila«lelphia,  1844).
Among  his  works  are  "^Ie*lical  Instniction  in
the  United  States"  (1845);  "  Klement^  of  Gen-
eral Pathology"  (1848);  "  ReiK)rt  on  Medical
Literaturi'"  (18.50);  "The  Unity  of  Me*licine"
(18.56):  "  Humboldt's  Life  and  ChanRters"  (1k59);
"Therapeutics  and  Materia  Me<lica  :  a  .Systematic
Treatise  on  the  Actions  and  U.-^es  of  Me*licinal
Agents"  (2  vols.,  18(>0);  "War  as  an  Instrument
of  Civilization"  (1862) :  and  "  Kpidemic  Menin-
gitis, or  Cen-bro-Spinal  Meningitis"  (1867).  He
was  associated  with  John  M.  Mais*-h  in  the  prefia-
ration  of  the  "  National  Dis|iensatory  "  (1879),  and
he  e<lite<l  the  second  e*lilion  of  the  "Treatise  on
Me*lical  Jurisprutlence,"  originally  written  by  his
brother,  Moret»»n  Slille,  with  Fnmcis  Wharton. —
His  brother,  C'harleM  Janeway.  historian,  b.  in
Philwlelphia,  Pa..  23  S-pt.,  1819.  was  graduated
at  S'ale  in  18:19,  and.  after  adnii..ision  t*)  the  bar.
tlevoted  his  attention  to  literatim-.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  an  active  meniU-r  of  the  execu-
tive c«>mmitt*'*'  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission,
of  which  he  afterwanl  U-i-anu-  the  hi^torian.  In
1866  he  was  apiM>iiiti-<l  profi-ss*ir  of  hi»t*iry  in
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1868  be-
came prov«>st,  which  pla<-e  he  fill«-*l  until  1880.
While  holding  this  office  he  convinc*-*!  the  trustees
and  faculty  «>f  the  lUH-essity  of  considering  the  de-
maixls  of'advanci-*!  tHlucation,  c»i|>e*-ially  in  the
s«ientific  branches,  and  largely  thr*»uch  his  in-
fluence the  new  buildings  in  West  Philadelphia
were  eriH-te*!  and  the  .scientific  de|>artinent  waa
found*-*!.  The  lylifict*  shown  in  the  illustration
n-pri-M-nts  the  library  building  ere«-t*.*l  in  1888-'9
on  the  university  gr*>untl.H.  1  he  *legrw  of  Lli.  I*,
was  oonferrwl  upon  him  by  Yale  in  1868. In  addi-


690


STILLMAN


STILWELL


tion  to  numerous  addresses  and  pamphlets,  he  has
published  "  How  a  Free  People  conduct  a  Long
War  "  (Philadelphia,  1862) ;  "  Northern  Interest  and
Southern  Independence :  a  Plea  for  United  Action  "


(1803) ;  "  Memorial  of  the  Great  Central  Fair  for
the  United  States  Sanitary  Commission "  (1864) ;
"  History  of  the  United  States  Sanitary  Commis-
sion "  (18G6) ;  and  "  Studies  in  Mediaeval  History  "
(1881). — Another  brother,  Moreton,  physician,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  Oct.,  1822 ;  d.  in  Saratoga
Springs,  N.  Y.,  20  Aug.,  1855,  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1841,  and  after
studying  medicine  with  his  brother,  Alfred  Stille,
was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the
university  in  1844,  Subseauently  he  spent  three
years  in  the  medical  schools  of  Dublin,  London,
Paris,  and  Vienna,  and  on  his  return  in  1847  set-
tled in  Philadelphia,  where  he  began  practice.  In
1848  he  was  elected  one  of  the  resident  physicians
of  the  Pennsylvania  hospital,  which  post  he  held
for  nine  months,  and  in  Juno,  1849,  during  the
cholera  epidemic  of  that  year,  he  was  aj)pointed  to
serve  in  the  Philadelphia  almshouse,  where  he  was
stricken  with  the  disease  and  narrowly  escaped
with  his  life.  In  1855  he  was  appointed  lecturer
on  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  the  Phila-
delphia association  for  medical  instruction,  and
completed  his  first  course  of  lectures  there.  Pr.
Stille  contributed  various  articles  to  the  medical
journals  of  Philadelphia,  and  was  associated  with
Francis  Wharton  in  the  preparation  of  a  "  Treatise
on  Medical  Jurisprudence"  (Philadelphia,  1855).

STILLMAN,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  10  March,  1738;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
12  March,  1807.  His  youth  was  passed  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  where  his  parents  had  removed
when  he  was  eleven  years  old.  His  education,
classical  and  theological,  was  good,  though  he  at-
tended neither  college  nor  seminary.  He  was  or-
dained to  the  ministry  in  1759,  and  soon  afterward
became  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  on  James  island.
Impaired  health  obliged  him  to  leave  the  south,
and,  after  preaching  for  congregations  in  New  Jer-
sey, he  was  called  in  1765  to  the  pastoral  charge  of
the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Boston,  which  relation
he  sustained  for  more  than  forty  years.  Few  cler-
gymen in  New  England  were  held  in  higher  es-
teem or  exerted  a  wider  influence.  As  a  preacher
he  had  no  superior.  In  all  the  philanthropic
movements  that  distinguished  Boston  he  was  an
active  and  honored  worker.  He  was  a  member  for
that  city  of  the  convention  in  1788  that  ratified
the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  His  zeal
for  education  was  evinced  especially  in  the  inter-
est that  he  took  in  Brown  university,  in  whose  act
of  incorporation  (1764)  and  first  list  of  trustees
his  name  appears.  In  1788  that  college  conferred
on  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  Dr.  Stillman  published
a  large  number  of  sermons,  among  which  were
"A  Sermon  on  the  Repeal  of  the  Stamp- Act"
(1766); "Thoughts  on  the  French  Revolution"


(1794);  and  "A  Sermon  occasioned  by  the  Death
of  George  Washington  "  (1799).

STILLMAN,  Thomas  Bliss,  mechanical  en-
gineer, b.  in  Westerly,  R.  I.,  30  Aug.,  1806;  d.  in
Plainfleld.  N.  J.,  1  Jan.,  1866.  He  was  educated  at
Union  college,  and  in  1832  came  to  New  York  city
and  took  charge  of  the  Novelty  iron-works.  The
first  line  of  steamships  on  this  coast  to  carry  pas-
sengers and  freight  between  New  York  and  Charles-
ton, S.  C.  was  established  by  him.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  U.  S.  inspector  of  steam  vessels  for  the
New  York  district,  and  superintendent  of  con-
struction of  revenue  cutters.  His  last  work  was
to  put  twelve  armed  steam  cutters  afloat  in  place
of  the  sailing  vessels  that  had  been  previously  used.
He  was  also  at  various  times  president  of  the  board
of  comptrollers,  of  the  park  board  in  New  York
county,  and  of  the  Metropolitan  f)olice  commission.
For  nearly  twenty  years  he  was  a  trustee  of  the
New  York  hospital,  and  he  was  long  president  of
the  Metropolitan  savings  bank.  He  invented  im-
proved forms  of  machinery  that  have  come  into
use.— His  brother,  William  James,  author,  b.
in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  1  June,  1828,  wjis  gradu-
ated at  Union  college  in  1848,  and  began  the  study
of  landscape-painting  under  Frederick  E.  Church.
In  1849  he  went  to  Europe,  remaining  six  months,
and  returning  with  a  thorough  belief  in  the  new
school  of  pre-Raphaelitism.  During  1851-'9  he
was  a  regular  exhibitor  at  the  Academy  of  design,
of  which  he  was  elected  an  associate  member  in
1854.  In  1852  he  went  to  Hungary  for  Louis
Kossuth,  to  carry  away  the  crown  jewels  of  the
kingdom,  which  had  been  hidden  by  Kossuth  dur-
ing the  revolution.  Thence  he  went  to  Paris,  to
study  under  Adolphe  Y-von.  On  his  return  to  the
United  States,  in  company  with  John  Durand  he
founded  the  "  Crayon,  in  1855.  He  returned  to
Europe  in  1859,  and  was  U.  S.  consul  in  Rome
during  1861-'5,  and  in  Crete  in  1865-'9.  Since
1870  he  has  devoted  himself  entirely  to  literature.
During  1875-'82  he  acted  as  correspondent  of  the
London  "  Times "  in  Herzegovina,  Montenegro,
and  Greece,  and  in  1883-'5  he  was  the  art  critic  of
the  New  York  "  Evening  Post  "  and  associate  edi-
tor of  the  "  Photographic  Times."  Since  1886  he
has  resided  at  Rome  as  the  London  "  Times's  '*
correspondent  for  Italy  and  Greece.  His  pub-
lished works  are  "  Acropolis  of  Athens  "  (London,
1870);  "Cretan  Insurrection"  (New  York,  1874);
"  Herzegovina  and  the  Late  Uprising "  (Ijondon,
1877);  and  "On  the  Track  of  Ulysses"  (Boston,
1887).  He  has  also  edited  "  Poetic  Localities  of  Cam-
bridge" (Boston,  1875),  and  has  contributed  arti-
cles to  various  magazines.  Mr.  Stillman  is  an  ex-
pert photographer,  and  in  1872-'3  published  two
manuals  of  photography.  In  1872  he  also  brought
out  twenty-nve  photographic  views  of  Athens,  and
in  1886  the  Autotype  company  of  London  began  the
publication,  for  the  Hellenic  society,  of  a  series  of
photographs  from  his  negatives  of  the  Acropolis.

STILWELL,  Silas  Moore,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  6  June,  1800 ;  d.  there,  16  May,  1881.
His  ancestor,  Nicholas  Coke,  brother  of  John  Coke,
the  regicide,  emigrated  to  this  country  earlv  in  the
17th  century,  where  hfe  adopted  the  name  Stilweli.
Stephen,  the  father  of  Silas  M.  Stilwell,  a  soldier
in  the  Plevolutionary  war,  went  in  1804  to  Wood-
stock, Ulster  CO.,  N.  Y.,  where  he  established  a
f:lass-factory.  The  son  was  educated  at  Woodstock
rec  academy  until  1812,  when,  his  father  having
failed,  he  went  to  New  York  and  entered  business.
In  1814  he  engaged  in  surveying  in  the  west,  and
then  settled  in  Tennessee,  where  in  1822  he  was
in  the  legislature. He  afterward  removed  to  Vir-


8TIMPS0N


snifsoN


091


ginia,  wm  derk  of  Tasewell  countr,  and  a  member
of  the  houm;  of  hur(^«8et(,  and  in  1H24  WMwlmittod
to  tlu>  Uif.  He  n'turntil  to  Nt-w  York  in  182H,  ami
in  1821*  wiLs  (•Itvt»'«l  to  the  lo^iHlHtun',  whon'  hi'it>n-
tinut<4l  until  18:{3.  In  \M4  hi*  l>)-<-Hnie  n  cnniiiilHto
for  lii-ut«'n»nt-governor  on  the  ticket  with  William
H.  Sewartl.  He  was  electe«l  alderman  in  New  York
city  in  1885,  and  made  chairman  of  the  Ixtanl;  the
pofitieal  parties*  were  then  e<|tially  divided,  and  as
no  had  the  casting-vole  on  all  ap[)ointmentH  he
became  |)oj»ularly  known  &»  K'mg  CaueuH.  He
was  the  acting;  mayor  at  the  time  of  the  prejit  fire
in  18JJ5.  On  Gen.  Harrison's  election  to  thd  pn-si-
dency  he  was  offere<l  a  cabinet  ap|M)intment,  but,
having  lost  his  fortune  in  the  [mnic  of  1887,  he
decliiuHl,  but  ho  was  with  Harrison  during  most  of
the  latter's  short  term  of  oflice,  ami  after  his  death
accented  the  appointment  of  IT.  S.  marshal  for  the
s<iutnern  district  of  New  York,  which  he  held
during  Tyler's  miministration.  At  this  time  he
was  sent  on  a  sfMH-ial  mission  to  the  Hague  to  in-


ouiro  as  to  the  feasibility  of  negotiating  a  l<Min  for
tne  U.  S.  government.  At  the  end  of  his  term  he
resumetl  tne  practice  of  law.  Mr.  Stilwell  was  the
author  of  the  act  entitled  "An  act  to  abolish  im-

Srisonment  for  debt  and  to  punish  fraudulent
ebtors,"  which  was  passed,  26  April.  1881.  This
was  commonly  called  the  Stilwell  act.  Ho  was
also  the  author  of  the  banking  laws  of  the  state
of  New  York,  of  the  general  bankrupt  act,  and
of  the  national  banking  act  and  system  of  organ-
ized credits  in  1808.  fie  wrote  a  great  deal  on
auestions  of  finance,  beginning  in  18537.  His
rst  pamphlet  was  entitleil  "  A  System  of  Credit
for  a  Republic  and  Plan  of  a  Bank  for  the  State  of
New  York"  (1838).  Others  were  "Notes  F^xplana-
torv  of  Mr.  Chase's  Plan  of  National  Finance,"
and  "  National  Finances ;  a  Philosophical  Examina-
tion of  Credit"  (18G(>).  Many  of  his  articles  ap-
peared in  the  "  Herald,"  from  1800  till  1872,  under
the  tK'n-iuiine  of  '-.Jonathan  Oldbuck."

ST1.MPS0N,  >Viniain.  naturalist,  b.  in  Rox-
bury,  Mass.,  U  Feb..  1832;  d.  in  Ilchester  Mills.
Md.,  26  May,  18?2.  He  was  early  led  to  the  study
of  natural  history,  and  made  extensive  collections.
It  is  claimed  that  he  was  the  first  to  enter  upon
the  work  of  deejHsea  dredging  in  searching  for
specimens.  He  became  a  pupil  of  I^ouis  .\gassiz.
and  accompanied  that  naturalist  in  1852  on  his  ex-
pedition to  Norfolk,  Va.,  and  Charleston,  S.  C,  to
mvestigate  the  marine  fauna  of  that  region.  Lat«r
in  the  year  he  was  ap|xiinted  naturalist  to  the  North
Pacific  expedition,  and  spent  three  years  and  a  half
in  making  observations  and  ctdlections.  On  his  re-
turn he  settled  in  Washington,  and  for  nine  years
was  engageil  in  classifying  the  results  that  he  had
obtaineil.  In  1804  he  liecame  curator  of  the  Chi-
cago academy  of  sciences,  and  sul>sefjuently  he
was  its  secretary.  While  holding  this  office  he
organized  a  system  of  exchanges  by  which  the
library  of  the  acatlemy  was  supplied  with  scientific
journals  and  transactions,  and  enriched  its  muse-
um with  spijcimens  of  natural  history  from  all
parts  of  the  world.  These  collections,  as  well  as
much  other  valuable  material,  including  his  own
manuscripts,  which  represente<l  the  rest*arches  of
more  than  twenty  years,  were  destroyed  bv  the  fire
of  1871.  For  several  years  he  visitetl  Florida  on
scientific  expe<Iitions,  and  during  the  early  part  of
1872  he  was  engaged  in  sufierintending  deep-sea
dre<lging,  under  the  auspices  of  the  I'.  S.  ctmst  sur-
vey, in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  The  thoroughness  of
his  researches,  with  the  clearness  and  accuracy  of
his  descriptions,  gained  for  him  a  high  rank  as  a
scientific  olMtervcr,  and  it  was  said  of  him  that  be


dearribed  mors  new  ipeclM  of  mariiM  animals
than  any  naturaiint  except  Jaroea  D.  Diaiw.  He
was  a  memlKT  of  Tarious  scientiflo  sodetiaa,  aiid
was  early  elected  to  mrmbenhip  in  the  Natiooal
academy  of  science*.  Darinf  his  ooonection  wiUi
the  Chica^)  academy  of  nieooM  bt  aditad  Ha
**  Transactions  "  and  ita  anniMl  rapurta,  BMidw
his  various*  contributions  to  srionfifci  pmraadlngs.
he  publishe^l  numerous  memoin,  including  "A
Revision  of  the  .Synonvmy  of  thf  Ti-«itnreofl«  Mol-
lusks  of  New  Kngland"  "(It.  - j^

sis  of  the  .Marine  fnvertebrat  ,n

the  "Smithsonian  ('ontrilmiii  ii«  i  ><»  ai«ninguin,
1H,W):  "Crustacea  and  F/-hino4iermala  of  the  Pa-
cific .Shon-s  of  North  Ameritii"  (Ikwton,  1857):
"  Descriittiones  Animalium  Kvertcbratorum "
(Philadelphia,  l8.'i7-*«»):  and  "  Note«  on  North
American  Crustatfa"  (New  York,  IKTO).  lie  wm
associate«l  in  the  pro^mration  of  "  Check- Lii*ts  of
the  Shells  of  North  America  "  (Wa-shington,  IHOO),
and  "  Researches  upon  the  Ilydrobiina*  and  Allied
Forms"  (18(W).

STIMSON,  Alexander  I^vett,  author,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  14  I)e<-.,  IHio.  Ho  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  (ieorgia  in  1840.  and  waa
also  connected  with  the  press  in  B<iston.  Nrw  Yorlj,
and  New  Orleans  for  many  years.  Mr.  Stimson
established  in  1852,  and  for  several  years  editetl,
the  "Express  Messenger."  He  is  the' author  of  a
"  Hi.storv  of  the  Boston  Mercantile  Library  Asso-
ciation'':  "  Fjisy  Nat,  or  the  Three  A{iprentioes**
(New  York.  1850;  republished  as  "New  England
Ikiys");  "History  of  the  Express  Companies,  and
the  Origin  of  American  ltailroads"(lK'i6;  new  ed.»
1881) ;  "  Waifwood,"  a  novel  (1804) ;  and  many  tales
in  tH-riiMlicnls.

STIMSON,  Frederic  Jesup,  author,  b.  in
Dedham,  Mass.,  20  July,  IKVi.  lie  was  gnwluated
at  Harvard  in  1870,  and  at  the  law--school  in  1878,
and  was  assistant  altoniey-general  of  Massachusetts
from  1884  till  1885.  He  has  pursue<l  literature  with
law.  writing  his  earlier  novels  under  the  pen-name
of  "J.  S.  of  Dale."  He  has  publisher!  "Stirason's
I>aw  Glossarv  "  (Ik>ston,  1881);  "  Guemdale."  a
novel  (New  Vork.  1882);  "The  Crime  of  Henry
Vane"  (1884);  "The  King's  Men."  in  collabora-
tion (1884);  "American  Statute  I^w  "  (lioston.
1886) ;  "  The  Sentimental  Calendar  "  (New  York.
1880);  "First  Harvests"  (1888);  and  "The  Re-
siduary IjCgatee  "  (1888).  He  was  alst>  one  of  the
authors  of  "  Rollo's  Journey  to  Cambridge."  which
first  appeared  in  the  "  Harvard  I^m{>o<m  "  and
afterward  in  book-form  (Boston.  187U).

STIMSON,  John  Ward,  artist,  b.  in  Paterson,
N.  J.,  10  Dec.,  1850.  He  wasgradiiatetl  at  Vale  in
1872,  and  then  studied  art  at  the  tlcolo  dt-s  beaux
arts  in  Paris,  France.  On  his  return  to  this  coun-
try he  became  art  instructor  and  lecturer  at  Prince-
ton, but  on  the  establishment  of  the  art-schools
that  are  connectetl  with  the  Metrop<ditan  museum
in  New  York  city  he  was  a|>|K>iiited  their  sui»erin-
tendent.  During  the  four  years  that  he  hail  charge
of  these  sch<x>ls  Mr.  Stimson  iiicn'ase«l  the  mem-
U'rship  from  thirty  pupils  to  nearly  four  hundred,
with  seventeen  classes.  Owing  to  differenws  lio-
tween  himself  and  the  trustees,  who  showed  a
desire  to  restrict  his  [Miwer,  he  resigned,  in  Kei>-
nuiry,  1888,  he  announced  his  deeire  to  found  a
New  York  university  fur  artist  artisans,  and  he
has  re<'eive«1  substantial  support  for  his  scheme
fnim  the  citizt>ns  of  New  York  city.  Mr.  Stimson
has  meanwhile  continued  his  artistic  work,  and
has  contributed  to  various  exhibitions.  He  has
also  written  for  p«'riodicaIs,  and  haM  published
"The  Law  of  Three  Primaries"  (New  York,  1884).


692


STIRLING


STOCKBRIDGE


STIRLING,  Sir  Thomas,  bart.,  British  soldier,
d.  9  May.  1808.  He  became  captain  in  July,  1757,
in  the  43d,  or  Royal  Highland  regiment,  which
took  part  in  the  expeditions  of  1758-'9  to  Lake
George  and  Lake  Champlain.  It  was  afterward
sent  to  assist  at  the  siege  of  Niagara,  and  in  1700
accompanied  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst  from  Oswego  to
Montreal.  Capt.  Stirling  was  stationed  at  Port.
Chartres,  III.,  in  1765,  and  in  June,  1766,  he  re-
turned to  Philadelphia,  after  a  march  of  more  than
3,000  miles,  with  his  entire  detachment  of  100
men  in  perfect  health  and  without  accident.  He
became  major  in  1770,  and  lieutenant-colonel  in
1771,  commanding  his  regiment  throughout  the
Revolutionary  war.  He  was  in  the  engagement  on
Staten  island,  the  battle  on  Brooklyn  heights  in
1776.  the  storming  of  Fort  Washington,  the  cap-
ture of  Red  Bank,  the  battle  of  the  Bmndywine,
and  that  of  Springfield,  7  June,  1780,  where  he
was  wounded.  He  wiis  made  colonel  in  1779.  and
held  the  rank  of  brigadier-general  under  Sir  Henry
Clinton  in  the  expedition  against  Charleston,  S.  C,
in  1780.  He  became  colonel  of  the  71st  Highland-
ers in  February,  1782,  major-general  in  November
following,  lieutenant-general  and  a  baronet  in  1796,
and  general,  1  Jan.,  1801.

STITH,  William,  historian,  b.  in  Virginia,  in
1689;  d.  in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  27  Sept.,  1755.
He  was  a  nephew  of  Sir  John  Randolph,  and
brother-in-law  of  Peyton  Randolph.  After  study-
ing theology,  he  was  ordained  in  England  as  a
minister  of  the  established  church,  and  in  1731
became  master  of  the  grammar-school  of  William
and  Mary  college.  He  was  chaplain  of  the  house
of  burgesses  in  1738,  and  in  1752-'5  rector  of  Hen-
rico parish  and  president  of  William  and  Mary.
He  published  a  "  History  of  Virginia  from  the
First  Settlement  to  the  Dissolution  of  the  London
Company "  (Williamsburg,  1747  ;  new  ed.,  with
bibliographical  notice  by  Joseph  Subin,  limited  to
250  copies,  New  York,  1866).  Thomas  Jefferson
says  of  this  work  that  it  is  "  inelegant  and  often
too  minute  to  be  tolerable,"  and  De  Tocqueville
calls  it  "  long  and  diffuse,"  but  it  is  praised  highly
by  others  for  its  accuracy.  Stith  acknowledges  in
his  preface  his  indebtedness  to  the  writings  of
William  Byrd,  and  he  also  made  use  of  materials
that  Sir  John  Randolph  had  collected  for  a  pur-
pose similar  to  his  own.  All  the  documents  that  he
used  have  been  recently  destroyed  by  fire.  He  also
wrote  "The  Nature  and  Extent  of  Christ's  Re-
demption." a  sermon  (Williamsburg,  1753).

STOBO,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scot-
land, in  1727 ;  d.  after  1770.  His  father,  William,
was  a  wealthy  merchant.  The  son  was  very  deli-
cate in  his  youth,  but  early  gave  evidence  of  taste  for
arms,  spending  his  play-hours  in  drilling  his  com-
panions. Both  his  parents  had  died  before  1742,
and,  after  studying  for  some  time  in  the  university
of  his  native  place,  he  went  to  Virginia  about  that
year  and  became  a  merchant.  Here  he  kept  open
house  and  was  a  great  social  favorite,  but  met
with  little  success  in  business,  and  in  1754  was  ap-
pointed senior  captain  in  a  regiment  that  was
raised  by  the  province  to  oppose  the  French.
Under  his  direction  the  intrenchments  called  Fort
Necessity  were  thrown  up,  and  when  finally  Maj.
George  Washington  was  obliged  to  surrender  the
work,  Stobo  was  one  of  two  hostages  that  were
given  to  the  French  to  secure  proper  performance
of  the  articles  of  capitulation,  lie  was  sent  to
Fort  Du  Quesne,  and  occupied  himself  with  draw-
ing a  plan  of  that  stronghold,  which,  with  a  writ-
ten scheme  for  its  reduction,  he  sent  to  the  com-
manding oflBcer  at  Wills  Creek. He  was  greatly


aided  in  obtaining  his  information  by  the  ladies  in
the  fort,  whose  good  graces  he  soon  succeeded  in
gaining.  He  considered  that  the  want  of  good
faith  that  the  French  had  shown  in  various  mat-
ters absolved  him  "  from  all  obligations  of  honor
on  this  point.".  His  letters  fell  into  the  hands  of
the  French  at  Braddock's  defeat,  whereupon  Stobo
was  closely  imprisoned  at  Quebec.  He  escaped  in
1756,  but  was  captured,  confined  in  a  dungeon,  and
on  28  Nov.  was  condemned  to  death  as  a  spy,  but
the  king  failed  to  approve  the  sentence.  On  30
April,  1757,  he  escaped  again,  but  he  was  recap-
tured three  days  later.  On  30  April,  1758,  ne
made  another  attempt,  and  succeeded  in  effecting
his  escape  with  several  companions  in  a  birch-bark
canoe.  After  meeting  with  many  adventures  and
travelling  thirty-eight  days  thev  reached  the  Brit-
ish army  before  Louisburg,  where  Stobo  was  of
much  service  by  his  knowledge  of  localities.  He
had  been  promoted  major  during  his  captivity,  and
after  returning  to  Virginia  sailed  in  1760  for  Eng-
land, where,  on  5  June,  1761,  he  was  commissioned
captain  in  the  15th  foot.  He  served  in  the  West
Indies  in  1762,  but  returned  to  England  in  1767,
and  resigned  in  1770.  On  his  visit  to  Virginia
after  his  captivity  the  legislature  thanked  him  by
name  for  his  services,  and  voted  him  the  sum  of
£1,300.  Stobo  was  a  friend  of  Tobias  Smollett,  the
novelist,  who,  it  has  been  suggested,  describes  him
as  Captain  Lismahago  in  "Humphrey  Clinker."
The  original  edition  of  Stobo's  "  Memoii-s  "  (Lon-
don, 18()0)  is  now  rare.  A  manuscript  copy  was
obtained  by  James  McHenry  from  the  British
museum,  and  published,  with  notes,  addenda,  and
a  fac-simile  of  Stobo's  plan  of  Fort  Du  Quesne,  by
"  N.  B.  C."  as  "  Memoirs  of  Major  Robert  Stobo  of
the  Virginia  Regiment"  (Pittsburg,  1854).  This
unique  work  is  largely  written  in  an  imitation  of
the  classical  epic  style.

STOCKBRIDOt:,  Francis  Brown,  senator,  b.
in  Bath,  Me.,  9  April,  1826.  He  was  educated  at
Bath  academy,  and  resided  in  Boston  from  1842
till  1847,  when  he  became  a  luml)er  merchant  in
Chicago,  III.  In  1854  he  removed  to  Saugatuck,
Mich.,  and  since  1863  he  has  resided  in  Kalamazoo,
Mich.  He  has  served  as  a  colonel  of  Michigan
militia,  wjis  successively  in  both  branches  of  the
legislature  in  1869-'71,  and  in  January,  1887,  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate.

STOCKBRIDGE,  Levi,  agriculturist,  b.  in
North  Hadley,  Mass..  13  March,  1820.  He  was
educated  in  New  England  common  schools  and
academies,  and  then  turned  his  attention  to  farm-
ing. His  application  of  scientific  principles  to  his
occupation  led  to  his  appointment  on  the  State
board  of  agriculture,  where  he  served  for  four  terms
of  three  years  each,  and  since  1868  he  has  been
chairman  of  the  State  board  of  cattle  commission-
ers. In  1867  he  was  called  to  a  professorship  in
the  Massachusetts  agricultural  college,  Amherst,
where  he  was  also  acting  president  in  1876-'9,  and
president  in  1880-'2.  Prior  to  the  establishment
of  experiment  stations  he  began  and  prosecuted
during  several  years  a  laborious  and  extended
series  of  investigations  on  the  movement  of  sap  in
growing  plants,  especially  trees,  and  the  force  that
plants  exert  in  their  growth.  About  the  same  time
he  devised  and  prosecuted  a  series  of  experiments
as  to  the  effect  of  moisture,  and  with  apparatus
that  he  invented  for  the  purpose  made  observations
on  percolation,  evaporation,  and  dew.  But  his
most  valuable  work  to  the  agriculturist  was  a
series  of  investigations  that  he  conducted  during
1868-'70on  the  chemical  composition  of  farm  crops,
and  the  effect  of  supplying  to  th*  soil  on  which


ST(K'KTON


STOCKTON


any  pArticulor  crop  wm  to  he  raiiKyl  the  oonstitu-

oiits  of  that  cr«)i».  This  Iml  to  tho  i*mplc>yiiioiit  of
tht<  s|NM-ial  fiTtilizcrs  that  arc  now  wi<i«*ly  iimhI  in
tho  pliu'o  of  (foneral  fertilizors,  or  ramiom  fertil-
izers, which  for  a  s|MH'ial  |iiiriN)s«'  tnijfht  Im>  valuahli'
or  worthless.  lie  is  a  ineiniK'r  of  various  affricul-
tural  ass4MMatinns  an<l  has  iniulo  many  mldn's^'s
on  his  sjHH'ialties  in  New  Kn^Utnd  an«l  New  York.
His  writinjp*.  inehulinjj  tlio  rt>sultsof  his  res<>art'hes,
apixMir  in  various  |iulilications.  chiefly  in  the  an-
nual reixirts  of  tlie  Mussiu'liusetts  a^fricultural  col-
lejre. — ilis  l)rother.  Hoiiry,  lawyer,  l».  in  N<»rth
Hailley,  Mass.,  HI  Aujj.,  1822,  was  originally  nanie<l
Henry  Smith  St«H'kl»ri(life,  hut  he  (InnnK^l  the
Smith  in  early  manhixxl.  He  was  f^rmiuateU  at
Amherst  in  lS4.5.  anil  studied  law  in  lialtinxirc,
whore  ho  was  admitted  to  tho  Iwr,  1  May.  18iy,
ami  has  since  practise*!  his  r)rofession.  During
the  civil  war  ho  was  a  special  district  attorney  to
attend  to  tho  business  of  tho  war  department,  and
in  18<M,  as  a  njomlKT  of  the  legislature,  ho  drafted
the  act  that  convenetl  a  constitutional  convention
for  tho  alxtlition  of  slavery  in  the  state.  He  took
an  active  jmrt  in  the  proceedings  of  tho  convention,
and  defended  the  constitution  that  it  lulopted  Ije-
fore  the  court  of  last  resort.  Afterward  he  insti-
tuted, and  succ^essfuUy  prosecuted  in  the  U.  S,
courts,  proceedings  by  which  were  annulled  the  in-
dentures of  apprenticeship  by  which  it  wjis  sought
to  evade  the  omanciiMititm  clause.  Mr.  Stockbridgo
thus  practically  secured  the  enfranchisement  of
more  than  10,000  colored  children.  Ho  wjis  judge
of  the  circ'uit  court  for  Baltimore  county  in  IHtJo,
a  delegate  to  the  Loyalists'  convention  in  IHiW,  and
vice-president  of  the  National  Ilepublican  conveii-
ti(m  of  18G8.  Mr.  Stockbridgo  has  Ijoen  f<ir  twenty
▼fears  wlitorof  the  Fund  publications  of  tho  Mary-
land tiistorical  society,  of  which  he  is  vice-presi-
dent; and  he  is  the  author  of  pultlication  No.  22;
'•The  Archives  of  Maryland"  (Baltimore,  18««);
Ix'sides  various  contril)utions  to  magazines.

STOCKTON,  Alfred  AiigUMtiis,  Canmlian  law-
yer, b,  in  Studholm,  King's  co..  New  Brunswick,  2
Nov.,  1842.  His  great-grandfather,  Andrew  Hun-
ter Stockton,  a  native  of  Princeton,  N.  J.,  fought
on  tM  royal  side  in  tho  war  of  tho  Revolution,
and  afterward  settled  in  New  Brunswick.  Mr.
Stoi'kton  was  graduateil  at  Mount  Allison  college
in  1864,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  New
Brunswick  in  1808,  and  became  a  momlKjr  of  the
New  lirunswick  legislature  in  1883.  Ho  is  secre-
tary of  the  lx)ard  of  gtjvernors  of  Mount  Allison
college,  an  examiner  in  political  t»conomy  an»l  con-
stitutional history,  and  also  an  examiner  in  law
at  Victoria  university,  president  of  the  Now  Bruns-
wick historical  society,  and  resistor  of  tho  court
of  vice-iulmirally  of  the  province.  He  luis  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  B.  from  Victoria  uni-
versity, that  or  Ph.  D.  fn)m  Illinois  Wesleyan  uni-
versity, and  that  of  D.  C.  L.  fn>m  Mount  Allis<»n
college  in  1884.  Ho  edited  "  Rules  of  the  Vice-
Admiralty  Court  in  New  Brunswick  "  (St.  John,
187(5),  ami  "  Berton's  Roiwrt  of  the  Supreme  Court
of  New  Brunswick,"  witn  copious  notes  (1882).

STOCKTON,  Richard,  sipnor  of  the  Dei-lara-
tiou  of  Inde|K'ndence,  b.  on  his  estate  near  Prince-
ton, N.  J..  1  Oct.,  17*):  d.  there.  28  Feb.,  1781.
His  great-grandfather,  of  the  same  name,  came
fnjm  Kngland  U'fore  1670,  and,  after  residing  sev-
eral years  on  Long  Island.  purchius«Hl.  alK>ut  1680,  a
tract  of  6,400  acres  of  land,  t)f  which  Prin<-eton.
N.  J.,  is  nearly  the  centre.  Al»out  1682  he  and  his
associates  formtHl  a  settlement  there,  and  were  the
first  EurojK'ans  in  the  district.  Richard's  father,
•Tohn,  inherited  "Morven,"  the  family-scat,  mid


If


WS3  for  nuuiT  jean  chief  judge  of  the  court  of

common  jilea*  of  SftmorM»t  county.  Tho  eon  wm
gnuliiate«{  at  Prin<-<'ton  in  I74X.  i»lu«Iie<l  law  with
I)avid  Ogden  in  Newark,  and  in  1 754  w««  ■limit'
ted  to  the  Imr,  in
which  he  wKjn  at-
tained great  repu-
tation. After  a<--
cpiiring  a  com(N>-
tency,  he  vixiU'd
Great  Britain  in
1786-'?.  making
the  aoquaintiinco
of  many  public
men  and  receiving
the  frwdoin  of  the
city  from  the  mu-
niciiiai  authorities
of  h^linburgh.  He
exerted  himself  e»-
iK-cially  to  n-move
the  pri' vailing  ig-
norance reganliiig
the  American  col-
onies. While  he
was  in  Sc-otland
his  personal  effort  8
induced  Dr.  John
Withers[XM)n  to  reconsider  his  refusid  to  Un-ome
president  of  Princeton,  and  for  this  and  other  ser-
vices to  the  college  Mr.  St<K-kton  re«-eiv«Ml  the  for-
mal thanks  of  its  tnistj-es  after  his  return  in  Sep-
temlx'r,  1767.  In  17tW  he  was  made  a  memlier  of
the  executive  council  of  the  province,  and  in  1774
he  was  raise<l  to  the  supri'ine  bench  of  New  Jersey.
He  strove  at  first  to  effect  a  ri'conciliation  U-tween
the  colonies  and  the  mother  country,  and  <m  12
Doc.,  1774,  sent  to  Lord  Dartmouth  "  An  Kx{>e<iient
for  tho  Settlement  of  the  American  DisiMites,"  in
which  ho  pro|¥)sed  a  plan  of  colonial  .'«'lf-govem-
ment,  but  he  mkhi  iMx-ame  at^'tive  m  efforts  to  or-
ganize a  prudent  opjiosition,  and  on  21  June,  1776,
was  chosen  by  tho  Provincial  congress  a  meml>er  of
tho  Continental  congn>ss,  then  in  sessi<m  in  Phila-
delphia. His  silence  during  the  ojn'iiing  deliates
on  the  (juestion  of  indt-p'ridence  leads  t«)  the  i-on-
clusion  that  at  first  he  cloubted  the  ex|iiHliency
of  the  declaration,  but  at  tho  close  of  the  discus-
sion ho  expn»sso«l  his  concurn^nce  in  the  final  vote
in  a  short  but  energetic  a4ldri«ss.  He  was  re-
elected to  congn*ss,  where  he  wjis  an  active  mem-
IxT,  and  in  .S»>pteml)er,  1776,  at  the  first  nieeting  of
tho  state  delegjites  under  tho  new  constitution,  wa«
a  candidate  for  governor.  On  the  first  liallot  \w
and  William  Livingston  received  an  e<jual  numl)er
of  votes,  but  the  latter  was  finally  e|ti-t«tl,  Mr.
Stwkton  was  then  chosen  chief  justice  by  a  unani-
mous vote,  but  <leclineil.  On  26  .Sept..  1776.  he
and  George  Clymer  won*  ap{»ointe«l  a  committee  to
inspect  tho  northern  anny.  On  :*)  Nov.,  at  night,
he  was  captured  by  a  i>arty  of  loyalists  at^the
house  of  John  Cove'nhoven,  In  Monmouth,  N.  J.,
which  was  then  his  temjM>rary  home,  Hi^  hort
share<l  his  fate.  Mr.  Stinkton  wjis  thrown  into
the  common  prison  in  New  York,  and  tn'ate<l  with
unusual  s«>vority,  which  »eri«iusly  affet'tiHl  his
health.  Congri^s  passiMi  a  resolution  dirvcting
Gen.  Washingttm  to  inquin*  into  the  circum>tance,
remonstrate  with  (ten.  Howe,  and  ask  "whether
he  chooses  this  shall  U"  the  future  rule  for  treating
all  such,  on  U>th  sides,  as  the  fortune  of  war  may
place  in  the  hands  of  either  |>arty."  Mr.  .Stockton
WHS  exchangetl  shortly  afterwanl.  but  never  »*-
gaine<l  his  health.  His  lil>rary,  which  wa«  one  of
the  best  in  the  country,  had  been  bum«I  by  the


694


STOCKTON


STOCKTON


British,  and  his  lands  were  laid  waste.  His  for-
tune was  greatly  diminished  by  these  depredations
and  the  depreciation  of  the  Continental  currency,
and  he  was  compelled  to  have  temporary  recourse
to  the  aid  of  fnends. Mr.  Stockton,  though  of  a


hasty  temper  and  somewhat  haughty  to  those  that
manifested  want  of  personal  respect  to  him,  was  a
man  of  great  generosity  and  courtesy.  He  pos-
sessed much  courage  and  agility  as  a  horseman
and  swordsman.  His  funeral  sermon  was  delivered
in  the  college  hall  at  Princeton  by  Rev.  Samuel  S.
Smith,  D.  D.  His  statue  was  placed  by  the  state
of  New  Jersey  in  the  capitol  at  Washington  in
1888.  The  accompanying  vignette  is  a  represen-
tation of  his  residence  at  Princeton. — His  wife,
Annis,  sister  of  Dr.  Elias  Boudinot,  was  well
known  for  her  literary  attainments,  and  con-
tributed to  periodicals.  One  of  her  poems,  ad-
dressed to  Washington  after  the  surrender  at
Yorktown,  drew  from  him  a  courtly  acknowledg-
ment. She  also  wrote  the  stanzas  beginning
"  Welcome,  mighty  chief,  once  more ! "  which
were  sung  by  young  ladies  of  Trenton  while  strew-
ing flowers  before  Gen.  Washington  on  his  passage
through  that  city  just  before  his  first  inauguration
as  president  They  are  given  in  full  in  Chief-
Justice  Marshall's  "  Life  of  Washington." — Their
son,  Richard,  senator,  b.  near  Princeton,  N.  J.,
17  April,  1764;  d.  there,  7  March,  1828,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1779,  studied  law  in
Newark  with  Elias  Boudinot,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1784,  and  began  to  practise  in  his  native
place.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1792,  and
in  1796  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  Feder-
alist for  the  unexpired  term  of  Frederick  Freling-
huysen,  resigned,  serving  from  6  Dec.  of  that  year
till  3  March,  1799,  when  he  declined  to  be  a  candi-
date for  re-election.  He  served  in  the  lower  house
of  congress  in  1813-'15,  and  again  declined  further
candidacy.  During  his  service  in  the  house  of  repre-
sentatives he  had  a  debate  with  Charles  J.  Ingersoll,
of  Philadelphia,  on  free-trade  and  sailors'  rights.  In
1825  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners
on  the  part  of  New  Jersey  to  settle  a  territorial
dispute  with  New  York,  and  he  was  the  author  of
the  able  argument  that  is  appended  to  the  report
of  the  New  Jersey  commissioners.  Mr.  Stockton
possessed  profound  legal  knowledge  and  much
eloquence  as  an  advocate,  and  for  more  than  a
quarter  of  a  century  held  the  highest  rank  at  the
bar  of  his  native  state.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Queen's  (now  Rutgers)  college  in  1815,
and  from  Union  in  1816.  He  was  often  called  "  The
Duke." — The  second  Richard's  son,  Robert  Field,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  20  Aug.,  1795 ;
d.  there,  7  Oct.,  1866,  studied  at  Princeton  college,
but  before  completing  his  course  he  entered  the
U,  S.  navy  as  a  midshipman,  1  Sept.,  1811.  He
joined  the  frigate  "  President "  at  Newport,  14
Feb.,  1812,  and  made  several  cruises  in  that  ship


with  Com.  Rodgers,  with  whom  he  went  as  aide  to
the  "  Guerriere  at  Philadelphia  ;  but,  as  the  ship
was  unable  to  go  to  sea,  Rodgers  took  his  crew  to
assist  in  defending  Baltimore.  Before  the  arrival
of  the  British,  Stockton  went  to  Washington  and
became  the  aide  of  the  secretary  of  the  navy,  after
which  he  resumed  his  post  with  Com.  Rodgers  and
took  part  in  the  operations  at  Alexandria.  He
then  went  with  Rodgers  to  Baltimore  and  had
command  of  300  sailors  in  the  defence  of  that  city
against  the  British  army.  He  was  highly  com-
mended, and  promoted  to  lieutenant,  9  Sept.,  1814.
On  18  May,  1815,  he  sailed  in  the  '*  Guerriere,"  De-
catur's flag-ship,  for  the  Mediterranean  after  the
declaration  of  war  with  Algiers,  but  he  was  trans-
ferred soon  afterward  to  the  schooner  "  Spitfire"
as  1st  lieutenant,  in  which  vessel  he  participated  in
the  capture  of  the  Algerine  frigate  "  Mahouda,"
and  led  the  boarders  at  the  capture  of  the  Algerine
brig  "  Esledio  "  in  June,  1815.  In  February,  1816,  he
joined  the  ship-of-the-line  "  Washington  "and  made
another  cruise  in  the  Mediterranean,  in  the  course
of  which  he  was  transferred  to  the  ship  "  Erie,"  of
which  he  soon  became  executive  officer.  The  Ameri-
can officers  very  often  had  disputes  with  British
officers,  and  frequent  duels  took  place.  At  one
time  in  Gibraltar,  Stockton  had  accepted  challenges
to  fight  all  the  captains  of  the  British  regiment  in
the  garrison,  and  several  meetings  took  place.  In
one  case  after  wounding  his  adversary  he  escaped
an-est  by  knocking  one  of  the  guard  from  his  horse,
which  he  seized  and  rode  to  his  boat.  Stockton
came  home  in  command  of  the  "  Erie  "  in  1821.
Shortly  after  his  return  the  American  coloniza-
tion society  obtained  his  services  to  command  the
schooner  "  Alligator  "  for  the  purpose  of  founding
a  colony  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa.  He  sailed  in
the  autumn  of  1821,  and  after  skilful  diplomatic
conferences  obtained  a  concession  of  a  tract  of  ter-
ritory near  Cape  Mesurado,  which  has  since  be-
come the  republic  of  Liberia.  In  November,  1821,.
the  Portuguese  letter-of-marque  "  Mariana  Flora  "
fired  on  the  "  Alligator,"  which  she  mistook  for  a
pirate.  After  an  engagement  of  twenty  minutes
the  Portuguese  vessel  was  taken  and  the  cap-
ture was  declared  legal,  though  the  prize  was  re-
turned by  courtesj^  to  Portugal.  On  a  subsequent
cruise  in  the  "  Alligator  "  he  captured  the  French
slaver  "  Jeune  Eugenie,"  by  which  action  the  right
to  seize  slavers  under  a  foreign  flag  was  first  es-
tablished as  legal.  He  also  captured  several  pirati-
cal vessels  in  the  West  Indies.  From  1826  until
December,  1838,  he  was  on  leave,  and  resided  at
Princeton,  N.  J.  He  organized  the  New  Jefisey
colonization  society,  became  interested  in  the  turf,
and  imported  from  England  some  of  the  finest
stock  of  blooded  horses.  He  also  took  an  active
part  in  politics,  and  became  interested  in  the  Dela-
ware and  Raritan  canal,  for  which  he  obtained  the
charter  that  had  originally  been  given  to  a  New
York  company,  and  vigorously  prosecuted  the
work.  His  whole  fortune  and  that  of  his  family
were  invested  in  the  enterprise,  which  was  com-
pleted, notwithstanding  the  opposition  of  railroads
and  a  financial  crisisj,  by  which  he  was  obliged
to  go  to  Europe  to  negotiate  a  loan.  He  retained
his  interest  in  this  canal  during  his  life,  and  the
work  stands  as  an  enduring  monument  to  his  en-
ergy and  enterprise.  In  December,  1838,  he  sailed
with  Com.  Isaac  Hull  in  the  flag-ship  "  Ohio "  as
fleet-captain  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  being

E)romoted  to  captain  on  8  Dec.  He  returned  in  the
atter  part  of  1839,  and  took  part  in  the  presi-
dential canvass  of  1840  in  favor  of  Gen.  Wuliara
Henry  Harrison. After  John  Tyles  became  presi-


STOCKTON


STOCKTON


090


dent.  SttKikton  was  offfiwl  a  neat  in  the  cabinet  an
secretary  of  the  navy,  which  he  declined.  The  U.  S.
steamer  "  Princeton "  (see  KKir8s«>N.  JuiiK)  waj«
built  under  his  8U|>errision,  and  launchtxl  at  Phila-
delphia early  in  1H44.  lie  was  a|i|Miinted  tn  com-
mand the  ship,  and  brmjjjht  her  to  Wa-shin^^on  for
the  insjKM-tion  of  odicial!*  and  nieniU-rs  of  con-
gress. On  a  trial-trip  <Iown  the  Potoma(!  river,
when  the  president,  cabinet,  and  a  di»tiii)CiiiHhed
company  wen>  on  l)onrd.  one  of  the  l«rK«'j;un»  burst
and  killed  the  w^crefury  of  state,  secn-tary  of  the
navy,  the  president's  father-in-hiw,  and  several  at
the  crew,  while  a  great  many  were  seriomtly  injure«l.
A  naval  court  of  inquiry  entirely  exonerate<l  Cant.
St<K'kton.  Shortly  after  this  event  he  sailed  in  the
"  Princeton  "  as  Ix'arer  of  the  annexation  resolu-
tions to  the  gt)vernment  of  Texas.  In  October,
1845,  ho  went  in  the  frigate  "Congress"  from  Nor-
folk to  serve  as  commander-in-chief  of  the  Pacific
8({uadn)n,  on  the  eve  of  the  Mexican  war.  He
saileti  around  Cape  Horn  to  the  Sandwich  islands,
and  thence  to  Monterey,  where  he  found  thes<^}uad-
ron  in  possession  under  Com.  .John  I).  .Sloat,  whom
Stockton  relieve<i.  News  of  the  war  hiwl  b'en  n»-
ceived  by  the  s<jua<lron  before  his  arrival,  and
Monterey  and  San  Francisco  were  captured.  St<x;k-
ton  assume<l  command  of  all  American  forces  on
the  coast  by  prtK-lamation,  23  .Fuly,  1H46.  He  or-
ganized a  battalion  of  Americans  in  California  and
naval  brigades  from  the  crews  of  the  ships.  Col.
John  C.  Fn'mont  also  co-o|K?rated  with  him. He

sent  Fremont  in
the  "  Cyane  "  to
.San  Diego,  while
he  landed  at  San-
ta Harbara  and
marched  thirty
miles  with  the
naval  brigatle  to
the  Mexican  cap-
ital of  Califor-
nia, the  city  of
Los  Angeles,  of
which  he  took
]K»ssession  on  13
Aug.  He  then
organized  a  civil
government  for
the  state,  and
anjKiinted  Col.
h  remont  govern-
or. Ruujors  of  a
rising  of  the  In-
dians com[H'lle<l
him  to  return  to
the  north  in  September.  The  force  that  he  left  at
Los  Angeles  was  l)esieged  by  the  Mexicans  in  his
absence,  and  .Stockton  wa.s  obliged  to  sail  to  San
Diego  after  finding  all  quiet  in  the  northern  jwrt  of
California.  The  Mexicans  had  also  recaptunnl  San
Diego.  He  landwl  at  that  place,  drove  out  the  ene-
mv,  and  sent  a  force  to  the  rescue  of  Gen.  Stephen
V/.  Kearny,  who  ha<l  l)een  defeated  b^  the  Mexi-
cans on  the  way  to  San  Diego.  Gen.  Kearny,  with
sixty  dragoons,  then  serve*!  under  Stockton's  orders,
and  the  force  procee<le«l  to  I.k>s  Angeles.  LK)  miles
distant.  An  engagement  took  place  at  San  Gabriel
on  8  Jan.,  1847.  followed  by  the  l»attleof  I^a  Mesa  the
next  day,  in  which  the  Mexiciinswere  routed.  Col.
Fremont  had  raised  an  atlditional  force  of  Califor-
nians,bv  which  the  force  under  Stockt<m  amounted
to  more' than  1,000  men.  Negotiations  were  opened
with  the  Mexican  governor,  and  the  entire  province
of  California  was  ceded  to  the  United  States  and
evacuated  by  the  Mexican  authorities. The  treaty


with  Mexico  wm  rabaequentiv  conflnned.  Gen.
Keamjr  raisod  ft  dispute  with  Stockton  for  his  •••
Kumntion  of  oommand  over  militjiry  formw.  but
SttM'kton's  course  was  su»tained  by  virtue  of  his
conquest.  On  17  Jan.,  1847,  he  rvturnetl  to  San
Diego,  and  then  saile*!  to  Monterey,  where  he  wa«
relieve<l  by  Com.  William  H.  .Shutirirk.  .Stoektcm
returned  home  ovitImuI  during  the  Nummer.  lie
wa-s  the  rtH'iiiient  of  honors  by  all  [«rtifs, and  the
legislatuw  of  New  Jerm-y  gave'him  a  vi.i.M.f  thanlu
and  a  ni-ention.  The  |Ny>ple  of  Calif- "i.n.  n.  nty.
ognition  of  his  serviceii,  name<l  for  h  •  ■  of

.Stockton,  and  alsf>  one  of  the  princij'  -  of

San  FranciM'o.  On  38  .Mar.  1850.  he  rei>igii«d  from
the  navv  in  order  to  M>ttle  his  father-in-law's  estate
in  South  Carolina  and  attend  to  hi»  private  inter-
ests. He  continueil  to  take  [lart  in  {loliticA.  was
elected  to  the  V.  S.  S4'nate.  and  t<H»k  his  M-at,
1  Dec.,  1851,  but  resigned.  10  Jan..  I8.''>3.and  retirtd
to  private  life.  During  his  brief  nervico  in  the
senate  he  introduce<l  and  advo<>ated  the  bill  by
which  flogging  was  alHtlishetl  in  the  navy.  He
also  urged  measures  for  chjasI  defence.  After  he
resigneti  fmm  the  senate  he  devoted  himself  to  the
development  of  the  Delaware  and  Itarilan  canal.
of  which  he  was  president  until  liis  death.  He
continued  to  take  an  interest  in  [Mlitics.  U-came  an
anient  supporter  of  the  "  American  "  jiarty.  antl  was
a  delegate  to  the  Peace  congress  that  met  in  Wash-
ington, 13  Feb.,  1801.  See  his  "  I^ifeand  .Speechee"
(New  York,  185(5).— Robert  Field's  son,  John  Pot-
ter, senator,  b.  in  Princeton,  N.  J..  2  Aug.,  1826,
was  graduate*]  at  Princeton  in  1843,  studie<l  law,
was  licensetl  to  practise  hs  an  attorney  in  1847.  anil
came  to  the  bar  in  IHTiO.  He  was  ap|>ointed  by  the
legislature  a  commissioner  to  revise  and  simplify
the  proceedings  and  practice  in  the  courts  of  law
of  the  state,  and  was  for  sevend  years  afterward
re[)orter  to  the  court  of  chancery.  In  1857  he  was
appointed  U.  S.  minister  to  Itome,  but  in  1861  he
was  recalled  at  his  own  reouest.  In  1865  he  was
chosen  U.  S.  senator  from  New  Jersey  bv  a  plu-
rality vote  of  the  legislature, a  resolution  changing
the  nundn-r  necessary  to  elect  from  a  majority  to  a
plurality  having  been  pass***!  bv  the  joint  et)nven-
tion  that  elected  him.  On  this  ground,  after  he
ha*l  taken  his  seat  in  the  senate,  several  members
of  the  legislature  sent  to  the  senate  a  protest
against  his  retaining  it.  The  committee  on  the
judiciarv*  unanimously  refKirtwl  in  favor  of  the
validity  of  his  election,  and  their  report  was  ac-
cepted by  a  vote  of  twenty-two  to  twenty-one,
Mr.  Stm-kton  voting  in  the  aflirmative.  His  vole
was  objecteil  to  bv  Charles  Sumner,  and  on  the  fol-
lowing day,  27  JJarch,  1866,  he  withdrew  it,  and
was  unsealed  by  a  vote  of  twenty-three  to  twenty-
one.  He  then  devot«>d  himself  to  the  practice  of
his  profession,  but  in  1869  was  re-elwle*!  to  the
senate,  and  serve<l  one  term  till  1875.  While  in
that  IxlkIv  he  advwatwl  the  establishment  of  life-
saving  stations  on  the  coast,  and  pnH-uml  on  the
appropriation  bills  the  first  pmvision  for  their
maintenance.  He  servwl  on  the  committees  on
foreign  affairs,  the  navy,  appropriations,  patents.
and  [lublic  buildings  anil  grounds :  and  took  part
in  the  delate  on  n<construction,  and  in  the  discus-
sion of  questions  of  inteniational  law.  In  1877  he
was  ap{»ointedattorney-gi-neral  of  New  Jersey,  and
he  wa«  chosen  again  in  1882  and  1887.  In  this
office  he  has  sustaimil  by  exhaustive  arguments
the  system  of  railroad  taxation,  reversing  in  the
c<nirt'of  errors  the  decisions  of  the  supreme  court
against  the  state.  Mr.  Stixrkton  has  U-en  a  dele-
gate-at-large  to  all  the  DenuK*ratic  National  con-
ventions since  that  of  1864,  where,  as  chairman  of


696


STOCKTON


STODDARD


the  New  Jersey  delofjation,  he  nominated  Gen.
George  B.  McClellan  for  the  presidency.  He  was
also  a  delegate  to  the  Unionists'  convention  at
Philatlolpliia  in  18G6.  Princeton  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  in  1882.  He  has  published  "  Equity
Ke{)orts,"  being  the  decisions  of  the  courts  of  ciiun-
cerv  and  anjieals  Qi  vols.,  Trenton,  18o0-'G0).

STOCKTON,  Thomas  Hewlingrs,  clergyman,
b.  in  Mount  Holly,  N.  J.,  4  June,  1808;  d.  in  l^hila-
dclphia.  Pa..  9  Oct.,  1868.  He  .studied  medicine  in
Philadelphia,  but  began  to  preach  in  1829,  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Protestant  church,
and  took  charge  of  a  circuit  on  the  eastern  shore
of  Maryland. He  soon  attained  a  reputation  as  a

f ml  pit  orator,  and  served  as  chaplain  to  the  U.  S.
louse  of  representatives  in  1833-'5  and  1859-'61,
and  to  the  senate  in  1862.  Being  unwilling  to  sub-
mit to  the  restrictions  in  the  discussion  of  slavery
that  were  imfx)sed  by  the  Baltimore  conference,  he
went  to  Philadelphia  in  1838,  where  he  was  a  pas-
tor and  lecturer  till  1847.  He  then  resided  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  till  1850,  and  while  there  declined  a
unanimous  election  to  the  presidency  of  Miami
university.  From  1850  till  1856  he  was  associate
pastor  of  St.  John's  Methotlist  Protestant  church
m  Baltimore,  also  serving  during  three  years  and
a  half  of  this  period  as  pastor  of  an  Associate  lie-
formed  Presbyterian  cnurch  there.  From  1856
till  his  death  lie  was  pastor  of  the  Church  of  the
New  Testament  in  Philadelphia,  and  also  devoted
himself  to  literary  work.  Ur.  Stockton  edited  at
different  periods  the  "  Christian  World  "  and  the
"  Bible  Times."  He  was  an  anti-slavery  pioneer,
opposed  set^tarianism,  and  was  active  in  his  labors
for  all  social  reforms.  He  published  editions  of
the  Bible,  each  book  by  itself ;  "  Floating  Flowers
from  a  Hidden  Brook  "  (Philadelphia,  1844) ;  "  The
Bible  Alliance  "  (Cincinnati.  1850) ;  "  Ecclesiastical
Opposition  to  the  Bible"  (Baltimore,  1853);  "Ser-
mons for  the  People  "  (Pittsburg,  1854) ;  '•  The
Blessing"  (Philadelphia,  1857);  "Stand  up  for
Jesus,"  a  ballatl,  with  notes,  illustrations,  and  mu-
sic, and  a  few  additional  poems  (1858) ;  "  Poems,
with  Autobiographical  ana  other  Notes  "  (1862) ;
and  "  Influence  of  the  United  States  on  Christen-
dom "  (1865).  After  his  death  appeared  his  "  The
Book  above  all "  (1870).  See  "  Memory's  Tribute
to  the  Life,  Character,  and  Work  of  Rev.  Thomas
H.  Stockton,"  by  the  Rev.  Alexander  Clark  (New
York,  1869),  and  "  Life,  Character,  and  Death  of
Rev.  Thomas  H.  Stockton,"  by  Rev.  John  G.  Wil-
son (Philadelphia,  1809). — His  half-brother,  Fran-
cis Richard,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  5
April,  1834,  was  graduated  at  the  Central  high-
school  in  his  native  city  in  1852,  became  an  en-
graver and  draughtsman,  and  in  1866  invented
and  patented  a  double  graver,  but  he  soon  aban-
doned this  occupation  for  journalism.  After  be-
ing connected  with  the  "  Post "  in  Philadelphia
and  "  Hearth  and  Home  "  in  New  York,  he  joined
the  editorial  staff  of  "  Scribner's  Monthly,"  and  on
the  establishment  of  "  St.  Nicholas "  became  its
assistant  editor.  Mr.  Stockton's  earliest  writings,
under  the  name  of  Frank  R.  Stockton,  which  ne
has  since  retained,  were  fantastic  tales  for  children,
and  apfieared  in  the  "Riverside  Magazine"  and
other  periodicals.  Four  of  these,  under  the  title
of  "  The  Ting-a-Ling  Stories,"  were  issued  in  a  vol-
ume (Boston,  1870).  More  recently  he  has  attained
a  wide  reputation  for  his  short  stories,  which  are
marked  by  quaintness  of  subject  and  treatment
and  by  dry  humor.  The  first  of  these  were  the
"  Rudder  Grange  "  stories,  which  appeared  in
"  Scribner's  Monthly,"  and  afterward  in  uook-form
(New  York,  1879). "  The  Lady  or  the  Tiger!"  is


perhaps  the  most  widely  known.  It  ends  by  pro-
pounding a  problem,  various  solutions  of  which,
some  serious  and  some  jc»cose,  have  apj>eared  from
time  to  time.  A  comic  opera,  based  u|)on  it,  the
libretto  of  which  was  written  by  Sydney  Rosenfeld,
was  produced  in  New  York  in  1888.  Mr.  Stock-
ton's other  short  stories  include  "  The  Transferred
Ghost,"  "  The  Spectral  Mortgage,"  and  "  A  T»Ue
of  Negative  Gravity."  He  is  also  the  author  of  the
novels  "  The  Late  Mrs.  Null "  (New  York,  1886) ;
"The  Ca.sting  Away  of  Mrs.  Leeks  and  Mrs.  Ale-
shine"  (1886),  with  a  seqiiel,  entitled  "The  Du-
santes  "  (1888) ;  and  "  The  Hundredth  Man  "  (1887).
His  short  stories  have  Iieen  collected  as  "  The  La-
dy or  the'Tigerf  and  other  Stories"  (1884);  "The
Christmas  Wreck,  and  other  Tales"  (1887);  and
"  The  Bee  Man  of  Om,  and  other  Fanciful  Tales  "
(1887).  He  has  written  for  children  "  Roundabout
Rambles "  (1872) ;  "  What  might  have  been  Ex-
pected "  (1874) :  "  Tales  Out  of  School "  (1875) ;  "  A
Jolly  Fellowship"  (1880) ;  "The  Floating  Prince"
(1881) ;  and  "  The  Story  of  Viteau  "  (1884).— Fran-
cis Richard's  brother,  John  Drean,  journalist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  26  April,  1836 ;  d.  there,  3  Nov.,
1877,  was  educated  in  his  native  city,  and  began  to
study  art  and  engraving,  but  was  employed  at  an
early  age  on  the  Philadelphia  "  Press,  and  became
its  manager  under  John  W.  Forney.  He  was  con-
nected with  the  New  York  "Tribune"  in  1866,
and  in  1867  assumed  the  editorship  of  the  Philadei-

t)hia  "  Post,"  of  which  he  l:)ecame  a  proprietor,  but
le  gave  up  his  interest  in  1872,  and  from  1873  till
his  death  was  dramatic  and  musical  critic  of  the
New  York  "  Herald."  He  wrote  "  Fox  and  Geese,"
a  comedy  (1868),  which  ran  100  nights  in  New  York
and  other  cities,  and  more  than  300  in  London.
Mr.  Stockton's  political  editorials,  as  well  as  his
dramatic  and  literary  criticisms,  were  marked  by
touches  of  humor  and  poetic  fancy.

STODDARD,  Charles  Warren,  author,  b.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  7  Aug.,  1843.  He  was'educated
in  New  York  city  and  in  California,  to  which  state
he  had  removed  with  his  father  in  1855.  In  1864
he  went  to  the  Hawaiian  islands,  where  he  has
since  passed  much  of  his  time,  and,  as  travelling
correspondent  of  the  San  Francisco  "  Chronicle "
in  1873-'8,  visited  many  islands  of  the  South  seas,
Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  the  Pacific  slope  from
Alaska  to  Mexico.  He  began  to  write  poetry  at
an  early  age,  was  for  a  short  time  an  actor,  has
contributed  to  many  magazines,  and  has  also  lec-
tured. He  was  professor  of  English  literature  in
Notre  Dame  college,  Ind.,  in  1885-'6.  He  has  pub-
lished "  Poems  "  (San  Francisco,  1867) ;  "  South-
Sea  Idyls  "  (Boston,  1873) :  "  Mashallah  :  a  Flight
into  Egypt"  (New  York,  1881);  and  "  The  Lepers
of  Molokai "  (Notre  Dame,  1885).

STODDARD,  John  F,  educator,  b.  in  Green-
field, Ulster  CO..  N.  Y.,  20  July,  1825 ;  d.  in  Kearney,
N.  J.,  6  Aug.,  1873.  His  early  years  were  ftassed  on
a  farm,  and,  after  attending  the  public  schools,  he
began  teaching  in  1843.  Later  he  entered  the  New
York  normal  school,  and,  upon  his  graduation  in
1847,  began  his  life-work  as  an  educator.  He  was
eminently  successful  as  an  instructor  of  mathemat-
ics and  in  his  efforts  to  promote  normal  schools,
and  left  a  fund  to  Rochester  univei-sity  for  a  gold
medal,  to  be  awarded  to  the  best  student  in  mathe-
matics. His  principal  published  works  are  "  Prac-
tical Arithmetic"  (New  York,  1852);  "Philosophi-
cal Arithmetic"  (1853);  "University  Algebra"
(1857) ;  and  "  School  Arithmetic  "  (1869).  The  an-
nual sale  of  Stoddard's  arithmetics  was  at  one  time^
about  200,000  copies,  now  40,000,  and  up  to  July,
1888,  over  2,500,000  copies  had  been  issued.


STODDARD


STODDARD


00^


Jc.^.AkU.^


STODDARD,  JoHhiia  ('.  inventor,  b.  In  P«w-
Ict,  Vt.,  2U  Au^'.,  1M14. He  WiiM  «><lu<ate(l  nt  the

t)ul)lii;  scli(M>ls,  and  U-caiiK'  n<it«<<l  aM  an  apiari><t.
ic  alM)  tunitNl  hi.H  attention  to  inv<>ntin^.  an<l
in  1H5U  «U'vis«'«l  tlu*  stcatn-<-alli<>iM\  which  is  \i^-*{
on  Mississippi  stoamcrs.  lie  alsi)  invtMitinl  the
Sttxldnnl  h(>rs4>-mkt'  ami  hav-t)'<i(lt>r.  Moru  than
l(Ml,(XHl  of  his  rakrs  ati-  iiow  in  use.

STODDARD.  Rirhard  lienrMxM>t.h.in  Wxwf,-
hum.  Mass.,  2  July,  1825.  His  father,  a  soa-i'aptain,
»ii>  wreeitcnl  and  lost  on  one  of  his  voyaKi*«  while
Hichard  was  a  child,  and  the  lail  went  in  lH;Vi  to

New  York  with  his
mother,  who  ha<l
niarriiHl  apiin.  lie
attended  the  pub-
lic 8ch<^>ol8  of  that
city,  but  worked
for  several  years  in
an  iron-foundry,  at
the  same  time  read-
ing the  Ix'st  au-
thors, i>articularlv
{MM'trv.  His  tal-
ents Viroupht  him
into  relations  with
younjr  men  inter-
est e«l  in  literature,
notablv  with  liay-
anl  'I'aylor,  who
ha<l  just  publishe<l
his"  Views  Aft>ot."
Stoddartl  had  written  verses  from  his  early  years,
and  in  1841)  printe<l  privately  a  colltH-tion  in  a
small  volume  called  "Footprints,"  the  e<lition
of  which  he  afterwanl  destroyed.  In  1853  he
^published  a  ri{H>r  volume  of  poems,  U'came  a
contributor  to  the  "  Knickerb<x;Ker,"  and  entere<l
upon  literary  work.  Writing  as  a  means  of  sul)-
sistence  U'came  such  a  bunlen  that,  through  Na-
thaniel Hawthorne,  he  obtained  a  place  in  tlie  cus-
tom-house, and  retained  it  from  1H.53  till  1870.  He
was  confidential  clerk  to  Gen.  George  B.  McClel-
lan  in  the  dock  dej»artment  in  1870-'3,  and  city
librarian  in  New  York  for  alxnit  a  year.  He  was
litcrarv  reviewer  on  the  New  York  "  World  "  from
18<50  till  1870,  and  has  held  the  same  ollice  on  the
"  Mail  "  and  "  Mail  and  Express"  since  IHSO.  He
also  editcil  for  some  time  "The  Aldine,"  an  illus-
trate<l  jieriodical,  which  was  discontinued.  His
mind  and  tastes  are  poetical,  but  he  has  done  a
good  deal  of  b(x»ksellers'  work  from  the  urgency
of  circumstances.  In  185Ii  he  published  "  -\dven-
tures  in  Fairy  Ijand"  for  young  folks,  and  in  1857
"Songs  of  Summer." abounding  in  luxuriant  im-
agination and  tropical  feeling.  Among  his  other
works  are  "Town  andC'ountrv,"  for  chililren  (New
York,  1857);  "  Life,  Travels,  and  Ii<H.ks  of  Alexan-
der von  Humlioldt,"  with  an  intr«Mluction  bv  Hav-
ard  Tavlor  (IJoston,  IWW;  I^mdon,  18«2);'"The
King's  IJell,"  a  jx^m  (Boston,  18«2 ;  London.  1804  ;
New  York.  1865);  "TheStorvof  Little  Re<l  Hiding
Hood,"  in  verse  (New  York,'l8«4);  "The  Children
in  the  Wo(k1,"  in  verse  (18(>.'>);  "Abraham  Lincoln,
a  Horatian  Ode"  (18«5);  "Putnam,  the  Brave"
(18(}y) ;  and  "  The  Book  of  the  F^ast."  containing  his
later  txKMns(18(J7).  He  liasedit»'d  "The  Ljust  Politi-
cal W  ritingsof  (ien.  Nathaniel  Lvon" (18(51);  "The
Ijovesand  Heroines  of  the  Poets''  (18<n);  JohnGuv
Vassjir's  "Twenty-one  Years  Hound  the  WorUl
(IH(5',»);  "MeUxlies  and  Mailrigals.  mostly  from  the
Old  Knglish  Poets"  (18<15)  ;  "The  liate  English
Poets  "  (1865) ;  enlarge<l  editi<Mis  of  Hufus  W.  Gris-
wold's  "  P<K't-s  and  PcM'try  of  America  "  (18?2) ;  "  Fe-
male PoeU  of  America"  (1874); and  the  "  Bri«-


A-Brac  S«riM  "  (1R74).  lie  ha«  alim  edited  feraral
annuals,  ma<le  tran)»lalion».  and  written  namercMM
monographs  ami  prrfarc*.  including  xaaoognxk^
iiti  E<igar  Allan  !'<■«•  and  William  I'ullen  Bmmt—
His  wife.  KlizalM>th  Bftntow,  poet,  U  in  Malta*
(Mtisett,  .Ma.sH.,  6  .May,  18S8,  wu  edocated  at  vari-
ous i)<»ardiiig-sch<M»ls.  At  twcntr-^igbt  feMv  of
age  she  marrieil  .Mr.  Stoddanl.  ami  Mion  aftcnnud
she  began  to  contribute  |Miem«  to  the  mairaxlnea.
Thetie  are  more  than  of  the  mer^dv  agf'  i 'U-

lar  onler;  they  invariablv  contain  a  '  lea,

not  always  apfiarent  at  hrst,  but  alwu^n  iMHti<«i,
though  not  iimlen«t<»<Ml  bv  the  average  n-a/ier.  No
colliH-tion  of  her  |NK-ms.  ifistrilmt^-*!  for  twenty-flve
or  thirty  vears  thmiigh  many  |MTi<Nli<-als,  ha>  lieen
made.  ^  ears  ago  she  publiHhe<l  thn-«>  remarkable
novels,  " The  Morgesons  "  (New  York,  IWK) ;  "Two
Men  "  (1865) ;  and  "  Temple  House  "  (1867).  Owiny
to  various  causes,  they  never  sold  to  any  extent,
and  had  long  been  out  of  print  when  a  new  e«li-
tion  was  publishwl  in  1888.  They  illustrate  New
England  character  and  scenery,  and  are  better
adapted  to  the  taste  and  culture  of  the  present
than  to  the  time  when  they  were  written.  .She  has
alsf)  published  a  story  for  young  folks,  "  LoUjr
Dinks's  Doings  "  (New' York. '1874).

STODDARD,  Solomon,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Ma.ss.,  in  164^i;  d.  in  Northampton,  Mass..  11
Feb.,  1?20.  His  father.  Anthony,  came  from  Eng-
land t4)  I^>ston  a)M)Ut  HCiO.  was  a  inendter  of  the
general  court  from  l<Mt5  till  1684.  and  marrit-il  a
sister  of  .Sir  (h>orge  Downing.  Their  son  Solo-
mon was  graduat«Hl  at  Harvard  in  1662,  was  ap-
pointeil  "fellow  of  the  hous«»,"  and  wa-s  the  first
librarian  of  the  college  from  1667  till  1674-  His
health  lH>ing  imiiairetl.  he  went  to  Itarltadoes  as
chaplain  to  the  governor,  an<l  {treache«l  to  the  dis-
senters there  for  nearly  two  years.  In  166U  he  be-
gan to  preach  in  Northampton,  and  on  11  Sept..
1672,  he  was  ordnim'<l  jiastor  of  the  Congregational
church  there,  retaining  this  charge  till  his  death.
In  P'ebruary.  1727,  Jonathan  E«lwards,  his  grand-
son, at  that  time  a  tutor  in  Yale,  Ut-ame  his  col-
league. In  addition  to  sermons,  he  published
"Doctrine  of  Instituted  Churches  explained  and
prove<l  from  the  W<trd  of  (ifnl,"  which  was  a  reply
to  Increase  Mathei's  "Ortler  of  the  (Josih-I."  and
occasioncil  an  exciting  controversy  (lA>ndon.  ITOO):
"Apin'al  to  the  Leaniwl "  <170»):  "Guide  to
Christ"  (1714);  "  Answer  to  Ca«»s  of  Conscience  "
(Boston.  1722):  "(Question  on  the  Conversion  of
the  Indians"  (l?2a);  and  "Safety  in  the  Right-
eousness of  Christ  "  (4th  e«l.,  with  preface  by  John
I  Erskine,  D.  D.,  Edinburgh,  1702).— His  son.  An-
'  thony,  clergvman.  b.  in  Northamjiton.  Ma-ss..  9
;  Aug.,  1678;  J.  in  Woo«lbury,  Conn..  6  Spt..  176(».
was  graduated  at  Hananl  in  161»7.  and  w«is  minis-
ter at  W(KKlbury,  Conn.,  from  27  May.  17<»2.  till  his
death.  He  was"  clerk  of  pn>l>ato  forty  years,  was
the  lawyer  and  physician  of  his  people,  and  one  of
the  most  extensive  farmers  in  the  t4»wn.  He  pub-
I  lished  an  "  Election  Sermon  "  (New  liondon.  1*16).
I  —Another  son.  John.  b.  11  Feb..  HJ81 ;  d.  in  Bos-
!  ton,  11)  June.  174N.  was  graduate*!  at  Harvard  in
I  1701,  was  for  many  years  a  memlK>r  of  the  council
of  Massachusetts,  chief  justice  of  the  t-ourt  of  com-

HLs  "  Jtiunial  of
was  printed  in

.,., ^ ^ .  .  Januarr.  1851.—

Anthonv's  gran<lson,  Aniofi.  wihlier.  b.  in  Wood-
burv.  Conn.,  26  Oct..  1762;  «1.  in  Fort  MeigH.  Ohio.

II  May,  1813.  was  a  s«ddier  from  177V  till  the  clow
of  the'warof  indejiendence.  then  clerk  of  the  su-
preme court  in  Boston.  an«l  practise*!  as  a  lawyer

III  IlHllnwell.  Me.,  in  17»2-'8. He  was  appointed  a


or  .Massacnuseiis.  cniei  jusiice  oi  un
mon  pleas,  and  colonel  of  militia.  I
an  Expedition  to  Canada.  KIS-'U,"
the  "(tenealogical  Register"  for  Ji


698


STODDARD


STOEVER


captain  of  artillery,  1  June,  1798,  was  governor  of
Missouri  territory  in  1804-'5,  became  major,  30
June,  1807,  and  deputy  quartermaster,  16  July,
1812.  At  the  siege  of  Port  Meigs  (see  IIarrison,
William  Henry)  he  received  a  wound  that  re-
sulted in  his  death.  He  wrote  "  Sketches,  His-
torical and  Descriptive,  of  Louisiana"  (Philadel-
nhia,  1812)  and  "The  Political  Crisis"  (London).
His  papers  are  in  the  archives  of  the  Western  Re-
serve historical  society,  Cleveland,  Ohio. — John's
great-grandson,  Solomon,  educator,  b.  in  North-
ampton in  1800;  d.  there,  11  Nov.,  1847,  was  grad-
uated at  Yale  in  1820,  and  became  professor  of
languages  at  Middlebury  college,  Vt.  He  was  co-
author with  Ethan  Allen  Andrews  of  a  "  Grammar
of  the  Latin  Language  "  (Boston,  1836),  which  was
at  one  time  almost  universally  used  in  this  coun-
try, and  had  passed  through  sixty-five  editions  in
1857. — Solomon's  descendant,  David  Tappan,  mis-
sionary, b.  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  2  Dec,  1818 ;
d.  at  Oroomiah,  Persia,  22  Jan.,  1857,  attended
Williams  college  in  1834-'5,  and  then  went  to
Yale,  where  he  constructed  with  his  own  hands
two  telescopes,  by  means  of  which  he  afterward
made  several  discoveries.  He  was  graduated  in
1838,  became  tutor  in  Marshall  college.  Pa.,  and
afterward  prosecuted  his  Latin  studies.  Declining
the  professorship  of  natural  history  in  Marietta
college,  Ohio,  he  entered  Andover  theological  semi-
nary in  1839,  and  became  tutor  at  Yale  in  1840.
He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1842,  and  ordained  at
New  Haven  in  January,  1843.  He  married  in  Feb-
ruary and  sailed  from  Boston  as  a  missionary  to
the  Nestorians  at  Oroomiah,  Persia,  in  March.  In
1848  his  wife  died  of  cholera,  his  health  failed,  and
he  visited  his  brother  in  Scotland  on  his  way  home.
He  remained  in  the  United  States  in  the  service
of  the  mission  board  till  1851,  when,  in  March  of
that  year,  after  marrying  again,  he  sailed  for  Per-
sia. His  labors  at  Oroomiah  were  successful,
many  of  his  pupils  becoming  Christian  teachers
and  preachers.  In  1853  he  completed  a  "  Gram-
mar of  Modern  Syrian  Language,"  which  was  pub-
lished at  New  Haven  in  the  "  Journal  of  the  Ameri-
can Oriental  Society  "  in  1855.  He  also  prepared
numerous  educational  and  religious  works  in  Syri-
an, which  were  issued  from  the  mission  press.  See
memoir,  by  the  Rev.  Joseph  P.  Thompson,  D.  D.
(New  York,  1858).

STODDARD,  William  Osborii,  author,  b.  in
Homer,  Cortland  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Sept.,  1835.  His
father  was  for  many  years  a  bookseller  and  pub-
lisher in  Rochester  and  Syracuse,  N.  Y.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Rochester  in  1858,
edited  the  "  Daily  Ledger  "  in  Chicago  for  a  short
time,  and  the  same  year  became  editor  of  the  "  Cen-
tral Illinois  Gazette,"  at  Champaign,  which  he  con-
ducted for  about  three  years.  He  was  an  opponent
of  slavery,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  Repub-
lican presidential  canvass  of  1860.  He  was  a  pri-
vate secretary  to  President  Lincoln  in  1861-'4,  was
U.  S.  marshal  for  Arkansas  in  1864-'6,  and  has
since  been  variously  employed.  He  invented  a
centre-locking  printer's  chase,  and  has  taken  out
several  patents  for  successful  improvements  in
desiccating  processes  and  in  machinery.  He  has
published  "  Royal  Decrees  of  Scanderoon  "  (New
York,  1869) ;  "  Verses  of  Many  Days  "  (1875) ;  "  Dis-
missed "  (1878) ;  "  The  Heart  of  It "  (1880) ;  "  Dab
Kinzer"  (1881);  "The  Quartet"  (1882);  "Esau
Hardery "  (1882) ;  "Saltillo  Boys"  (1882);  "Talk-
ing-Leaves "  (1882) ;  "  Among  the  Lakes  "  (1883) ;
"Wrecked?"  (1883);  "The  Life  of  Abraham  Lin-
coln "  (1884) ;  "  Two  Arrows  "  (1886) ;  "  The  Red
Beauty"  (1887);  "The  Volcano  under  the  City,"


a  description  of  the  draft  riots  of  1883  (1887) ;  and
"  Lives  of  the  Presidents,"  to  be  completed  in  ten
volumes  (1886-'H).

STODDERT,  Benjamin,  cabinet  officer,  b.  in
Charles  county,  Md.,  in  1751 ;  d.  in  Bladensburg,
Md.,  18  Dec,  1813.  His  grandfather,  Maj.  James
Stoddert,  a  cadet  of  the  Scotch  family  of  Stoddert,
settled  in  Maryland  about  1675,  and  his  father,
Capt.  Thomas  Stoddert,  of  the  Maryland  contin-
gent, was  killed  in  Bfaddock's  defeat.  Benjamin
was  educated  for  a  merchant,  but  in  1776  joined
the  Continental  army  as  captain  of  cavalry,  and
was  in  active  service  till  the  battle  of  Brandywine,
when,  holding  the  rank  of  major,  he  was  so  severe-
ly wounded  as  to  unfit  him  for  active  service.  As
secretary  of  the  board  of  war  he  remained  with  the
army  till  the  latter  part  of  1781.  When  peace  was
concluded  he  became  a  successful  merchant  of
Georgetown,  D.  C.  In  May,  1798,  he  was  appoint-
ed secretary  of  the  navy,  being  the  first  to  hold  the
post,  and  so  remained  till  4  Afarch,  1801.  He  was
acting  secretary  of  war  after  the  resignation  of
James  Henry,  until  his  successor,  Samuel  Dexter,
took  charge.  When  the  navy  department  was  cre-
ated in  1798,  the  frigates  "  Constitution,"  "  Con-
stellation," and  "  United  States  "  constituted  the
bulk  of  the  American  navy.  By  the  latter  part  of
1799  five  frigates  and  twenty-three  sloops-of-war
were  in  commission.  Mr.  Stoiddert's  exjierienc€  in
the  mercantile  marine,  coupled  with  his  tact,  in-
dustry, and  judgment,  were  valuable  in  the  forma-
tion of  this  naval  force,  through  which  the  hos-
tilities with  France  were  so  soon  terminated.  That
he  possessed  the  confidence  and  friendship  of  Presi-
dent Adams  is  shown  by  his  official  and  private
correspondence.  At  the  close  of  Adams's  admin-
istration he  returned  to  private  life,  settling  his
business  affairs,  which  during  his  absence  had  be-
come so  entangled  as  to  cause  serious  losses.

STOECKEL,  Gustave  Jacob,  musician,  b.  in
Maikammer,  Bavarian  Palatinate.  Germany,  9  Nov.,
1819.  He  was  graduated  at  the  seminary  in  Kai-
serslautern  in  1838,  pursued  a  post-graduate  course
in  musical  composition  under  Joseph  Krebs,  and
was  a  teacher  and  organist  till  1847.  He  came  to
this  country  in  that  year,  and  since  1849  has  been
instructor  in  music  at  Yale,  and  organist  of  the
college  chapel.  Yale  gave  him  the  degree  of  Mus.  D,
in  1864.  Dr.  Stoeckel  has  published  a  collection
of  sacred  music  for  mixed  voices  (New  York,
1868),  and  "  College  Hymn-Book  "  for  male  voices
(1886) ;  besides  compositions  for  the  piano,  songs,
and  overtures  and  symphonies  for  orchestra.  He
is  also  the  author  of  the  unpublished  operas  ef
"  Liehtenstein,"  "Mahomet,"  "Miles  Standish,"
and  "  Miskodeeda."

STOEVER,  Martin  Luther,  educator,  b.  in
Gerraantown,  Pa.,  17  Feb.,  1820;  d.  there,  22  July,
1870.  With  the  ministry  in  view  he  entered  Penn-
sylvania college,  Gettysburg,  and  was  graduated
in  1838,  but  he  was  pressed  into  service  as  an  in-
structor before  he  could  begin  his  theological
course,  and  until  his  death  was  engaged  in  teach-
ing. He  was  principal  of  a  classical  academy  in
Maryland  in  1838-'42,  and  of  the  preparatory  de-
partment in  Pennsylvania  college  in  1842-'51,  pro-
fessor of  history  in  the  collegiate  department  in
1844-'51,  and  professor  of  Latin  and  history,  to
which  political  economy  was  added  in  1855,  from
1851  until  his  death  in  1870.  After  the  retirement
of  Dr.  Charles  P.  Krauth  from  the  presidency  of
the  college  in  1850,  he  discharged  the  duties  of
that  office  for  many  months,  until  his  successor  was
elected.  The  honorary  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was  con-
ferred upon  him  in  1866  by  Hamilton  college,  and


STOKES


STONB


609


that  of  LL.  I),  in  18<J»  by  Union  colloj^.  In  1862
the  presiiU'nfy  of  (limnl  collej^c.  Philiwlplphia,  was
oflfiTod  to  him,  and  in  1869  the  proffssorship  of
hat  ill  in  MiihlonU-rjf  collej^,  Alinntown,  Pa.;  hut
ho  (K-^'lintvl  both.  Up  was  ('onn«>(:ti>4l  with  the
"  Kvanjfelical  (^ua"t«Tly  Kcview  "  fn)m  its  licifin-
ninj?  in  1K4».  an<l  was  its  solo  cnlitor  from  1M,57
until  his  death.  His  biographical  artiflos  eanicd
him  the  title  of  "The  I'luUiwh  of  the  Lutheran
Church."  He  was  also  e<litor  of  the  "  Literary
K<'<'ord  and  LinnnMin  Journal,"  in  (Jettysburp,  in
1847-'8,  and  publishcil  "  Memoir  of  the' Life  an<l
Times  of  Henrv  Melchior  MuhlenU'rg,  I>.  1)."
(Philmlelphia,  1856) ;  "  Memorial  of  Phili|)  F.
Mayer,  D.  D."  (1859):  "Brief  Sketch  of  the  Lu-
theran Church  in  this  Country"  (1860);  and  "  Dis-
course before  the  Lutheran  Historical  Society"
(Lancaster,  1862).

STOKES.  Anthony,  British  jurist,  b.  in  Kne-
land  in  17:^6;  d.  in  Loudon,  27  5larch.  1799.  lie
was  a  barrister  at  law  of  the  Inner  Teiuftle,  Lon-
don, came  to  this  country,  was  ap|H)iiited  chief
justice  of  Georjjia  in  1708,  and  in  1772  l)ecarae
councillor  of  that  colony,  retaininp  those  oflices
till  the  evacuation  of  Georjfia  by  the  British  in
1782.  1  lo  was  a  loyalist  at  the  oi)enin;;  of  the  Kevf>-
lution,  and  was  taken  prisoner,  but  was  s(X)n  after-
ward exchanged.  In  1778  his  »»state  wa-s  confis-
cated, lie  went  to  Charleston,  S.  C,  after  leaving
Georgia,  and  at  the  evacuation  of  that  city  ho  re-
turned to  Kngland.  He  published  "  View  of  the
Constitution  of  the  British  Colonies  in  North
America  and  the  West  Indies"  (London,  1782^);
"  Narrative  of  the  Official  Conduct  of  Anthony
Stokes"  (1784);  and  "Desultory  Observations  on
Great  Britain  "  (1792).

STOKES,  James  Hnglies,  soldier,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  in  1814:  d.  in  New  Vork  city,  27  Dec.,
18SK).  Ho  wius  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  resigned  in  184^^,  and  engaged  in  busi-
ness, removing  in  1858  to  Illinois.  After  aiding
in  the  etjuipment  of  volunteers,  he  joine«l  the  army
as  captam,  and  served  in  Tennessee,  and  afterward
as  assistant  adjutant-general.  He  was  ma<le  a
brigadier-general  on  20  July,  1805,  and  was  mus-
tend  out  a  month  later.

STOKES,  Montford,  senator,  b.  in  Wilkes
county,  N.  C,  in  1700:  d.  in  Arkansas  in  1842.
He  served  in  the  U.  S.  navy  during  the  war  of  the
Revolution,  and  after  its  close  removed  to  Salis-
bury, N.  C,  where  he  was  for  several  years  clerk  of
the  superior  court.  He  became  .subsequently  clerk
of  the  state  senate,  and  wa-s  elet'tetl  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  but  declined  the  office.  He  was  again
elected  to  the  same  office  in  1816,  ami  served  till
1823,  wa.s  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  182>i,
and  of  the  stjite  house  of  representatives  in  1829
and  1830.  Ho  was  governor  of  North  Carolina  in
1830-'l,  which  office  he  resigne<l  to  accept  that  of
commissioner  to  superintend  the  removal  of  the
Indians  west  of  Mississippi  river.  He  was  apfmint-
ed  by  President  Jackson  in  18JJ1  Indian  agent  for
Arkansas  territory,  where  he  remained  till  his
death.  He  fought  a  duel  near  Salisbury  with
Jesse  D.  Pierson,  and  was  severelv  wounded.

STOLBRAND,  Carlos  John  Soulier,  soldier,
b.  in  Swollen,  11  Slay,  1821.  He  entered  the  n)val
artillery  in  January,  18;i9,  and  during  1848-\50
took  |>art  in  the  campaign  of  Schleswig-Holstein
with  jiart  of  his  regiment  in  defence  of  Denmark.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  came  to  the  United
States,  and  in  July,  1861,  he  enlisted  as  a  private
in  the  volunteer  aftiller)'.  Soon  afterward  lie  wa*.
appointed  its  captain  and  join»*d  the  1st  liattalion
of  Illinois  light  artillery,  and  liecame  chief  of  ar-


tillerr  under  Gen,  John  A.  Ix>f;mn.  FTe  tnok  nut
in  the  movement*  aninst  Corinth,  MIm..  anfl  in
1H4S:{,  on  (ten.  Logans  aoewrion  to  the  command
of  the  15th  corps,  waa  tnuiafenvd  to  the  command

of  its  artilhry  brigade.  He  |tarticiiial4<<l  in  th«
campaign  of  Atlanta  and  the  mnnh  to  the  ms.
In  February.  1805,  he  wa«  pmrnoted  to  bri|pidi«r>
general  of  voluntcerx,  a<wigne<l  to  a  brigade  in  th«
15th  corfis,  an<l  shortly  aftorwanl  to  one  in  th»
17th  corps.  The  latter  brigade,  being  rtdooed
in  numlwrs.  wan  ro-enforced  and  reorganiied  un*
der  his  charge.  In  1805  he  went  with  nia  brigade
to  St.  Ix>uis.  .Mo.,  and  thence  to  Leavenworth,
Kan.,  and  in  Febniary,  1H65.  he  received  an  hon-
orable ilischarge  from  the  army.  In  1K«W  Gen.
Stolbraiid  was  elwtJMl  secnMarv  of  the  Constitu-
tional convention  of  .South  Carolina.  He  was  dele-
gate-at-lar^e  to  the  National  BepubUcan  ntnven-
tion  at  Chicago  in  IHOH,  and  served  as  pre««idcntial
ele(.'tor.  He  ha^  miule  various  improvementa  in
steam-engines  and  steam-lx>ilerB,  and  now  reaideB
at  Fort  Collins,  Col.

STONE,  Ama.Ha,  philanthroriist.  b.  in  Charlton,
Mass.,  27  April,  181M;  d.  in  Cleveland.  Ohio,  11
May,  1888.  Ho  U-gan  life  a.s  an  architect,  at
twenty-one  was  engaged  in  the  const  ruction  of  rail-
n)ad  brid^fes.  and  while  still  young  became  the  flrrt
l)ridge-builder  in  the  country.  In  iiartnershii)  with
two  friends  he  constructe«l  the  Cleveland,  t  olum-
bus.  and  Cincinnati  railroa4l,  an<l  afterward  the
Cleveland  and  Erie,  of  which  roa<ls  he  was  made
superintendent.  He  was  next  engagt>«l  in  building
the  Chicago  and  Milwaukee  nxul.  He  was  presi-
dent and  director  of  numerous  railrowls  and  other
industrial  and  financial  corporations,  was  freijuent-
ly  consultetl  by  Pri'sident  Lincoln  in  regard  to  mat-
ters of  army  trans|x)rtation,  and  was  offcre«l  by  him
an  ap(>ointment  as  briga4lier-p'neral.  He  sjiont  a
year  in  Euro|te  in  1808-'9.  Mr.  Stone  gave  large
sums  in  charity  to  the  city  of  Cleveland.  He  built
and  endowed  the  Home  for  age<l  women  and  the
Industrial  school  for  children,  and  gave  fOOO.OOO
to  Adon)ert  college  of  Westeni  B«?serve  university.

STONE,  Andrew  Leete.  b.  in  Oxford,  Conn..
25  Nov..  1815.  His  father,  N»>ah  Stone,  was  town-
clerk  and  justice  of  the  r>eai>e  for  a  quarter  of  a
century,  served  for  several  terms  as  judge  of  pro-
bate, and  had  local  reputation  as  a  physician.  The
son  was  grmluated  at  Yale  in  1837.  and  served
for  three  years  as  a  professor  in  the  New  York
institution  for  the  deaf  and  dumb,  studying  at
Union  theological  seminar)'.  He  then  connected
himself  with  the  American  Sunday-school  union
at  Philadelphia,  and  in  September,  1H44,  was  or-
dained imstor  of  the  South  Congrt'patii>nal  church
at  Midtlletown.  Conn.  In  January.  \SAU.  he  was
calle<l  to  the  juistorate  of  the  Park  stnvt  church,
lioston.  In  1866  he  receivtHl  a  call  Ut  the  1st  Con-
gregational church  in  .San  Francisc-o,  Cal.  In  1881,
nis  Health  failing,  he  was  electwi  ttastor  emeritus.
He  is  the  author  of  "  Service  the  End  of  Living"
(1858);  ".Vshton's  Mothers"  (1S59):  "  Discourw
on  the  Death  of  .\braham  Lfncoln  "  (1865);  and
numerous  |>rinte<i  a»hln\sses.  Two  volumes  of  his
sermons  have  Iveii  publislu-il.  entitlcil  "  Memorial
Discourses"  (18«MJ);  and  "  I^eaves  from  a  Finished
Pastorate"  (1882).— His  brother,  David  Marvin,
journalist,  b.  in  Oxford,  Conn..  2i<  !>«•.,  1H17,  left
home  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  and  taught  when
he  was  sixteen.  He  was  a  merchant  in  Phila-
deliihia  fn>m  1842  till  1849,  when  he  was  calleil
to  N'ew  York  city  to  take  charge  of  the  "  Dry
Goods  Ileptirter."  In  DecemU'r  of  that  year  he
became  commercial  e<litor  of  the  New  York  "  Jour-
nal of  Commerce,"  and  in  September,  1861,  with


700


STONE


STONE


William  C.  Prime,  he  purchased  the  interest  of
that  paper,  succeeding  Mr.  Prime  in  1860  as  editor-
in-chief,  which  post  he  still  (1888)  retains.  He  was
president  of  the  New  York  associated  press  for
twenty-five  years.  For  several  years  he  contributed
a  financial  article  weekly  to  the  New  York  "  Ob-
server." edited  as  a  pastime  the  "  Ladies'  Wreath,"
and  conducted  the  financial  department  of  "  Hunt's
Merchants'  Magazine."  An  important  event  in  the
history  of  his  paper  was  its  suppression  by  the  gov-
ernment in  1804  for  publishmg  a  proclamation
purporting  to  have  been  issued  by  President  Lin-
coln, calling  for  volunteers  to  serve  in  the  war  and
naming  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer.  It  wjis  the
production  of  Joseph  Howard,  Jr.,  and  appeared
m  the  "  Journal  of  Commerce,"  18  May,  1864.  The
"  Herald  "  printed  25,000  copies  containing  the  so-
called  proclamation,  but,  finding  that  neither  the
"Times"  nor  the  "Tribune"  had  printed  it,  de-
stroyed the  edition.  The  "  World  published  it,
but  afterward  endeavored  to  undo  the  mischief.
President  Lincoln  immediately  ordered  the  sup-
pression of  the  "Journal  of  Commerce  "and  the
"  World,"  and  the  arrest  and  imprisonment  of  their
editors  and  proprietors.  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,  who
knew  that  the  proclamation  had  been  left  at  the
newspaper  offices  at  about  three  o'clock  in  the
morning,  after  the  responsible  editors  had  depart-
ed, endeavored  to  secure  a  modification  of  this  or-
der. Some  of  the  persons  designated  were  arrested,
but  they  did  not  include  David  M.  Stone  or  Manton
Marble.  The  government  soon  found  that  it  had
made  a  mistake,  the  troops  that  had  been  put  in
possession  of  the  two  newspaper  offices  were  with-
drawn, and  the  editors  were  released  from  arrest
and  their  papers  from  suspension.  Mr.  Stone's
opinions  on  commercial  and  other  matters  in  his
"answers  to  correspondents"  are  regarded  as  an
authority  by  merchants  throughout  the  country.
In  his  younger  days  he  wrote  for  the  magazines,
but  since  1860  he  has  done  little  literary  work  ex-
cept for  his  own  paper.  He  published  a  volume
called  "  Frank  Forest,"  which  passed  through
twenty  editions  (1849).  and  a  memorial  volume
containing  the  "  Life  and  Letters "  of  his  niece,
]\[ary  Elizabeth  Hubbell  (1857).

STONE,  Barton  Warren,  reformer,  b.  near
Port  Tobacco,  Md.,  24  Dec,  1772 ;  d.  in  Hannibal,
Mo.,  9  Nov.,  1844.  He  was  graduated  at  the
academy  in  Guilford,  N.  C,  in  1793,  studied  the-
ology, and,  after  teaching  in  Washington,  Ga.,  was
licensed  in  North  Carolina  in  1796.  Two  years
later  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  churches  of
Caneridge  and  Concord,  Ky.  During  the  revival
of  1801  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  Stone,  with
four  other  ministers,  renounced  the  dogmjis  of  Cal-
vinism. One  of  tlie  number  was  tried  by  the  synod
of  Lexington,  Ky.,  in  1803,  for  preaching  anti-
Calvinistic  doctrines,  whereupon  they  all  withdrew
in  September  from  that  body,  formed  themselves
int(3  the  Springfield  presbytery,  and  continued  to
preach  ana  to  form  churches,  the  first  being  one  at
Caneridge  of  Mr.  Stone's  old  followers.  In  June,
1804,  the  presbytery  was  dissolved,  and  they  took
the  name  of  the  Christian  church.  Having  no
pastoral  charge.  Stone  supported  himself  for  several
years  by  farming  and  teaching  while  he  continued
to  found  churches  in  Ohio,  Kentucky,  and  Ten-
nessee. In  1826  he  edited  the  "  Christian  Messen-
ger," and  six  years  later,  with  Rev.  John  T.  John-
son, a  Baptist,  he  at  Georgetown  united  the
"  Stoneite  "  and  "  Campbellite  "  churches  in  Ken-
tucky. He  removed  to  Jacksonville,  111.,  in  1834,
included  Missouri  in  his  circuit,  and  also  continued
his  editorial  labor  until  his  death. His  last  preach-


ing-tour was  in  1843,  and  a  year  later,  while  on  his
way  home  from  a  visit  to  5lissouri,  he  died.  Mr.
Stone  wielded  a  great  influence  through  his  scholar-
ship, piety,  and  attractive  manner.  He  wrote
Eart  ii.  of  the  "Apology  of  the  Springfield  Pres-
ytery"  (1803).  which  has  been  called  the  first
declaration  of  religious  freedom  in  the  western
hemisphere,  and  the  hymn  "The  Lord  is  the
Fountain  of  Goodness  and  Love."  Among  his
other  writings  are  "  Letters  on  the  Atonement "
(1805);  "Address  to  the  Christian  Churches"
(1805) ;  and  "  Letters  to  Dr.  James  Blythe  "  (1822).
STONE,  Charles  Pomeroy,  soldier,  b.  in  Green-
field, Mass.,  30  Sept.,  1824:  d.  in  New  York  city,
24  Jan.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1845,  assigned  to  the  ordnance,
and  served  in  the
war  with  Mexico,
beingbrevetted  Ist
lieutenant,  8  Sept.,

1847,  for  gallant
and  meritorious
conduct  at  the  bat-
tle of  Molino  del
Rey,  and  captain,
13  Sept.,  for  the
battle  of  Chapul-
tepec.  He  also
participated  in  the
siege  of  Vera  Cruz
and  the  assault
and  capture  of  the
city  of  Mexico.  He
was  on  duty  at  Wa-
tervliet  arsenal,  N.
Y.,  till 15  Sept.,

1848,  on  leave  of

absence  to  visit  Europe  for  the  purpose  of  improve-
ment in  his  profession  and  the  gaining  of  general
information  till  13  May,  1850,  and  on  duty  at  Wa-
tervliet  and  Fort  Monroe  arsenals  in  1850.  Under
orders  of  the  secretary  of  war  he  embarked  men
and  stores,  and  conducted  them  to  California  ina
Cape  Horn  till  August.  1851,  after  which,  till  27
Jan.,  1856,  he  was  in  charge  of  construction  and  in
command  of  Benicia  arsenal,  and  chief  of  ordnance
of  the  Division  and  Department  of  the  Pacific.
He  resigned,  17  Nov.,  1856,  and  from  March,  1857,
till  31  Dec,  1860,  was  chief  of  the  scientific  com-
mission for  the  survey  and  exploration  of  the  state
of  Sonora,  Mexico.  On  1  Jan.,  1861,  he  was  appoint-
ed colonel  and  inspector-general  of  the  District  of
Columbia  militia,  and  was  engaged,  under  the  or-
ders of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott,  in  disciplining  volun-
teers from  2  Jan.  till  16  April,  1801.  He  was  ap-
pointed colonel  of  the  14th  infantry,  14  May,  1861,
and  given  charge  of  the  outposts  and  defences  of
Washington.  He  commanded  the  Rockville  expedi-
tion and  engaged  in  the  skirmishes  of  Edward's  and
Conrad's  Ferry  in  June,  and  Harper's  Ferry,  7  July,
1861,  led  a  brigade  in  Gen.  Robert  Patterson's  op-
erations in  the  Shenandoah  valley,  commanded  the
corps  of  observation  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
from  10  Aug.,  1861,  till  9  Feb.,  1862.  and  on  20  Oct.,
1861,  was  ordered  by  Gen..McClellan  to  keep  a  good
lookout  and  make  a  feint  of  crossing  the  Potomac
at  Ball's  Bluff.  Gen.  McClellan,  in  his  report  of
this  disastrous  affair,  says :  "  I  did  not  direct  him
to  cross,  nor  did  I  intend  that  he  should  cross  the
river  in  force  for  the  purpose  of  fighting."  After
having  made  the  feint.  Gen.  Stone,  it  appears,  was
led  to  believe  that  the  enemy  might  be  surprised,
and  accordingly  caused  a  part  of  his  command  to
cross  the  Potomac  in  the  night.  The  enemy  at-
tacked in  force  at  daybreak  of  the  21st,«nd  pushed


8T0NK


STONE


701


the  National  troops  into  the  river  with  grf^t  lo«i.
(Km).  Stone  was  (Hintinued  in  the  .>»«nie  i>omniantl
until  U  Fel).,  1H<52,  when  lie  wjis  sii(l<h>niv  arrest*-*!
and  imprisoned  in  Fort  liafavette.  New  \'<>rk  har-
l>or.  wliere  he  nMimiiietl  until  1(1  Aujf..  IHOi.  IIi>
wa,s  then  n'leiiM'd,  no  charp-  having;  1»«>«'U  i»referr«>«l
against  him,  and  awaittil  orders  until  'A  May.  lNO:t,
when  he  WHS  direete«l  to  report  to  the  conirnandin);
genenil  of  the  Department  of  the  (Jidf.  where  he
served  until  17  April.  1H<M.  lie  |>artici|iate4l  in
the  sicfje  of  Port  Iludson  in  June  an<l  Julv.  IWW.
and  was  M>nior  memU'r  (»f  the  eommission  for
re<"eivinj;  the  surrender  of  that  plat'e.  H  Julv.
1H(W.  He  was  chief  of  staff  to  (len.  Nathanild
1*.  I^nks.  c-ommandiii);  the  I)e|mrtment  of  the
Gulf,  from  25  July.  IHIW.  to  17  April.  1H«M.  lujr-
ticipating  in  the  campaign  of  Itayou  Twhe.  lia..
in  Octolwr.  186Ji.  and  the  Red  Uiver  eantftaign  in
March  and  April.  IWM.  lie  was  hononihly  mus-
tered out  as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  4  Aj)ril,
1M4M.  and  resigned  his  commission  as  colonel  of  the
14th  infantry.  13  Sept.,  18(54.  In  the  autumn  of
18()5  (ten.  Stone  was  ap|K)inted  engineer  and  sujter-
intendent  of  the  Dover  mining  coinpanv  in  (looch-
land  county,  Va.,  where  he  residinl  until  1H70.  He
then  accepted  a  commission  in  the  Kgy|»tian  army,
and  later  was  made  chief  of  the  general  staff,  iti
which  capacity  he  bc^stowetl  much  attention  ujHin
the  military  school  that  ha<l  aln^uly  lx>en  formed
by  French  officers  in  the  Kgyptian  service.  He
created  a  ty|)ographical  bureau,  where  a  great  num-
ber of  maps  were  produced  and  the  government
printing  was  executed,  and  when  the  n*iM)rts  of  the
American  oflicers  engagetl  in  exploration  of  the
interior  were  printed.  Gen.  Stone  was  placeil  in
temporary  charge  of  the  cmlastral  survey,  and  was
president  of  the  Geographical  society  and  a  memlx'r
of  the  Institut  Egyptien  at  Cairo.  The  American
oflBcers  were  mustered  out  of  the  service  in  1879,  as  a
measure  of  economy,  by  the  reform  government
which  succeeded  the  dethronement  of  Ismail.  Gen.
Stone  alone  remained,  and  acted  as  chief  of  the
staff  until  the  insurrection  of  Arabi  and  the  army,
in  which  he  took  no  active  part.  He  resigned  and
returned  to  the  United  States  in  March.  1883.  Gen.
Stone  was  decorated  by  Ismail  Pacha  with  the
order  of  the  commander  of  the  Osmanieh.  wjus  made
grand  officer  of  the  Medjidieh  and  Osmiiiiieh.  and
was  created  a  Ferik  pacha  (genera!  of  division).
In  May  he  was  apwinted  engineer-in-chief  of  the
Florida  ship-canal  and  transit  company,  and  di-
rected a  preliminary  survey  across  the  northern
part  of  the  peninsula.  On  3  April,  188(j.  he  Ije-
came  engineer-in-chief  to  the  committee  for  the
constniction  of  the  [wMlestal  of  the  Bart  hold  i  statue
of  "  Liberty  enlightening  the  World,"  and  u|)on  its
successful  completion  he  acted  as  grand  marshal
in  the  military  and  civic  ceremony  that  jiccomjMtnied
the  dedi(;ation  of  the  statue.

STONE,  Collins,  clergyman  and  educator,  b.  in
Guilfonl.  Conn.,  7  Sent.,  1812:  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  2ii  Dec.,  1870.  He  was  graduat<»<l  at  Yale
in  1832,  and  in  the  following  year  l)ecame  a  teacher
in  the  American  deaf-n)ute  asylum  at  Hartford.
In  1852  he  was  called  as  nrincipal  to  the  Ohio  state
asylum  for  the  deaf  and  aumb  at  Columbus,  but  he
returned  in  18(>;j  to  take  charge  of  the  asylum  at
Hartfonl.  where  he  remaiiuHl  until  his  death.  He
studied  theology,  and  was  onlained  to  the  ministry
in  1853  while  iii  Ohio.  For  nearly  forty  years  Mr.
Stone  was  prominent  in  his  department  of  e<luca-
tion,  and  merits  the  cre<lit  <if  laymg  the  foundations
of  the  futun;  pros|H'rity  of  the  Ohio  institution,
and  of  carrying  the  Hartfonl  a.sylum  thnniph  <lilll-
culties. Ho  published  antnial  n>|K>rUt  of  tlie  Ohio


Institution  (1852-'fi»)  and  of  that  at  Hartfonl
( IH«W-'7(»),  Hin  other  educational  writingM.  includ-
ing an  addrcMs  on  the  "  HiNtorr  of  fleaf-Miitc
Instruction"  bcturv  the  Ohio  inittitution  (IHAfi).
Were  publishe<l  in  the  "American  AnnaKof  th«
Deaf  and  Dumb."  A  railroad  accident  wa«  the
caUM'  of  his  death.

STONE,  DaTid.  m-nator,  b.  in  Hope.  N.  C.  17
Feb.,  1770:  d.  in  Italeigh.  N.  ('..  7  Oct.,  IHIH.  Hi*
father,  Z«Mlekiah  Stone,  was  a  mem  tier  of  the  Pro-
vincial congri'ss  at  Halifax.  X.  ('..  in  177fl.  and  for
nuiny  years  a  state  senator.  David  wan  graduatrd
at  Princeton  in  17H.S.  >^tudie4l  law.  and  waiadmitted
to  the  Uir  in  1700.  He  wilh  a  memlter  of  the  Iqfts-
lature  in  17yi-'4,  judu'e  of  the  supreme  court  of
North  Carolina  in  1795-'8.  and  a  memlter  of  con-
gress in  171>1>-1801,  having  Un-n  ch<»sen  a*  a  I)emo-
crat.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  m-nt  to  the  V.  S.
senate,  but  he  resigned  in  1807  to  lny^ime  judge  of
the  state  .su|>reme  court.  He  was  governor  of
North  Carolina  in  1808-*10.  and  in  the  two  follow-
ing years  sat  again  in  <'ongn'ss.  In  1813  he  was
again  sent  to  the  V.  S.  M-nate  by  a  legislature  whooe
majority  sup|H»rte<l  the  measim-sof  President  Ma<li-
S4m  and  the  war  with  England:  but,  oiirH>sing
these  measures,  he  was  censured  by  the  legislature,
and  resigne<l  the  following  vear.

STONE.  Ebonezer  Whitton,  soldier,  b.  in  Bo»-
ton,  Mass..  10  June.  1801  ;  d.  in  Hoxburv,  Mass.,
18  April.  1K80.  In  1817  he  enlistwl  in  the  U.S.
army,  from  which  he  was  disihargeil  in  1821.  He
WHS  connected  with  the  Ma.«.sachus<*tts  militia  in
1822-'(iO.  receiving  the  appointment  of  adjutant-
genend  in  1851  and  filling  the  post  till  the  ch>so  of
his  service.  In  1840  he  was  a  memlKTof  the  legis-
lature, serving  on  the  militarv  crmimittee.  The
first  full  batter*'  of  light  artillery  in  the  United
States,  except  those  in  the  rt'gular  anny.  was  or-
ganized by  him  in  1K>'{.  and  through  his  efforts
Massachust'tts  was  the  first  state  to  receive  the
new  rifled  musket  of  the  |>alteni  of  1855.  From
experiments  that  he  made  with  this  musket.  Gen.
Stone  conceived  the  idea  that  cannon  could  also
Ik?  rifled,  and  after  successful  tests  in  1859.  he  or-
dered a  ino<lel  from  John  P.  Schenkl.  the  inventor
of  the  Schenkl  shell.  It  is  claimcnl  that  this  was
the  first  rifliHl  canium  that  was  made  in  the  United
States.  an<l  that  the  invention  was  original  with
(Jen.  .Stone,  though  riflwl  cannon  had  U-en  in  use
in  Europe  for  several  years.  Fnnn  April  till  Octo-
lK>r,  1861,  Gen.  Stone,  as  chief  of  ordnance,  armed
and  etjuip|>ed  twenty-ft)ur  n-giments  of  infantry,
one  of  cavalry,  and  three  light  l«tteries  <»f  artillerr.
He  was  for  twelve  vears  a  meinln-r  of  the  Ancient
and  honorable  artillery  com|wny,  and  liecame  its
captain  in  1841.  He  pn"|>an'<l.  under  an  act  f)f  the
legislature,  a  "  Digest  of  the  Militia  Ijiwsof  Massa-
chusetts" (Boston.  1851).  and  a  "(Vimi<end  of  In-
st met  ions  in  .Militarj- Tactics,"  and  "The  Manual
of  IVri-ussi<m  Arms"  (1H57).

STONE.  Edwin  Martin,  clergyman,  b.  in
Framingham,  Mass.,  29  .Vpril,  1805;  d.  in  Provi-
dence. H.  I..  15  Ih-i'..  1H83.  After  working  as  a
printer  in  lioston.  he  wlitetl  the  "Times"  in  that
citv  in  1827.  the  "  IndefK-ndent  Messenger"  in
1kV2-'3.  and  sul»se(juently  the  "Salem  Obwr^er."
In  18:M-'4({  he  was  |ias'tor  of  a  CoMTegat ionai
church  in  lieverly.  .Mass..  in  the  mean  t&e  st-ning
two  vears  as  represt'iitative  in  the  general  court  of
Massm'hus*'tts,  t«)  which  he  made  some  important
legislative  re|K»rts.  In  1847  he  t«K>k  eliarge  of  the
ministry-at-large  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  tlevoting
liimself  for  thirty  years  to  mission  work,  and  sug-
gi'sting  n-forms  that  weno  suooeesfully  carriwl  out.
Chief  of  t  best!  was  a  home  for  agtxl  men,  founded


702


STONE


STONE


in  1784,  of  which  he  was  a  charter  member.  Dur-
ing that  time  he  also  served  on  the  Providence
school  committee.  In  1848-'83  he  was  librarian
of  the  Rhode  Island  historical  society,  and  con-
tributed antiquarian  and  miscellaneous  matter  to
his  annual  reports.  He  was  also  a  member  of
many  learned  societies.  He  has  published  "  Life  of
Elhanan  Winchester  "  (Boston,  1836 ;  Salem.  1838) ;
"Hymns  for  Sabbath-Schools"  (1837);  "Hymns
and  Tunes  for  Vestry  and  Conference  Meetings  "
(4th  ed.,  1844) ;  "  History  of  Beverly,  Mass.,  1630-
1842"  (1843);  "Life  and  Recollections  of  John
Howland"  (Providence.  1857):  "History  of  the
Providence  Association  of  Mechanics  and  Manu-
facturers" (1860);  "The  Invasion  of  Canada  in
1775,"  including  the  journal  of  Cant.  Simeon
Thayer,  with  notes  and  appendix  (Providence,
1867);  "The  Architect  and  Monetarian:  a  Brief
Memoir  of  Thomas  Alexander  Teflft"  (1869):  and
"  Our  French  Allies  "  (1883).  Assisted  by  his  son,
Edwin  W.,  he  edited  the  "  Adjutant-General's  Re-
port of  Rhode  Island  for  1865,"  which  contains  a
roster  of  the  Rhode  Island  soldiers  in  the  civil
war.  He  left  unpublished  a  "  Life  of  Rev.  Dr.
Manasseh  Cutler  "  and  a  history  of  Providence. —
His  son,  Edwin  Winchester  (1835-'78),  served  in
the  Rhode  Island  artillery  during  the  civil  war,
was  a  war  correspondent  of  the  "  Providence  Jour-
nal," and  published  "  Rhode  Island  in  the  Rebel-
lion "  (Providence,  1864).

STONE,  James  Samnel,  clergyman,  b.  in
Shipston-on-Stour,  Worcestershire,  England,  27
April,  1852.  He  emigrated  to  Philadelphia  in
1872,  and  studied  theology  in  the  divinity-school
in  that  city,  at  which  he  was  graduated  in  1877.
He  was  made  deacon  in  1876,  and  ordained  priest
by  the  bishop  of  Toronto,  Canada,  in  1877.  He
was  rector  of  St.  Philip's  church,  Toronto,  from
1879  till  1882,  and  of  St.  Martin's,  Montreal,  from
1882  till  1886.  In  the  latter  year  he  accepted  a
call  from  Grace  church,  Philadelphia.  lie  was
professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  in  Wycliffe  col-
lege, Toronto,  in  1877-82.  He  is  well  known  in
Canada  as  a  lecturer,  some  of  his  topics  being
"  Love  in  ye  Olden  Time,"  "  Trials  of  a  Parson,
"  Robin  Hood,"  and  "  John  Bunyan."  He  received
the  degree  of  B.  D.  from  Cambridge  (Mass.)  Epis-
copal theological  school  in  1880,  and  those  of  B.  D.
and  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Bishop's  col-
lege, Lennoxville,  Canada,  in  1886.  Besides  many
pamphlets,  sermons,  and  magazine  articles.  Dr.
Stone  has  published  "  Simple  Sermons  on  Simple
Subjects  "  (Toronto,  1879)  and  "  The  Heart  of  Mer-
rie  England  "  (Philadelphia,  1887).

STONE,  John  Augustus,  dramatist,  b.  in  Con-
cord, Mass.,  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1
June.  1834.  He  appeared  on  the  stage  in  Boston,
New  York,  and  Philadelphia.  For  Edwin  Forrest
he  wrote  "  Metamora,"  "  The  Ancient  Briton,"  and
"  Fauntleroy  " ;  and  among  other  plays  he  pub-
lished "  La  Roque,"  "  The  Demoniac,"  and  "  Tan-
cred."  He  was  drowned  in  a  fit  of  temporary  in-
sanity in  the  Schuylkill,  at  Philadelphia,  and  his
monument  there  bears  the  inscription:  "Erected
to  the  memory  of  the  author  of  '  Metamora,'  by  his
friend,  Edwin  Forrest."

STONE,  John  Osgood,  physician,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  1  Feb.,  1813 :  d.  in  New  York  city,  7  June,
1876.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1833,
and  at  the  medical  department  there  in  1836.
After  hospital  exnerience  in  London  and  Paris  he
began  practice  in  New  York  city,  identifying  him-
self with  many  medical  charities  and  scientific
organizations,  and  attaining  eminence  in  his  pro-
fession. He  was  long  a  surgeon  at  Bellevue  hospi-


tal, but  resigned  in  1857  on  account  of  his  exten-
sive private  practice.  In  1866  he  was  a  member  of
the  first  Metropolitan  board  of  health,  and  subse-
quently its  president,  in  which  connection  his  ser-
vices relative  to  the  sanitary  condition  of  tene-
ment-houses and  in  the  management  of  quarantine
were  of  great  value.  Dr.  Stone  publisned  many
surgical  papers,  including  "  Amputations  and  Com-
pound Fractures,  with  Statistics"  (1849);  "Treat-
ment of  Suppurative  Inflammation  of  the  Joints"
(1852) ;  "  Necessary  Amputation  of  the  Lower  Ex-
tremities" (1854);  and  "Ruptures  of  the  Heart."

STONE,  John  Seely,  clergyman,  b.  in  Great
Barrington,  Mass.,  7  Oct.,  1795 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  13  Jan.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1823,  and  thence  went  to  the  Episcopal
general  theological  seminary.  New  York  city,  pre-
paratory to  taking  orders.  He  was  ordained  deacon
in  St.  Mark's  church.  New  York,  4  Jan.,  1826,  by
Bishop  Hobart,  and  priest  in  Christ  church,  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  7  June,  1827,  by  Bishop  Brownell.
He  was  tutor  in  Greek  and  Latin  in  Hobart  college
in  1825-'6.  He  was  rector  of  St.  Michael's  church,
Litchfield,  Conn.,  in  1827,  of  All  Saints'  church,
Frederick  city,  Md.,  in  1828-'9,  of  Trinity  church,
New  Haven,  in  1830-'2,  and  of  St.  Paul's  church,
Boston,  in  1832-'41.  He  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,  in  1837.  He
next  became  rector  of  Christ  church,  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  in  1841,  and  in  1852  of  St.  Paul's  church.
Brookline,  Mass.,  where  he  remained  till  1862.  He
atjcepted  the  post  of  professor  in  the  divinity-
school  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  1862,  which  he  held  for  five  years.
In  1867  he  became  dean  of  the  newly  established
theological  school  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  but  in  1875
resigned  active  work.  Dr.  Stone  attained  reputa-
tion as  a  pulpit  orator.  In  theological  position
he  was  prominent  among  the  evangelical  Episcopal
clergy,  and  it  was  largely  due  to  his  efforts  and
influence  that  the  theological  school  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  was  founded.  Dr.  Stone's  publications  were
"  Memoir  of  Bishop  Griswold"  (Philadelphia,  1844) ;
"  The  Mysteries  Opened  "  (New  York,  1844 ;  re-
published, with  the  title  "  Christian  Sacraments,"
1866);  "The  Christian  Sabbath"  (1844;  en-
larged ed..  with  the  title  "The  Divine  Rest,"
1867);  "The  Church  Universal"  (1846;  repub-
lished, under  the  title  of  "  Living  Temple,"  1866) ;
"Memoir  of  Rev.  Dr.  Milnor"  (1848;  abridged  by
the  author,  1849);  and  "The  Contrast"  (1853).
Dr.  Stone  was  twice  married ;  his  second  wife  was  a
daughter  of  Chancellor  Kent,  of  New  York. — Their
son,  James  Kent,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston  in'
1840,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1861.  After
studying  for  two  years  at  the  University  of  GOt-
tingen  and  in  Italy,  he  returned  to  this  country
and  entered  the  National  army,  from  which  he  re-
tired after  six  months,  owing  to  wounds.  He  be-
came professor  of  Latin  in  Kenyon  college,  Ohio,
in  1803,  and  professor  of  mathematics  in  1867,  and
was  soon  afterward  appointed  president.  In  1868
he  became  president  of  Hobart  college,  but  resigned
in  1869,  and  a  few  months  later  united  with  the
Roman  Catholic  church. ,  He  entered  the  congre-
gation of  missionary  priests  of  St.  Paul  the  Apostle
in  New  York  city,  and  soon  became  one  of  the
best-known  preachers  of  that  body.  Afterward  he
joined  the  Passionists,  in  which  order  he  is  known
as  Father  Fidelis.  He  is  now  (1888)  a  missionary
in  South  America.  He  published  "The  Invitation
Heeded,"  in  which  he  gave  his  reasons  for  becom-
ing a  Roman  Catholic.

STONE,  Lncy,  reformer,  b.  in  West  Brookfield,
Mass.,  13  Aug.,  1818.  Her  grandfather  wwis  a  colonel


8T0NB


BTONB


706


in  the  Revolution,  8n«l  led  400  men  In  ShaTs's  r»-
licUion.  Iler  father  was  a  prospomuA  farmer.  In
iletertniiiiii({  to  obtain  a  collet^iate  education,  xhe
WHS  larffely  influencHMl  by  her  desire  to  learn  t<»
read  the  Bible  in  the  oripual.  and  stttisfv  lu-rwlf
that  the  texts  that  were  quoti'd  apiiiist  thf  e<|ual
rights  of  wonien  were  correetly  lninHlate<l.  She
was  graduated  at  Obcrlin  in  1847,  and  in  the  Haine
rear  gave  her  first  lecture  on  wumati's  rightn  in
ner  brother's  church  at  (Jardner,  MaMt.  She  be-
came lecturer  for  the  Ma>sachus4'tLs  anti-slavery
Bociety  in  1848,  travelling  extensively  in  New  Eng-
land, the  west,  and  Canada,  and  speaking  also  on
woman's  rights.  In  IS-W  she  marrieil  Ilenrv  B.
Black  well  (brother  of  Dr.  KlizaUth  Blackwell),  a
merchant  of  Cincinnati  and  an  Aboliticmist,  re-
taining by  his  consent  her  own  name.  A  few
years  later,  while  she  livetl  in  New  Jersey,  her
property  wjis  seized  for  taxes,  and  she  published  a

rrotest  a^inst  "taxation  without  representation."
n  1809  Mrs.  Stone  was  instrumental  in  form-
ing the  American  woman's  suflFrage  asscx'iation.
In  the  following  year  she  IxK^me  co-e<lilor  of  the
"  Woman's  Journal  "  in  lioston.  and  from  1873  to
the  present  time  (1888)  she  has  been  e<litor-in-chief,
with  her  husband  and  daughter  as  assoc-iafes.  Mrs.
Stone  again  lectured  in  the  west,  in  l)ehalf  of  the
woman  suflFrage  amendments,  in  18({7-'82.  She
has  held  various  oflices  in  the  national,  state,  and
local  woman  suffrage  associations.  "  Lucy  Stone,"
says  Mrs.  Stanton,  "  first  really  stirred  the  nation's
heart  on  the  subject  of  wonum's  wrongs."

STONE.  Melville  Elijah,  journalist,  b.  in  Hud-
son, 111.,  15  Aug.,  1848.  When  he  was  twelve  years
of  age  his  parents  removed  to  Chicago,  where  he
was  graduated  from  the  high-school  in  18G7.  Two
»years  later  he  purchased  an  interest  in  a  foundry
and  machine-shop,  and  was  doing  a  good  business
when  his  earnings  were  swept  away  in  the  great
lire  of  1871.  He  then  resorted  to  journalism,  and
a  successful  experience  of  four  years  as  correspond-
ent and  editor  prompted  him  to  establish  an  even-
ing paper.  On  Christmas-day,  1875,  he  published
the  first  number  of  "The  Daily  News,"  since  which
time  he  has  been  its  contmlling  spirit.  He  soon
became  associated  with  Victor  P.  I^aws  in  the
management  of  the  journal,  which  hiis  an  average  I
circulation  of  a  million  copies  a  week.

STONE.  Oriuond,  astronomer,  b.  in  Pekin,  111.,
11  Jan.,  1S47.  He  was  educate*!  at  Chicago  public
schools  and  at  the  University  of  Chicago,  where  he
devoted  much  attention  to  astronomy.  In  18(57
he  became  a  tutor  in  Racine  college,  and  in  1868
he  was  made  professor  of  mathematics  at  North-
western female  college.  Evanston,  111.  He  was
appointed  assistant  at  the  U.  .S.  naval  observatory
in  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1870,  and  in  1875  was
given  charge  of  the  Cincinnati  observatory.  In
1882  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  practical  astrono-
my in  the  University  of  Virginia,  with  care  of
the  Leander  McCormick  observatory,  both  of  which

E laces  he  now  (1888)  holds.  Prof.  Stone  is  a  mem-
er  of  scientific  stK;ieties,  and  is  the  author  of  vari-
ous papers  on  astronomy.  He  e<lited  the  "  Pub-
lications of  the  Cincinnati  Observatory"  (No.  1  to
6,  Cincinnati,  1877-'82),  containing  observations
of  nearly  all  the  known  double  stars  between  the
e<juator  and  30°  south  tleclination,  and  since  1883
has  edited  "The  Annals  of  Mathematics "  at  the
University  of  Virginia.

STONE,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hertfonl.
England,  30  Julv,  1(K>2;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  20
Julv.  1063.  His' father.  John,  was  a  freeholder  of
Hertfonl.  Cotton  Mather's  statement  in  his  "  Mag-
nalia  "  that  Samuel  was  the  son  of  a  non-conformist


clergyman  of  the  Mme  name  ha*  lieen  reoratly
nrovwl,  by  tho  rt-giMeruf  the  Church  of  All  Sftinta,
Hertford,  to  U<  without  foundation.  The  Mm  wm
a  student  at  Emanuel  college,  Cambridge,  in  1088-*7.
Fleeing  to  the  American  colonies  to  eacape  reUgioaa
tterMcution,  he  lan«l(Hl  at  Boston,  Msml,  sStpC^
1633,  having  a.H  com|Minionii  in  his  flicht  Rfx.  John
Cotton  and  l^v.  ThomaM  H<M)kcr.  With  th*-  latter
he  waa  an  associati'  in  a  church  at  Cambri<I-.  unf  Jl
1636,  when  they  UUh  removed  to  th«-  to

of  Hartford,  Conn.,  which  wan  named  .>  id

home,  the  s|K«lling  l)eing  confornifd  to  ihi-  Kngltjsh
pronunciation.  Ili>  was  distingui^luMl  an  a  con-
troversialist and  c»>l»'brate«l  for  his  wit  and  humor.
Ik'ing  a  man  of  strong  i-onvictionn,  he  engi^Ked
during  the  latter  |>art  of  his  lif«!  in  theological  di*-
putes  which  causi-d  |iart  of  his  congregation  to
fccede  and  found  another  church.  On  his  decease,
his  old  comiianion,  H<H>ker,  succee<le<l  him  in  the
ministry.  >Ir.  .Stone  jujblishcd  "A  Congmgational
</hurch  is  a  Catholic  Visible  Church :  Examination
of  Mr.  Hudson's  View"  (Ij<)n<lon,  Uy»2(.  and  he
left  two  works  in  manus^-ript.  a  "  Ikxly  of  I)ivinity  "
and  a  confutation  of  the  .\ntinomians.  Of  the
former.  Cotton  Mather  says:  "This  rich  treasure
has  often  been  transcriUtl  by  the  vast  pains  of  our
candidates  for  the  ministrv:  and  it  has  made  some
of  our  most  considerable  divines."

STONE,  Thonius  Treadwell.  clergyman,  b.  in
Waterford,  Me.,  y  Feb..  IWH.  He  was' (graduated
at  Bowdoin  in  1820,  studie<l  theoUigy.  and  was  rias-
tor  of  the  Congregational  chun-h  at  Andover.  Me.»
in  l824-'30,  of  that  at  East  Mmhias  in  1888-'44l,
of  the  1st  church  (Unitarian)  at  .Salem,  Mass..
in  1846-'52,  of  the  Ist  Congn-gat ional  church  at
Ik)lton,  Mass.,  in  1852- '60,  and  of  the  1st  e<'clejii-
a.stical  society,  Br(x>klyn,  Conn.,  fmni  186!!  till
1871,  when  he  retired  from  the  active  duties  of  the
ministry.  He  afterward  removed  to  Bolton.  Mass.,
where  he  has  since  resided.  He  receive<l  the  degree
of  I).  I),  from  liowdoin  in  1866.  was  principal  of
Bridgeton  academy.  18i{0-'32.  one  of  the  early
memoers  of  the  Transcendental  sc-hool.  contributed
to  various  religious  peritMlicals,  and  published
"Sermons  on  War"  (Boston,  1829);  "Sketches  of
Oxfortl  County,  Me."  (Portland.  18;J0);  "Sennons"
(Boston,  1854):  "The  R<k1  and  the  SUff"(I856);
and  sejmrate  sermons  and  a«ldresse«.

STONE.  Warren,  phvsician.  b.  in  .St.  Albans.
Vt..  in  February.  1808:  d.  in  liaton  Rouge,  Ija.^  6
Dec.,  1872.  He  studietl  medicine  in  Massachusetts,
settle<l  in  New  Orleans,  and  soon  Ixt-ame  one  of
the  chief  physicians  there.  He  l>egah  teaching
anatomy  in  1886,  in  1837  was  ap|H>intetl  professor
of  that  branch  in  the  Universitv  of  Ix)uisiana,  and
afterward  accepted  the  chair  ci  surgery,  whiih  he
held  till  his  death.  Dr.  Stone  was  at  the  head  of
his  profession  in  the  south,  ami  when  Gen.  Grant
was  thrown  from  his  horse  near  New  Orleans  in
S4>ptember,  1863,  he  was  called  to  attend  him.  He
contributed  numerous  articles  to  medical  journals.
—His  son,  Warren,  physician,  b.  in  New  Orleans
in  1843;  d.  thcns  3  Jan.,  1883,  was  educated  at
the  Jesuits'  college.  New  Orleans,  and  servetl  in  the
Confe«lerate  army  during  the  civil  war.  On  return-
ing to  New  Orleans,  he  U-gan  the  stutlv  of  nu>dicine,
was  graduateil  at  the  University  of  I/ouisiana  in  1867.
and  at  the  o[)ening  of  the  Charity  hospital  medical
collegeof  New  Orleans,  in  1874,  was  appointe«l  to  the
chair  of  surgical  anatomy.  In  1873  he  made  what
is  thought  to  be  the  first  n-conletl  cun*  of  Iraunuitic
aneurism  of  the  suttclavian  artery  by  digital  pres-
sure. He  gave  his  services  to  the  iie«>ple  of  Bruns-
wick, Ga.,  during  the  prevalence  of  yellow  fever  in
1874,  and  in  1878,  when  that  disease  was  raging


704


STONE


STONE


in  the  southwest,  he  left  his  home  and  large  prac-
tice and  travelled  about  from  one  stricken  village
or  town  to  another,  giving  his  services  gratuitously.
Dr.  Stone  IxHranie  a  member  of  the  American  public
henlth  association  in  1880.

STONE,  William,  colonial  governor,  b.  in
Northamptonshire,  England,  about  1603;  d.  in
Charles  county,  Md.,  alK)ut  1695.  He  emigrated
to  the  eastern  shore  of  Vii-ginia,  where  he  settled
Northampton  county.  There  was  a  settlement  of
Puritans  in  Nanseraond  county,  and,  their  condi-
tion becoming  xmcomfortable  from  the  attitude
and  treatment  of  the  Episcopalians  of  Virginia,
Stone  arranged  with  Cecilius  Calvert,  the  second
Lord  Baltimore,  to  remove  500  settlers  to  Mary-
land. On  8  Aug.,  1648,  Baltimore  ajipointed  Stone
governor  of  his  province,  and  he  arrived  there  as
early  as  1649.  His  Puritan  emigrants  from  Vir-
ginia settled  at  a  place  on  Severn  river,  which  they
called  Providence  and  which  is  now  Annapolis.
In  1653  Stone  was  removed  from  the  govemoi-ship
by  William  Claiborne  and  Richard  Bennet.  parlia-
mentary commissioners.  But  on  25  March,  1655,
at  the  head  of  the  Cavalier  forces  of  the  province,
ho  attacked  the  Roundhead  forces  under  Capt.
William  Fuller  at  Severn,  where  he  was  routed,
taken  prisoner,  and  condemned  to  death  by  court-
martial.  His  life  was  spared  at  the  entreaty  of  the
men  of  the  victorious  party.  After  this  he  does
not  appear  to  have  taken  part  in  public  affairs,
but  lived  and  died  on  his  manor  of  Avon  on  Nan-
jeinoy  river,  in  Charles  county,  Md.  In  consid-
eration of  his  faithful  services  to  the  proprietary,
he  was  granted  as  much  land  as  he  could  ride
around  in  a  day. — His  great-grandson,  Tliomas,
signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  b.  in
Charles  county,  Md.,  in  1743;  d.  in  Alexandria,
Va.,  5  Oct.,  1787,  daily  rode  ten  miles  to  school  in
order  to  acquire  a  classical  education,  borrowed

money  to  enable  him
to  study  law  in  An-
napolis, began  prac-
tice in  Frederick
about  1770,  and  two
years  later  removed
to  Charles  county,
purchasing  a  farm
near  Port  Tobacco.
He  early  espoused
the  cause  of  his  coun-
try in  the  disputes
with  the  British  gov-
ernment, and  was
elected  to  the  Conti-
nental congress,  when
two  members  were
added  to  the  Mary-
land delegation,  8
'^^"^^^^ .^^ «  Dec,  1774,  taking  his

,ifyt-<^  ^;^v-fL.e^  seat  on  15  May,  1775.
In  July  he  was  re-
elected for  a  year  longer,  and  again  on  21  May,  1776,
till  the  end  of  the  next  session  of  the  convention.
The  Maryland  delegates,  notwithstanding  their  in-
structions in  favor  of  reconciliation,  voted  for  the
resolution  of  15  May,  1776,  declaring  that  the  au-
thority of  the  crown  had  cca.sed.  Late  in  June  the
instructions  were  recalled,  leaving  them  free  to  vote
for  the  Declaration  of  Independence  on  4  July.
On  the  same  day  Stone  and  his  colleagues  were
re-elected  without  restrictions  on  their  action.
Although  he  bore  no  active  part  in  the  debates  of
congress,  he  served  on  committees  that  were  in-
trusted with  important  matters,  such  as  the  aug-
mentation of  the  flying  camp,  the  failure  of  the


Canada  expedition,  the  consideration  of  some  of
Gen.  Washuigton's  letters,  and  the  elaboration  of  a
scheme  of  a  confederacy.  Of  the  committee  on
co!i federation,  which  was  appointed  on  12  June,
1776,  he  was  the  only  member  from  his  province.
Being  re-elected  to  congress  in  February,  he  lalwred
in  this  committee  till  the  articles  of  confederation
were  finally  settled  on  and  agreed  to  by  the  vot«
of  15  Nov.,  1777.  The  Maryland  convention  re-
fused to  enter  the  confederacy,  and  expressed  a
hope  that  the  "unhappy  difference"  with  the
mother  country  might  yet  be  accommodated.
Stone  declined  a  re-election  to  congress,  and  en-
tered the  Maryland  senate,  where  he  could  be  more
useful  to  the  patriotic  cause.  In  1783  he  was  again
elected  to  congress,  and  iti  the  session  of  1784  he
served  on  most  of  the  important  committees.
Toward  its  close  he  acted  as  president  pro  tem-
pore. He  declined  re-election,  and  devoted  himself
thenceforth  to  his  profession  and  to  his  duties  as  a
member  of  the  state  senate,  in  which  he  opposed
in  1785  a  proposition  to  establish  a  paper  currency.
After  the  death  of  his  wife  in  June,  1787,  he  aban-
doned his  large  legal  practice  in  Annapolis,  sank
into  a  settled  melancholy,  and  died  when  he  was
about  to  embark  on  a  sea-voyage. — Another  great-
grandson,  Jolin  Hoskins,  governor  of  Maryland,
b.  in  Charles  county,  Md.,  in  1745;  d.  in  Annapo-
lis, Md.,  5  Oct.,  1804.  On  2  Jan.,  1776,  the  con-
vention of  Maryland  elected  him  captain  in  Col.
Smallwood's  battalion,  and  in  December  of  the
same  year  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  coloneL
lie  served  with  credit  in  the  battles  of  Long  Island,
White  Plains,  Princeton,  and  Germantown,  re-
ceived in  the  last-mentioned  battle  a  wound  that
maimed  him  for  life,  and  on  1  Aug.,  1779,  resigned
his  commission.  In  1781  he  was  clerk  in  the  office
of  Robert  R.  Livingston,  secretary  of  state,  and
afterward  was  one  of  the  executive  council  of
Maryland.  He  was  governor  from  1794  till  1797. —
Another  great-grandson,  William  Murray,  P.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Somerset  county,  Md.,  1  June,  1779;
d.  in  Salisbury,  Md.,  26  Feb.,  1838.  He  entered
Washington  college,  Md.,  was  graduated  in  1799,
and  studied  theology,  preparatory  to  taking  orders
in  the  Episcopal  church.  He  was  ordained  deacon  in
St.  Paul  s  church.  Prince  George  co.,  Md.,  17  May,
1802,  by  Bishop  Claggett,  and  priest  in  the  same
church,  27  Dec,  1803,  by  the  same  bishop.  In  1808
he  became  rector  of  Stepney  parish,  Somerset
(now  Wicomico)  county.  This  position  he  held  for
twenty-three  years,  and  he  was  very  diligent  and  suc-
cessful in  his  pastoral  work.  In  1829  he  accepted
the  rectorship  of  St.  Paul's  church,  Chestertowo,
Kent  CO.,  Md.  The  following  year,  at  the  conven-
tion in  May,  after  a  failure  to  elect  either  of  two
prominent  clergymen,  he  was  nominated  and  elected
bishop  by  a  nearly  unanimous  vote.  He  was  conse-
crated in  St.  Paul's  church,  Baltimore,  Md.,  21  Oct.,
1830.  The  same  year  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Columbia.  Bishop  Stone's  publications  were
"  A  Charge  to  the  Clergv  and  Laity  of  Marvland  "
(1831);  "A  Pastoral  Letter  to  the  Diocese  of
Maryland  "  (1835) ;  and  "  The  Sermon  before  the
General  Convention  of  the  P.  E.  Church"  (1835).
— Thomas's  brother,  Micbael  Jenifer,  jurist,  b.
in  Charles  county,  Md.,  about  1750;  d.  there  in
1812,  received  a  classical  education.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Maryland  convention  that  ratified
the  Federal  constitution,  and  was  elected  to  the
1st  congress,  serving  from  8  June,  1789,  till  3
March,  1791.  Under  the  st-ate  government  he  was
a  judge  of  the  general  court,  and  continued  on  the
bench  till  the  judicial  system  was  reorganized  in
1806.  —  Michael  Jenifer's grandson,  Frederick,


STONK


8T0NB


706


«onfP'«8(iinaii,  b.  in  Virginia,  7  Fob..  1R20,  wm
fCnuluated  at  St  John'H  eollof^.  .-\nna|>uli^  and
iitii(licMl  and  pnictiswl  law  at  l*<»rt  TolwHVd,  Charli's
oo..  Md.  H»'  Wits  ••li'cU'd  !))•  th<«  p'nrnil  axvuiMy
in  IHoS  (>no  of  ihi'  (•onimi.>*.sionfrs  t<»  Htniplify  tin-
ruli's  of  nlradinK  and  pnwlic-e  in  the  statf  rourts.
Ho  wiis  elcH'tcnl  to  tlio  Constitutional  convention  to
form  a  new  constitution  for  the  Mate  in  ttie  Hprini;
of  1H04.  but  decline<l  to  take  his  seat.  In  the  fol-
iowin);  November  ho  was  electe«l  to  the  housi>  of
dolepates  from  Charh's  county  and  s4Tvw1  for  tliat
»t«ssion.  He  was  electeil  to  coiiffn-ss  in  IWMJ,  and
re-eU'ctcd  in  IHi'tH.  In  1H71  he  was  aptin  elei-ted
to  the  house  of  delegates,  and  servcni  his  term.  lie
was  chosen  judge  of  the  court  of  apix^als  in  1881,
which  place  ho  now  (1SH8)  occupies.

STONE.  William Leete.  author,  b.  in New
Paltz,  N.  Y.,  20  April,  ITU'i  :  d.  in  Siimtoga  Springs.

N.Y.,iriAug.,tS44.
His  father,  Will-
iam, was  a  soldier
of  the  Kev«)lution
and  afterward  a
Presbyterian  cler-
gyman, who  was  a
ues<'en«lant  of  (lov.
William  licete.  The
son  remove<l  to  .So-
dus,  N.  Y.,  in  1808.
where  ho  assisted
his  father  in  the
care  of  a  farm.  The
country  wils  at  that
time  a  wilderness,
and  the  adventun*s
of  young  St  one  dur-
ing his  early  pio-
neer life  formed
material  that  he  afterward  wrought  into  bonier
talcs.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  l)ecame  a  printer
in  the  office  of  the  Cooperstown  "  Federalist,"  and
in  1813  he  was  editor  of  the  Herkimer  *'  American,"
with  Thurlow  Weed  as  his  journeyman.  8ul)se-
quently  he  edited  the  "  Northern  Whig  "  at  Hudson.
N.  Y.,  and  in  1817  the  Albany  "  Daily  Advertist>r."
In  1818  he  succeetletl  Theo<l(jre  Dwight  in  the  edi-
torshii)  of  the  Hartford  "  Mirror."  While  at  Hart-
fonl,  Jonathan  M.  Wainwright  (afterward  bishop).
Samuel  G.  (ioodrich  (I'eter  Parley).  Isiuic  Toucey.
and  hims«'If  alternated  in  e<litinga  liteniry  maga-
zine calknl  "  The  Knights  of  the  Round  Table."
He  also  edited  while  at  Hudson  "The  Lounger,"  a
litemry  [>erio4lical  which  was  noted  for  its  pleasant-
ry arul  wit.  In  1821  he  succeeded  Zachariah  Lewis
in  the  editorship  of  the  New  York  "Commercial
Advertiser,"  becoming  at  the  same  time  one  of  its

(»roprietors.  which  place  he  held  until  his  death.
Irown  university  gave  him  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in
182.').  Mr.  Stone  always  advocatwl  in  its  columns
the  abolition  of  slavery  by  congressional  action,  and
at  the  great  anti-slaverv convention  at  Baltimore  in
1825  he  originated  ancf  drew  up  the  plan  for  slave
emancipation  which  was  recommetuhHl  at  that  time
to  congress  for  adoption.  In  1824  his  symiwtliies
were  strongly  enliste<l  in  Iwhalf  of  the  (Jreeks  in
their  struggles  for  independence,  and,  with  Edwanl
Everett  and  Dr.  Sanuiel  G.  Howe,  was  among  the
first  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  country  to  that
people  and  awaken  sympathy  in  their  Itehalf.  In
1825,  with  Thurlow  ^'etnl,  he  accomnanie<l  I^afay-
ette  on  his  tour  through  imrt  or  the  Tnite*!
States.  He  was  appointed  by  Presi«lent  IIarri«<on
minister  to  the  Hague,  but  was  recalle<l  by  Tvler.
HcHtn  after  the  .Mori;an  tragi^ly  (see  Moroan,  NN  ii.i--
lAMt  Mr.  Stone,  who  was  a  Freemason,  atidressed  a
VOL.  v.^-45


wrieji  of  lottcn  on  "  Mawmry  uid  Antl-MaMnry"
to  John  (^uincy  Adainx,  who  in  his  rotinDment  at
(juincy  had  taken  iDtereat  in  the  anti-MaMinio
movement.  In  these  letten,  whi<h  wen*  afterward
colU-cte*!  and  published  (Now  York,  IH32).  tb«  au-
thor  maintained  that  .MaMinry  should  to*  ahan-
dontsi,  chieMy  ln«cauM«  it  had  UmI  it*  UMfuincaa.
The  writer  alstj  rleannl  away  the  mista  of  slaiifler
that  ha<l  gathcre<l  arouml'the  name  of  I)e  Witt
Clinton,  and  by  prt>iierving  strict  impartiality  he
securoil  that  credence  whicTi  no  ej-aarie  argument
could  obtain,  however  ingenious.  In  It^  hcorigi-
nate«l  anil  intrtMluoed  •  resolution  in  the  Now  York
hbtorical  society  direeting  a  memorial  to  be  ad-
drewed  to  the  Now  York  legi.»Iaturi'  praying  for  the
appointment  of  an  historical  mission  to'thegovem-
mciits  of  Knglaml  and  Holland  for  the  recovery  of
such  papers  and  d<H-uments  as  were  cMential  to  a
correct  un«Ier»tandingof  th«'  crtlonial  history  of  the
state.  This  was  the  origin  r»f  the  c-olloction  known
as  the  "  New  York  Colonial  DcMument'*  "  mailo  bjr
John  Romeyn  Bnxlhea*!,  who  whs  sent  abroad  for
that  pur|)ose  by  (Jov.  William  II.  SewanI  in  the
spring  of  1841.'  Ho  was  the  first  superintendent
of  public  sch<x>U  in  New  York  city,  and  while
holding  the  office,  in  1844,  had  a  discussion  with
Archl^hop  Hughes  in  relation  to  the  use  of  the
Bible  in  the  public  schools.  Although  the  influ-
ence of  Col.  Stone  (as  he  was  familiarly  called,
from  having  held  that  rank  on  Gov.  ('linton's
staff)  extentled  througlunit  the  country,  it  was  fell
more  particularly  in  New  York  city,  fie  was  active
in  religious  entoriirisi>s  and  l)onevolont  associations.
His  works  aro  "  llistorv  of  the  (ireat  AUianv  Con-
stitutional Convention'of  1821  "  (Allwny,  1822);
"Narrative  of  the  Grand  Erie  Canal  Celebration,"
prepire<l  at  the  request  of  the  New  York  common
council  (New  York,  1825);  "Tales  and  Sketches,"
founded  on  aboriginal  aixl  Revolutionary  tradi-
tions (2  vols.,  1834);  "Matthias  and  His  Im|K)S-
tures  "  (18*J) ;  "Maria  Monk  and  the  Nunnery  of
the  Hotel  Dieu,"  which  put  an  end  t«i  an  extraor-
dinary mania  (s«h*  Monk,  Maria)  (ISiMJ);  "  I'ps  and
Downs  in  the  Life  of  a  Distressed  Gentleman."  a
satire  on  the  fashionable  follies  of  the  day  (IKM);
"  Border  Wars  of  the  American  Revolution  "
(18.37);  "Life  of  Joseph  Bnmt"  (IKiH);  "I^etters
on  Animal  Magnetism  "  (1H:W):  "  Life  of  Roil  Jack-
et "  (1840;  new  ed.,  with  memoir  of  the  author  by
his  son,  William  L.  Stone.  186(J):  "Poetry  and
History  of  Wvominir."  including  Thomas  Camp-
Ih'H's  "Gertrude  of  Wyoming"  (1841 ;  with  index,
Albany,  1804);  and  "  I'ncas  and  Miantononmh  "
(1842).'— His  only  son,  William  l/eete,  author,  b.
in  New  York  city,  4  April,  183.5,  entere«l  Bn>wn,
but  left  college  in  18.5<5  an«l  sjhmU  several  months
in  Germany  in  ac<|uiring  a  knowUnlge  of  the  (ler-
man  language  with  a  view  of  translating  into  Eng-
lish several  military  works  U'aring  u\nn\  our  Revo-
lutionary history.  On  his  return  in  1858  he  was
graduatinl  at  Brown,  and  in  1855)  took  the  degree  of
LL.  B.  at  Allwny  law-s<hool.  He  pnutisetl  law  at
Saratoga  Springs  during  lM«J0-*3.  and  in  1864-7
wascitv  alitor  of  the  New  York  "Journal  of  Com-
men-e.'^  In  187()-*4  he  was  editor  and  proprietor
of  the  "Collegi"  Review."  a  paper  md»lishe»I  in  the
interests  of  American  c<»lleges.  Ho  has  Iieen  secre-
tary »»/  the  .Snratoga  moiuunent  asoociation  since
it9'inc«ir|Kiration  t»y  the  legislature  of  the  state  of
New  York  in  1871,  and  is  als<i  one  of  its  original
trustees  and  incoqjorators.  At  the  laying  of  the
corner-stone  of  the  monument  on  17  (Ki.,  1H77,  the
centennial  of  Burgoyne's  surri-mler,  he  delivered
the  historical  wldress,  and  he  is  the  author  of  "  The
Life  and  Times  of  Sir  William  Johnson,  Bart."  (8


706


STONE


STORER


vols.,  Albany.  1865) ;  "  Life  and  Writings  of  Col,
William  L.  Stone"  (1806);  "Guide- Book  to  Sara-
toga Springs  and  Vicinity"  (1866);  "Letters  and
Journals  of  Mrs.  General' Riedesel"  (1867);  "Life
and  Military  Journals  of  Major-General  Riedesel"
(1868);  "History  of  New  York  City"  (1872);
"  Reminiscences  of  Saratoga  and  Ballston  "  (1875) ;
"  Campaign  of  General  Burgoyne  and  St.  Leger's
Expedition  "  (1877) ;  "  Third  Supplement  to  Dowl-
ings  History  of  Romanism"  (1881);  "The  Order-
ly Book  of  t^ir  John  Johnson  "  (1882) ;  "  The  Jour-
nal of  Captain  Pausch,  Chief  of  the  Hanau  Artil-
lery during  the  Burgoyne  Campaign"  (1886);  and
"Genealogy  of  the  Stone  Family  "  (1887).  He  is
now  (1888)  engaged  on  a  life  of  George  Clinton.

STONE,  William  Oliver,  artist,  b.  in  Derby,
Conn.,  26  Sept.,  1830 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  15  Sept.,
1875.  He  studied  with  Nathaniel  Jocelyn  at  New
Haven,  and  in  1851  removed  to  New  York.  In
1856  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy,  and  he  became  an  academician  three  years
later.  He  gained  distinction  in  portraiture,  and
devoted  himself  entirely  to  that  branch  of  art.
Among  his  numerous  portraits  are  those  of  Bishops
Williams  of  Connecticut  (1858),  Littlejohn  of  Rhode
Lsland  (1858),  and  Kip  of  California  (1859) ;  John
W.  Ehninger  (1859),  owned  bv  the  National  acade-
my ;  Rev.  Henry  Anthon  (1860);  Cyrus  W.  Field
(1865);  and  James  Gordon  Bennett  (1871).

STONEMAN,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Busti.  Chau-
tauqua CO.,  N.  Y.,  8  Aug.,  1822.  lie  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1846,  and  entered
the  1st  dragoons. He  acted  as  quartermaster  to

the  Mormon  bat-
talion at  Santa  Fe,
was  sent  with  it  to
California  in  1847,
and  remained  ac-
tively engaged  on
the  Pacific  coast
till  1857.  In  March
of  this  year  he  be-
came captain  in
the  2d  cavalry,  and
served  till  1861,
chiefly  in  Texas.
In  February  of
that  year,  while  in
command  of  Fort
Brown,  he  refused
to  obey  the  order  of
his  superior.  Gen.
David  E.  Twiggs,
for  the  surrender  of  the  government  property  to
the  secessionists,  evacuated  the  fort,  and  went  to
New  York  by  steamer.  He  became  major  of  the
1st  cavalry  on  9  May.  1861,  and  served  in  west-
ern Virginia  till  13  Aug.,  when  he  was  appointed
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  and  chief  of  cav-
alry of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  organized
the  cavalry  of  that  army  and  commanded  during
the  Virginia  peninsular  campaign  of  1862.  After
the  evacuation  of  Yorktown  by  the  Confederate
troops  his  cavalry  and  artillery  pursued  and  over-
took them,  and  thus  brought  on  the  battle  of
Williamsburg,  5  May,  1862.  He  took  command  of
Gen.  Philip  Kearny's  division  after  the  second
battle  of  Bull  Run,  succeeded  Gen.  Samuel  P.
Heintzelman  as  commander  of  the  3d  army  corps,
15  Nov.,  1862,  and  led  it  at  Fredericksburg  on  13
Dec.  He  was  promoted  major-general,  29  Nov.,
1862,  led  a  cavalry  corps  in  the  raid  toward  Rich-
mond from  13  April  till  2  May,  1863.  and  com-
manded the  23d  corps  from  January  till  April,
1864. On  the  reorganization  of  the  armies  oper-


ating against  Richmond  by  Gen.  Grant,  Gen.  Stone-
man  was  appointed  to  a  cavalry  corps  in  the  De-
partment of  the  Ohio,  was  engaged  in  the  opera-
tions of  the  Atlanta  campaign  in  May-,July,  1864,
and  conducted  a  raid  for  the  capture  of  Macon  and
Andersonville  and  the  liberation  of  prisoners,  but
was  captured  at  Clinton,  Ga.,  31  July,  and  held  a
captive  till  27  Oct.  He  led  a  raid  to  southwestern
Virginia  in  December,  1864,  commanded  the  dis-
trict of  east  Tennessee  in  February  and  March,
1865,  conducted  an  expedition  to  Asheville,  N.  C,
in  March-April,  1865,  and  was  engaged  at  Wythe-
ville,  the  capture  of  Sjilisbury.  N.  C,  and  at  Ashe-
ville. He  became  colonel  of  the  21st  infantry,  38
Julv,  1866,  and  was  brevetted  colonel,  brigadier.-
and  major-general  for  gallant  conduct.  He  retired
from  the  army,  16  Aug.,  1871,  and  has  since  re-
sided in  California,  of  which  he  was  governor  in
1883-'7,  having  been  chosen  as  a  Democrat.

STORER,  Bellamy,  jurist,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,
9  March,  1798;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  1  June,
1875.  He  was  educated  at  Bowdoin,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1817,  and  the  same
year  began  practice  at  Cincinnati.  In  1824  he  ad-
vocated the  election  of  John  Quincy  Adams  to  the
E residency,  and  edited  "  The  Crisis,"  an  organ  of
is  party.  He  served  in  congress  in  1835-'7,  de-
clined renomination.  and  in  1844  was  a  presiden-
tial elector  on  the  Henry  Clav  ticket.  He  was  for
many  years  a  professor  in  the  Cincinnati  law-school,
and  served  for  nineteen  years  as  judge  of  the  su-
preme court  of  that  city.  He  was  popular  as  a
speaker  at  both  political  and  religious  meetings.
At  one  time  in  his  early  life  Judge  Storer  was  &
leading  spirit  in  a  religious  band  of  young  men
called  "  Flying  Artillery,"  who  went  from  town
to  town  to  promote  revivals.  He  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Bowdoin  in  1821. — His
brother,  David  Humphreys,  physician,  b.  in  Port-
land, Me.,  26  March,  1804.  was  graduated  at  Bow-
doin in  1822.  and,  after  studying  medicine  with
Dr.  John  C.  Warren,  was  graduated  at  the  medical
department  of  Harvard  in  1825.  Settling  in  Bos-
ton, he  there  began  his  practice,  which  he  still
(1888)  continues.  In  1837  he  originated  the  Tre-
mont  street  medical  school,  and  in  1854  he  was
called  to  the  chair  of  obstetrics  and  medical  juris-
prudence in  the  medical  department  of  Harvard,
becoming  also  its  dean,  which  appointments  he  held
until  1868.  Dr.  Storer  was  physician  to  the  Mas-
sachusetts general  hospital  from  1849  till  1858,  and
in  1837  was  given  charge  of  the  departments  of  zo-
ology and  herpetology.  under  the  direction  of  the
Massachusetts  state  survey.  He  is  a  member*  of
many  medical  and  scientific  societies  in  the  United
States,  to  whose  transactions  he  has  frequently
contributed  papers  on  natural  sciences,  and  m  1866
was  president  of  the  American  medical  association.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by
Bowdoin  in  1876.  His  larger  publications  include
a  translation  from  the  French  of  Louis  C.  Kiener's
"  Genera,  Species,  and  Iconography  of  Recent
Shells"  (Boston,  1837);  "Report  on  the  Ichthy-
ology and  Herpetolog}'  of  Massachusetts"  (1839);
"Synopsis  of  the  Fishps  of  North  America"  (Cam-
bridge, 1846);  and  "  History  of  the  Fishes  of  Mas-
sachusetts "  (in  parts,  Boston,  1853-'67). — David's
son,  Horatio  Robinson,  surgeon,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  27  Feb.,  1830,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1850,  where  he  devoted  special  study  to  natural
science,  and  was  a  private  pupil  of  Louis  Agassiz
and  Asa  Gray.  He  then  turned  to  medicine,  re-
ceived his  degree  from  Harvard  in  1853.  and  then
spent  two  years  in  Paris,  London,  and  Edinburgh,
during  one  of  which  he  was  the  a^istant,  in  pri-


STOKER


8T0RKY


707


▼ate  practice,  to  Sir  Jaineti  Y.  Simp«>n.  In  IKM
be  estaMisheil  himself  in  liostmi  aiul  ma<lo  a  H\)e-
ciiilty  itf  jjyrjcc-olojfy.  For  s«>vi'rai  years  ho  serve*!
IIS  iis>.i>itHnt  to  his  father  wiiil«<  the  latter  lecturecl
at  Ilurvani,  and  in  IHtW  ho  was  chos^-n  t<>  the  chair
of  oljstotrics  and  medical  jurisprudftH-o  in  Ii«Tk-
shire  me<lical  collcpo,  which  ho  hold  fur  four  yoars.
To  Ix'tter  fit  himself  for  toai-hinj;  inctlical  iuris-
prudence,  he  attende<l  the  Harvard  law-sc-hool,  and
was  jjraduated  in  1808.  For  several  yean«  he  ile-
liverod  in  I^>ston  a  semi-annual  course  to  medical
CTaduatcs  upon  the  sur^jical  disejises  of  women,  re-
fusinj;  to  admit  any  applicant  that  was  not  in
goo«l  standinK  in  the  American  nu.><lical  as.s<K'ia-
tion.  These  lectures  were  attend«»d  hy  physicians
from  all  parts  of  the  country.  In  18?2  his  health
failed  and  he  went  to  FJurope,  where  ho  spent  five

fears,  studying  practically  the  fevers  of  southern
taly.  On  his  return  he  settled  in  Newport.  It.  I.,
where  he  has  since  resido<l.  While  in  m>st«>n  he
wa.s  physician  to  the  Boston  lyinjj-in  hos[)ital,  to
St.  Elizabeth's  hospital,  and  to  St.  .losenh's  honu',
consulting  surgeon  to  Carney  gonoral  hospital,
and  surgeon  to  the  New  p]ngland  hospital  for
women  and  children.  Dr.  Storer  is  a  meml)er  of
many  scientific  and  medical  societies  in  this  coun-
try anil  abroad,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  and
later  president  of  the  Gynecological  society  of  Bos-
ton, of  whose  journal  he  was  also  the  active  e<litor
in  1869-'73.  lie  was  also  in  1871  president  of  the
Association  of  American  medical  editors.  He  has
been  a  fretjuent  attendant  at  the  meetings  of  the
American  medical  association,  of  which  he  was
secretary  and  prize  essayist  in  1805  and  vice-presi-
dent in  18(i8,  and  in  1871,  by  special  invitation  of
the  California  state  board  of  health,  he  delivered  a
lecture  in  Sacramento  on  "  Female  Hygiene."  He
was  a  vice-president  of  the  gynecological  section
of  the  Ninth  international  congress.  Dr.  Storer
has  been  a  very  large  contributor  to  medical  jour-
nals, and  the  titles  of  his  papers  excee<l  125  in
numlK3r.  In  l)ook-form  he  has  published,  with  Dr.
William  O.  Priestley,  "The  Obstetric  Memoirs  and
Contributions  of  Sir  James  Y.  Simpson"  (Hidin-
burgh.  1855;  Philadelphia,  1850);  "Criminal  Ab<ir-
tion  in  America"  (Philadelphia,  1800);  "  Whv
Nott  A  Book  for  Everv  Woman  "(Boston,  180<3);
"Is  it  HA  Book  for  kvery  Man"  (1807);  with
Franklin  F.  Heard,  "Criminal  Abortion:  Its  Na-
ture, its  Evidence,  and  its  Law"  (1808);  "On
NuRies  and  Nursing,  with  Special  Reference  to  the
Management  of  Sic-K  Women  "  (1808) :  and  "  South-
em  Italy  as  a  Health  Station  for  Invalids"  (Na-
ples, 18*5^. — Another  son,  Francis  Humphreys,
chemist,  o.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  March.  1hS2,
entered  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard
in  1850,  and  there  made  a  sjx>cialty  of  chemistry,
studying  under  Josiah  P.  C(K)ke,  whose  assist^mt
he  btjcame  in  1851.  He  remained  for  two  years  in
Prof.  Cooke's  laboratories  at  Cambridge  and  at
Harvard  medical  school  in  Boston,  where  he  also
instructed  a  private  cla^s  in  chemical  analysis.  In
185^3  he  was  appointed  chemist  to  the  U.  S.  North
Pacific  explornig  expedition,  and  visited  the  prin-
cipal islands  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  (K-oiins.
On  his  return  he  cfjmpleteil  his  course  at  the  Law-
rence scientific  school,  receiving  the  degree  of
S.  B.  in  185.">,  and  then  studied  abroad  with  Bunsen
in  Heidelberg,  Richter  in  Freiberg,  Stockanlt  in
Tharandt,  and  with  ftmile  Kopp  in  Paris.  He  re-
turmnl  in  1857,  ami  wa.s  chemist  to  the  Boston
iras-light  cbmpany  till  1871.  also  o|H'ning  a  private
laljoratory  as  an  analytical  and  consulting  chemist.
In  IHdT)  he  was  apfwi'nted  f  rofessor  of  geneml  and
industrial chemistry  at the -Mjissaihusettj* insti-


tute of  technology,  wherv,  with  Charloii  W.  Kliot,
ho  devote«l  hitUM-lf  to  tesehing  chemistry  in  it*  «{>•
plication  to  tho  arts  and  tut  m  mean*  of  mental
trainint;  in  general  nlucation,  and  to  Uie  tank  of
orgjmizing  an<i  {terfecting  a  nyrtem  of  inKtnu-tinff
students  in  large  claflMd  by  the  ex|ierimenUu
nietluMl.  He  M[ient  several  month»  abroml  during
18<J7  for  the  nuqKMo  of  studying  the  chemical  de-
partments of  the  World's  fair  in  Parin  nnd  the
processes  actually  employiNl  in  the  chemical  manu-
factures of  Europe.  In'  1H70  he  was  callo«i  to  the
chair  of  agricultural  chemistry  at  llarvanl,  and
he  ha-s  since  cK-cupied  that  |»ost,  and  is  dean  of
the  Bussey  institution.  Prof.  Storer  received  the
honorary  degrt-e  of  A.  M.  from  Harvanl  in  1B70.
and  is  a  meinU'r  of  scientific  sMierieties  at  home  and
abroiul.  His  |ut{M<rs  excetHl  100  in  number.  Kor
some  time  he  was  American  alitor  of  the  "  Reper-
toire de  chimie  applifpuV,"'  and  has  conducted
the  "  Bulletin  of  the  Buss«'v  Institution."  In  book-
form  he  has  published  "l)icti(mary  of  tho  Solu-
bilities (if  Chemical  Sulwtances  "  (Cambridjfe,  18«4) ;
with  Charles  W.  Eliot,  "  Manual  of  Iiiorganic
Chemistry"  (New  York,  18<J8)  and  "Manual  of
Qualitative  Chemistry  .Vnalysis"  (1809);  "Cyclo-
piedia  of  (Quantitative  .Vnalvsis,"  in  two  parts  (Bos-
ton, 1870-  3) ;  and  "  Agriculture  in  Some  of  its  Re-
lations with  Chemistry  "  (2  vols..  New  York.  18H7).
— David's  cousin,  George  Washington,  naval  of-
ficer, b.  in  Porti<mouth,  N.  II.,  in  178S»;  d.  there,  8
Jan.,  18f>4,  entere<l  the  navy  as  a  midNhipman.  16
Jan.,  180i),  and  was  commissionnl  a  lieutenant.  34
July,  1813.  He  serve«l  in  the  ship  "  Indefwndem*,"
on  the  Mediterranean  station  in  181 5-' 16, command-
ed the  schooner  "  Lynx  "  on  the  New  Flngland  const
and  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  in  1817,  cruise<l  in  the
frigates  "(\jngress"  and  "Java"  in  the  West  In-
dies in  1818-'19,  and  in  the  frigate  "('oust it ut ion  "
in  the  Mediterranean  in  1820-'4.  He  was  com-
missione«l  master-c-omnmndant,  24  April,  1828,  and
captain,  9  Feb.,  18J37,  «)minand«Hl  the  receiving-ship
"  Constellation  "  at  Boston  in  18:39,  the  frigate  "  Po-
tomac," of  the  Brazil  station,  in  1840-'2.  the  navy-
yard  at  Portsmouth  in  184:3-'0,  and  was  the  com-
inander-in-chief  of  the  Brazil  squa4lron  in  1847-'50.
He  was  on  leave  and  served  as  memtn'r  of  boanls,
president  of  the  boanl  of  in<piiry,  and  other  duty
m  1851-'4.  In  1855-'7  he  was  ifovernor  of  the
naval  asylum  at  Philatlelphia.  He  was  retired,
21  Dec.,  1801,  on  account  of  age.  and  pnwnoted  to
rear-admiral  on  the  retire<l  list,  10  July,  1862.  In
1801-'2  he  servwl  on  s{)ecial  duty  in  Bn'wklyn,  after
which  he  was  unemploved  for  one  year.

STOKER.  Clement,  senator,  b.'in  Kennebunk,
Me.,  in  1700;  d.  in  Portsmouth.  N.  H..  21  Nov.,
18130.  He  received  an  at*4ulemical  education,  stud-
ied meilicine  at  Portsmouth  and  afterwanl  in
Europie,  and  In'gan  practice  at  Portsmouth.  He
was  a  major-general  of  militia,  n»|ieate«lly  a  mem-
Ijer  of  the  legislature  and  one  year  its  s|H>«ker.  and
sat  in  congress  fn>m  20  iht,',  1807.  till  3  March,
1809.  He  was  then  elected  to  th.r  I'.  S.  M'nate  to
fill  the  vacaticy  cause<l  by  the  resignation  of  Jere-
miah Mas<m,  and  sorve<l  from  1  I)ec..  1817,  till  8
March,  1S19.  He  was  high  sheriflf  of  the  county  of
RiKkingham  in  1818-'24.

STOREY.  Wllbnr  FIsk,  jounialist,  b.  in  .Salis-
bury. Vt..  19  Dec.,  1H19 :  d.  in  Chicago,  III.,  29
Oct.',  1884.  lie  nx-eive*!  a  common-sH'ht»ol  educa-
tion, learnwl  the  printinir  tratle  at  twelve  rears  of
ag«'.  and  supplemente<l  nis  training  by  wide  mis-
cellantM»us  reading.  He  w«»rko<I  steailily  in  the
ofilee  «.f  the  Middlobury  "True  Pri'vs"  until  he  was
seventeen  years  old,  when  he  went  to  New  York
and  set  type  on  the  "  Journal  of  Commerce." Two


708


STORK


STORES


years  later  he  went  to  La  Porte.  Ind,,  and  had
there  his  first  experience  in  publishing  a  news-
paper, which  was  unsuccessful.  He  kept  a  drug-
store for  some  time,  and  edited  a  country  weekly,
and.  growing  tired  of  Indiana,  went  to  Jackson,
Mich.,  and  studied  law  for  two  years.  He  next  es-
tablislied  the  "  Patriot"  in  that  town,  of  which  he
was  appointed  postmaster  under  Polk's  adminis-
tration, whereupon  he  sold  the  paper.  Having
been  removed  by  Taylor  in  1849,  he  .set  up  another
drug-store,  was  chosen  the  year  following  a  mem-
ber of  the  State  constitutional  convention,  and
subsequently  appointed  state-prison  inspector.  In
1853  he  removed  to  Detroit,  bought  an  interest  in
the  "  Free  Press,"  and  ere  long  rose  to  be  its  editor
and  sole  owner.  He  went  to  Chicago  in  1861  and
purchased  the  "Times,"  which  then  had  a  very
small  circulation.  His  energy,  enterprise,  and  fear-
less expression  of  his  views  on  every  subject  gave
the  paper  notoriety.  No  man  in  the  northwest  has
done  so  much  as  he  both  to  benefit  and  injure
journalism.  Without  faith  in  any  one,  as  a  conse-
quence no  one  placed  faith  in  him.  He  was  inde-
Eendent  in  an  extreme  and  unwholesome  sense,
oasting  that  he  had  no  friends  and  wanted  none,
and  apparently  doing  his  utmost  to  create  enemies.
His  whole  mind  was  bent  on  giving  the  news,  his
idea  of  what  constitutes  news  bemg  frequently
morbid  and  indecorous.  He  was  daring  to  a  de-
gree of  recklessness  and  repellent  cynicism,  but
his  course  yielded  him  a  large  fortune.  About  1877
his  health  began  to  fail,  and  he  went  abroad.  In
the  summer  of  1878  he  had  a  paralytic  stroke,  and
was  brought  home.  He  was  adjudged  of  unsound
mind  in  1884,  and  a  conservator  of  his  estate  was
appointed  by  the  courts.

STORK,  Charles  Augnstus  GottUeb,  clergy-
man, b.  in  lielmstadt,  duchy  of  Brunswick,  Ger-
many, 16  June,  1764;  d.  in  Salisbury,  N.  C,  27
March,  1831.  The  family  name  was  originally
Storch.  He  received  his  classical  and  theological
educjition  in  the  Univei-sity  of  Helmstadt,  in  1785
became  a  private  tutor,  and  in  1788  accepted  a  call
as  pastor  and  missionary  among  Lutherans  in
North  Carolina.  He  was  examined  and  ordained
to  the  ministry,  and  arrived  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in
June.  Immediately  after  his  arrival  he  took
charge  of  congregations  in  Cabarrus  county,  N.  C,
where  he  remained  until  he  retired  from  the  active
duties  of  the  ministry.  He  was  the  leader  of  vari-
ous enterprises  of  the  church.  When,  on  2  May,
1803,  the  synod  of  North  Carolina  was  organized,
he  was  elected  the  first  president,  and  he  was  annu-
ally re-elected  whenever  he  could  be  present.  Dur-
ing the  latter  part  of  his  life  he  removed  to  a
farm  ten  miles  south  of  Salisbury,  where  he  spent
the  remainder  of  his  days.  He  was  a  man  of  learning
and  piety,  and  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  superior
linguist.  See  "  The  Stork  Family  in  the  Lutheran
Church,"  by  John  G.  Morris,  D.  D.  (Philadelphia,
1886). — His  son,  Theophilns,  clergyman,  b.  near
Salisbury,  N.  C,  in  August,  1814 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  28  March,  1874,  was  graduated  at  Penn-
sylvania college.  Gettysburg,  in  1835,  and  at  the
theological  seminary  there  in  1837.  In  the  same
year  he  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  synod  of
Maryland,  and  assumed  pastoral  charge  of  the  Lu-
theran congregation  at  Winchester,  Va.,  where  he
remained  until  1841.  In  the  latter  year  he  re-
moved to  Philadelphia  as  pastor  of  St.  Matthew's
congregation,  the  second  English  Lutheran  con-

f^regation  in  the  city.  In  1842  he  was  one  of  the
eaders  in  the  movement  that  resulted  in  the  or-
ganization of  the  East  Pennsylvania  synod.  In
1850  he  resigned  as  pastor  of  St.  Matthew's  con-


gregation and  organized  St.  Mark's  congregation,
building  a  new  church.  In  1858  he  accepted  the
presidency  of  Newberry  college,  S.  C.  but  in  1860
ne  removed  to  Baltimore.  Md.,  as  pastor  of  a  new
congregation.  Here  ho  remained  until  1865,  when
he  retired  on  account  of  failing  health.  For  the
next  few  years,  until  1871,  he  was  engaged  in  pas-
toral and  editorial  duties  in  Philadelphia,  as  well
as  in  literary  pursuits  In  1851  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Pennsylvania  college.  He
was  at  various  times  editor  of  the  "  Home  Jour-
nal "  and  "  Lutheran  Home  Monthly,"  and  assist-
ant editor  for  several  years  of  the  "  Lutheran  Ob-
server." Among  his  published  works  are  "  Life  of
Martin  Luther  and  the  Reformation  in  Germany,"
edited  with  introduction  (Philadelphia,  1854);
"  The  Children  of  the  New  Testament "  (1854) ;
"Luther's  Christmas-Tree  "  (1855) ;  "Jesus  in  the
Temple,  or  the  Model  of  Youth  "  (1856) ;  •'  Home
Scenes  in  the  New  Testament "  (1857) ;  "  Luther  at
Home"  (1871);  "The  Unseen  World  in  the  Light
of  the  Cross"  (1871);  "Luther  and  the  Bible"
(1873) ;  "  Afternoon  "  (1874) ;  and  "  Sermons."  edit-
ed by  his  sons  (1876). — Theophilus's  son,  Charles
Augnstiis,  clergyman,  b.  near  Jefferson,  Freder-
ick CO.,  Md.,  4  Sept.,  1838 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
17  Dec.,  1883,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1857.
where  his  room-mate  was  James  A.  Garfield,  studied
at  Andover  theological  seminary,  and  was  profes-
sor of  Greek  in  Newberry  college,  S.  C,  in  1859-'60.
In  1861  he  was  ordained  to  the  ministry.  He  was
pastor  of  St.  James's  Lutheran  congregation  in
Philadelphia  for  a  few  months  in  1861,  of  St.
Mark's  congregation  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  1862-'81,
and  professor  of  theology  in  Gettysburg  seminary,
and  chairman  of  the  faculty  from  1881  until  his
death.  In  1874  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Pennsylvania  college.  He  published  numerous
articles  in  periodicals,  and  was  for  a  time  co-editor
of  the  "  Lutheran  Missionary  Journal "  and  the
"  Lutheran  Observer "  in  Philadelphia  Some  of
his  fugitive  writings  have  been  collected  in  a  post-
humous work  entitled  "Light  on  the  Pilgrim's
Way,"  edited  by  his  brother,  Theophilus  B.  Stork
(Philadelphia,  1885).

STORKS,  Emery  Alexander,  lawyer,  b.  in
Hinsdale,  Cattaraugus  co.,  N.  Y.,  12  Aug.,  1835;  d.
in  Ottawa,  111.,  12  Sept.,  1885.  He  first  studied
law  with  his  father,  and  then  went  to  Buffalo,
where  he  pursued  his  legal  course,  and  in  1853  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1857  he  went  to  New
York,  remaining  there  for  two  years.  He  then  set-
tled in  Chicago,  and  soon  took  a  prominent  place
among  the  lawyers  of  the  countr)-.  As  an  orat9r
he  had  few  superiors.  Politically  a  Republican,
he  devoted  his  great  talents  to  that  party,  tak-
ing an  active  part  in  the  presidential  campaigns
of  the  last  twenty  years.  In  1868,  1872,  and  1880
he  was  a  delegate-at-large  from  Illinois  to  the
National  Republican  convention,  being  on  each
occasion  one  of  the  foremost  in  shaping  the  pol-
icy and  formulating  the  platform  of  his  party.
His  friends  urged  his  appointment  as  attorney-
general  under  the  administrations  of  Hayes  and
Arthur,  but  without  success.  A  few  months  before
his  death  he  accepted  a'large  retainer  to  defend  the
Mormons  in  the  U.  S.  courts  of  Utah.

STOKRS,  Henry  Randolph,  b.  in  Middletown,
Conn.,  3  Sept.,  1787 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  29
July,  1837.  Ho  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1804,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1807,  and

Practised  at  Champion,  Whitestone,  and  Utica,
[.  Y.,  serving  for  five  years  as  judge  in  Oneida
county.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Federalist
from  Utica,  and  served  with  re-elections  from  6


STORRS


8T0RBS


700


Dec.,  1819,  till  8  March.  \KM,  oxorpt  durinjr  the
17th  coMCTiMw.  Mr.  Storn*  sulD<c<|ucntly  Kelllwl  in
Now  York  city  and  attuintHl  h  hi);h  mnk'at  the  Iwr.
He  was  poeseewdof  uncommon  [MjWfntof  discrimi-
nation,  irreat  Io|rif.al  exai-tno.Ht<,  atul  a  ready  and
poworfuV  elocution,  and  hh  a  (lf>kml(>r  in  eonfcroM
was  in  the  first  rank.  St'veral  of  his  siM>efhes  have
been  puhlish*-*!. — His  brother,  Wlllinm  LiiriiiK,
jurist,  h.  in  Middletown.  Conn..  2^>  Munh,  17U5;
d.  in  Ilartford, Cunn.. 2<5  June.  IHHl.  wa8f;raduato<i
at  Yale  in  1814,  and  then  studied  law  in  White-
stone.  N.  Y.  In  1817  he  was  a<lmitte<l  to  the  Uir
in  New  York,  but  s«x)n  returned  to  his  nati'vi;  city
and  there  followed  his  pn>fession.  lie  was  electeil
to  the  state  assembly  in  ■1827-'9  and  IMIM.  and  was
piteaker  during;  the  last  term.  In  1829  he  was
cnost^n  to  congress  as  a  Whit;  and  servecl  from  7
Dec.,  1829.  till  3  March,  18;W,  and  again  from  2
Dec.,  1889,  till  June,  1840,  when  he  resigned  to  ac-
cept the  appointment  of  associate  judge  of  the
court  of  errors,  and  in  18o7  was  ap{K)inte<l  chief
justice.  He  held  the  professorship  of  law  in  Yale
during  184ft-'7,  and  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  was  con-
ferretl  on  him  by  Western  Ri'serve  in  184<J.  His
defisions.  which  are  regarded  as  exceedinglv  able,
are  jiiililished  in  the  "  t'uniHH;ticut  Ke[H)rts.*

STORRS,  Richard  Salter,  clergyman,  b.  in
Ijong  Meadow,  Mass.,  G  Feb.,  1787;  d.  in  Hraintree.
Ma.'vs..  11  Aug.,  1878.  His  grandfather,  John,
served  as  a  chaplain  in  the  Revolution,  and  his
father,  Richard  Salter,  was  pastor  of  the  ("ongnsga-
tional  church  at  Long  Meadow,  Mass.  The  son  re-
ceiveil  his  early  education  at  home  and  <'iitered
Yale  in  1802.  but,  his  health  failing,  he  taught  in  the
Clinton  ac^emy  in  East  Hampton,  L.  I.,  where  he
had  been  invited  at  the  suggestion  of  Lyman
Beecher.  Meanwhile  he  continue<l  his  studies,  and,
entering  the  senior  class,  was  graduated  at  Will-
iams in  1807.  He  then  returned  to  Long  Island
and  studied  theology  under  Rev.  Aaron  Wool-
worth  in  Bridgehaninton.  A  year  later  he  was
license<l  by  the  SuffolK  presbytery  and  had  charge
of  the  parishes  of  Islip  and  iSmithtown,  but  soon
retired  from  this  work  and  entered  .Andover  theo-
logical seminary,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1810.
He  was  then  ordained  pastor  of  the  1st  Congrega-
tional church  of  IJraintree,  which  charge  he  re-
tained until  his  death,  except  during  an  interval
of  five  years,  when  he  was  engage<l  in  the  service  of
the  Home  missionary  society  of  Massachusetts.
The  degree  of  D.  I),  was  conferred  on  him  by
Williams  in  1KJ5.  and  by  Amherst  in  the  same  year.
During  1817-'25  he  was  editor  of  the  "  Bosttm  Re-
corder," and  he  was  senior  a.«sociate  editor  of  the
"Congregationalist"  in  IS.'jO-'O.  Dr.  Storrs  was  also
a  contributor  to  the  "  Panoplist,"  the  "  Home
Monthly,"  and,  other  pcriotlicals.  and  in  jwldition
to  alK>ut  twenty  sermons.  publishe<l  "  Memoir  of
Rev.  Samuel  Green"  (IV)ston,  IKJO),  "Life  and
I^ettcrs  of  Rev.  Daniel  Temple  "  (New  York,  185.'}).
and  edited  "  Williston's  Sacramental  Meditations"
(Boston,  1857).— His  brother,  Charles  Barkns,
clergyman,  b.  in  Long  Meadow,  Mass.,  15  ^lay.
1794;  d.  in  Braintree.  Ma.ss..  15  Sept.,  18:W.  was
etlucated  at  Munson  wademy  and  at  Princeton,
but  left  college  at  the  close  of  his  junior  year  on
account  of  his  health.  He  studied  theology  in
Bridgehampton,  L.  I.,  and  was  licenseti  to  preach
by  the  I^ong  Island  presbytery  in  1818.  P'or  a
year  he  ha*!  charge  of  two  small  churches  on
ijong  Island,  but,  his  health  failing,  he  returned
to  his  father's  home.  On  his  recovery  he  was
gnwluattHl  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1820,  and  was  ortlaine<I  as  an  evangelist  by  the
Charleston  Congregational  aasociation  on  2  Feb.,


1821.  For  two  jmn  be  UboTBdas  *
in  South  Canilina  and  Oeorvia,  wban  his  bcalt
again  failed  him.  In  1888  ne  gathered  a  church
in  liavenna.  Ohio,  and  continued  thrrr  for  aii
years.  He  then  ac(-epte<l  the  profiwM>rHhip  of  tbe-
olo^  in  Wi»»teni  K«wne  colleg*',  and  in  1881
was  inaugurate<l  nrenident  of  that  in!«titution«
which  pliw-e  he  held  until  hisdealh.  He  publi»hed
an  addn>ss  <>n  his  induction  into  the  preBidency.
— Richanl  Siilter's  st.ii.  Kirhard  Salter,  deriry-
man,  b.  in  Braintree.  .Mas.<t..  21  Aug.,  1831,  was
ffnuluated  at  Amherst  in  1889.  and.  after  teach*
ing  in  Monson  academy  and  Williston  Mrminair,
studiecl  law  under  Kufurt  Choato.  Turning  hisai>
tention  to  theology  in
1842,  he  was  gnuluat-  _  ..

e<l  at  Andover  semi-
nary in  1845,  and  or-
dained on  22  Oct.  of
that  year  in  Brook-
line,  Mass.,  where  he
had  been  called  to  the
charge  of  the  Ilar-
vanl  Congregational
church.  In  1846  he
accei)te<l  the  |>astorate
of  tne  newly  organ-
ized Church  of  the
Pilgrims  in  Brrwklyn,
where  he  has  since  re-
mained. The  degree
of  D.  I),  was  conferred
on  him  by  Union  col-
lege  in  18.W  and by

Harvanl  in  ia')9,  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Princeton  in
1874,  and  that  of  L.  H.  D.  by  Columbia  in  1887.
In  1855  he  delivere«i  the  Graham  le<-lurps,  before
the  Brt>oklyn  institute.  "On  the  Wischdn  and
Goodness  of  (io<l,"  his  subject  Iteing  "  The  Constitu-
tion of  the  Human  Soul,"  and  in  1871»  he  delivered
the  L.  P.  Stone  lectures  at  Princeton  theological
seminary.  He  also  gave  the  li-ctures  on  "  Preaching
without'Notes."at  the  L'nion  theological  seminary,
in  New  York,  in  1875.  and  those  on  the  "  Divine
Origin  of  Christianity."  in  the  same  institution,  in
1881.  which  were  rejieated  before  the  liowell  insti-
tute in  lioston.  Dr.  Storrs  has  attained  reputation
as  one  of  the  most  eUMpient  pulpit  orators  in  the
United  Sutes.  In  1878  he  matle  an  addnsson  the
"Appeal  of  Romans  to  etlucated  Protestants"  be-
fore the  Kvangeiical  alliance.  He  is  well  known
for  his  historical  studies,  and  has  delivered  fre-
quent addresses  on  public  occasions.  In  1875  be
made  the  address  U-fore  the  New  York  historical
society  on  its  seventieth  anniversary,  in  1870  the
centennial  oration  in  New  York  city,  and  in  1881
the  ♦  B  K  onition  at  Harvanl.  Dr.  Storrs  was
electtnl  a  trustee  of  .\mherst  in  1808.  and  since  187^*
has  iH'cn  president  of  the  I>ong  Island  historical
s<x-ietv.  In  1887  he  was  chosen  president  of  the
American  i»oar«l  of  commi-ssioners  for  foreign  mi»-
sions.  He  was  one  of  the  wlitors  of  "The  Inde-
pendent" from  1848  till  18(n.  and.  in  addition  to
numerous  articles  in  ix-riodicals.  pre|>are<l  a  "Re-
port on  the  Revise*!  Kditiou  of  the  Kngli>h  Version
of  the  Bible."  His  publishe<!  works  further  in-
clude "The  Constitution  of  the  Human  Soul"
(1850) :  "Conditions  of  Success  in  Pri'aching  with-
out Notes"  (1875);  "  Karly  Americ-an  Spirit  and
the  Genesis  of  It"  (1875) ;'"  Declaration  of  Inde-
IK>ndence,  and  the  Effects  of  It"  (1870);  "John
Wvcliffe  and  the  First  English  Bible"  (1880);
"  iWognition  of  the  Su|>eniatural  in  I/cttcrs  and
in  Life  "(1881):  "  .Manliness  in  the  .Sholar"  (1888);
" The  Divine  Origin  of  (.:hri»tianity  ni<liiated  by


710


STORY


STORY


its  Historical  Effects"  (1884);  "The  Prospective
Advance  of  Christian  Missions"  (1885);  "Forty
Years  of  Pastoral  Life"  (Brooklyn.  1886);  and
"  The  Broader  Range  and  Outlook  of  the  Modern
College  Training"  (1887).

STORY,  George  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  New
navcn.  Conn.,  23  Jan.,  1835.  When  he  was  fifteen
years  of  age  he  apprenticed  himself  to  a  wood-
carver  for  three  years.  At  the  expiration  of  this
term  he  was  a  pupil  under  Charles  Hine  for  three
years.  He  then  studied  in  Europe  for  one  year,
after  which  he  went  to  Portland,  Me.,  where,  in
1859,  he  gained  the  state  medal.  He  painted  for
two  years  in  Washington,  D.  C,  then  one  year  in
Cuba,  and  since  then  has  resided  in  New  York.
In  1875  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy.  His  portraits  include  those  of  Salmon
P.  Chase,  Howell  Cobb,  Whitelaw  Reid,  and  Gov.
Partino  and  family,  of  Cuba.  Among  his  genre
pieces  are  "  The  Testy  Old  Squire  " ;  "  The  Fisher-
men "  (1886);  "Sunday  Morning,"  "Clock-Tink-
ers." and  "  Twenty  Thousand  Majority."

STORY,  Joseph,  jurist,  b.  in  Marblehead,  Mass.,
18  Sept.,  1779 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  10  Sept.,
1845.  His  father.  Dr.  Elisha  Story,  was  one  of  the
"Boston  tea-party,"  and  subsequently  a  surgeon
in  the  Revolutionary  army.  In  his  boyhood  the
son  manifested  unusual  powers  of  observation  and
an  intense  craving  for  knowledge.  In  1798  he  was
graduated  at  Harvard,  delivering  the  poem  at  the
commencement  exercises,  and,  choosing  the  law  for
his  profession,  studied  under  Samuel  Sewall  and
Samuel  Putnam.  In  1801  he  began  practice  in
Salem,  and  prepared  and  published  a  "  Selection  of
Pleadings  in  Civil  Actions  "  (Salem,  1805).  He  pub-
lished also  "The  Power  of  Solitude,  with  Fugitive
Poems"  (1804),  a  literary  venture  which  he  afterward
deeply  regretted.  Becoming  interested  in  feudal-
ism, he  made  a  profound  study  of  the  old  black-
letter  law  of  England,  and  mastered  the  intricate
and  technical  rules  which  govern  the  law  of  real
property.  Rising  rapidly  to  eminence,  he  was  soon
retained  in  important  cases,  and  took  rank  with
the  leaders  of  the  New  England  bar.  In  1805  he
was  elected  a  representative  of  Salem  in  the  legis-
lature, where  he  was  a  vigorous  and  accomplished

debater, and be-


^^''**-^.


came  the  acknowl-
edged leader  of  the
Republican  party.
Though  Democrat-
ic in  his  political
views,  he  was  never
a  slave  to  party,
and  on  questions
of  national  politics
was  of  the  school
of  Washington  and
Marshall.  In  1808,
in  opposition  to
Christopher  Gore,
then  at  the  zenith
of  his  fame,  Story
defended  the  em-
bargo as  the  only
measure  short  of  a
declaration  of  war
which  the  administration  could  have  adopted  with-
out submitting  to  ignominious  restrictions  on
American  commerce  by  the  belligerent  powers.  In
the  same  year  he  was  elected  a  representative  to
congress,  where,  in  opposition  to  the  administra-
tion, he  labored  to  procure  a  repeal  of  the  embargo,
on  the  ground  that  it  was  expedient  only  as  a  tem-
porary, not  us  a  permanent,  measure,  and  that  its


^/?:J^x^/2f^U^i:€^


continuance  would  be  disa.strous  to  New  England.
When  the  embargo  was  finally  repealed.  President
Jefferson  attributed  that  result  to  Story,  whom  he
styled  "  a  pseudo-Republican."  Another  measure
that  Story  advocated  in  opposition  to  the  adminis-
tration was  an  increase  of  the  navy.

On  his  return  home,  he  was  re-elected  to  the
Massachusetts  house  of  representatives,  and  in
1811  became  its  speaker.  In  Nt)vember  of  the
same  year,  at  the  early  age  of  thirty-two,  Story
was  appointed  by  President  Madison  an  associate
justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States.
His  circuit  embraced  four  states — Maine,  New
Hampshire.  Massachusetts,  and  Rhode  Island — and
his  judicial  duties  were  onerous  in  the  extreme.
Among  the  questions  that  came  before  him  for
atijudication  were  curious  and  perplexing  ones  of
admiralty  law,  of  the  law  of  salvage,  and  that  of
marine  insurance,  also  of  prize  law,  the  principles
of  all  which,  now  clearly  defined,  were  then  un-
settled and  imperfectly  understood.  Of  the  law
relating  to  these  subjects,  and  of  the  patent  law,
he  was  in  a  great  measure  the  creator.  He  also
divided  with  Chancellor  Kent  the  honor  of  having
founded  the  American  system  o<  equity  juris-
prudence. In  1819  he  denounced  the  slave-trade,
still  carried  on  in  the  ports  of  New  England,  so
vehemently  in  his  charges  to  the  grand  juries  that
he  greatly  contributed  to  its  extinction.  Though
denounced  by  the  press  as  deserving  "  to  be  hurled
from  the  bench,"  ne  redelivered  the  charge,  and
in  the  case  of  "  La  jeune  Eugenie,"  branded  the
traffic  in  a  masterly  judgment  as  a  violation  of
the  law  of  nations.  In  the  same  year  he  gave  his
opinion  in  the  celebrated  Dartmouth  college  case,
which  is  one  of  his  best.  When  the  Missouri  com-
promise was  agitating  the  country  his  feeling  on
the  subject  was  so  strong  that  he  took  part  in  a
public  meeting  at  Salem  to  protest  against  that
measure.  In  1820  he  made,  in  the  convention
called  to  revise  the  constitution  of  Massachusetts,  a
powerful  and  brilliant  speech,  the  best,  he  after-
ward thought,  that  he  ever  made,  in  opposition  to
a  motion  that  the  legislature  should  have  authority
to  diminish  the  salaries  of  the  judges  of  the
supreme  court.  In  1829.  when  Nathan  Dane
founded  a  professorship  of  law  at  Harvard,  he  was
elected  to  nil  it,  in  accordance  with  the  stipulation
of  its  founder,  and  delivered  an  able  and  polished
inaugural  discourse.  He  now  removed  to  Cam-
bridge, where  he  resided  for  the  rest  of  his  life.
The  school,  hitherto  unsuccessful,  now  attracted
students  from  all  parts  of  the  land.  The  number
rose  from  one,  the  only  student  in  attendance  tbe
vear  before,  to  thirty,  to  one  hundred  and  twenty
in  1842.  and  to  one  hundred  and  fifty-six  in  1844.
The  annual  salary  that  Story  received  during  his
professional  life  was  $1,000.  As  a  teacher  of  law
Judge  Story  has  had  few  if  any  equals.  His  vast
acquirement,  extraordinary  fluency,  sympathy  with
learners,  and  personal  magnetism,  eminently  fitted
him  for  that  office.  His  familiar  bearing  toward
"  the  boys,"  as  he  called  the  students,  his  frank-
ness and  abandon,  his  bubbling  humor,  his  merry
and  contagious  laugh,  and  his  inexhaustible  fund
of  incident  and  anecdote,  with  which he  gave

Eiquancy  and  zest  to  the  driest  themes,  won  for
im  not  only  the  attention  but  the  love  of  his
pupils,  whose  professional  careers,  after  they  left
the  school,  he  watched  with  fatherly  interest.  He
conducted  his  lectures  as  conversational  exercises
on  the  text-books,  and  two  or  three  limes  a  week
held  moot-courts  in  the  library.  His  manner
when  lecturing  was  that  of  an  enthusiast  rather
than  that  of  a  professional  teacher.


STOKY


8T0RV


711


In  1H.T1  Judjjf  Story  was  offonnl  tho  chief
ju«ti(H'«hi{)  of  MH>!«u'hus4>tt8.  hut  ho  ili>rlin(*d.
After  the  <l»'uth  of  Chief-.! iistifc  MHr>hHll,  U-iuj:
the  M'liior  memlK<r  l»y  ii|>|M)intiiieiit.  ho  pn>t«ii|e4l
over  the  del itKrat ions  of  liis  ussoeiiiteM  until  the
conflruintion  of  ('liief-Jm«ti<v  Tttney.  It  hutl  Un'n
the  wish  of  Marshiill  that  Story  should  suec«H*<)
him,  hut,  as  he  was  not  in  symfiathv  with  the  a*!-
ministration,  that  wa-s  ini|>oshihle.  fhirint;  the  ill-
ness of  Taney  in  1H44  he  a^ain  fllle<l  the  chief
justice's  place  for  a  few  months.  Jud);e  Story  ha<l
nearly  complettnl  his  preparations  for  retiring  from
the  iKMich  and  devoting;  liis  enerjjies  exdufiively  to
the  law-s<'hool,  when  he  was  stricken  with  a  fatal
illness.  In  181H  he  was  elected  an  ovenwer  of  Har-
vard, and  that  university  conferre<l  on  him  the  de-
jfree  of  LL.  I),  in  1«21.  while  Brown  similarly  hon-
ore«l  him  in  1815,  and  Dartmouth  in  1824.  For
many  years  he  was  president  of  the  Merchants'
bank  in  Salem,  and  in  1842  he  was  m-tive  in  estab-
lishing the  alumni  a.ssociation  of  Harvard,  of  which
he  iK'came  vice-presi(h'nt.  Though  for  thirty-three
years  a  lalK»rio>is  judge  of  the  su|>reme  court  of
his  country,  and  during  the  last  sixte«^n  years  of
his  life  an  eminently  successful  teacher  of  law,
Storv  gave  to  the  world  more  text-books  on  juris-

r>ru(ience  than  any  other  writer  of  his  time.  The
ist  comprises  his  "Commentaries  on  the  Ijaw  of
Bailments"  (Cambridge,  18J^2);  "Commentaries  on
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,"  a  work  re-
markable alike  for  its  depth  of  research,  vivid  his-
torical sketches,  and  treasures  of  political  wistlom
0  vols.,  1833);  "Commentaries  on  the  Conflict  of
Laws,"  his  ablest  and  most  original  work  (lioston,
1834);  "  Commentaries  on  Ecjuity  Jurisprudence,"
the  first  logical  and  systematic  aiscussion  of  that
.subject  (2  vols.,  183o-'6);  "Equity  Pleadings"
(IKJjM);  "  Law  of  Agency  "  (1831));  "Law  of  Part-
nership" (1841);  "Ijaw  of  Bills  of  Exchange"
(184;i);  and  "Law  of  Promissory  Notes"  (1845).
He  also  edited  "Chittv  on  Bills  of  Exchange  and
Promissory  Notes"  (hoston,  1800);  "Abbot  on
Shipping''  (1810);  and  "Laws  on  Assumpsit"
(1811),  with  notes  of  American  statutes  and  cases.
All  of  these  works  have  passed  through  many
editions,  and  are  reco^ized  not  only  by  British
judges,  but  on  the  continent,  where  they  have  Ix-en
translated  into  German  and  French,  as  of  the  high-
est authority.  Edwartl  Everett  writes :  "  For  an
American  judge  to  be  daily  cited  in  the  British
courts  from  the  highest  of  all,  the  court  of  imr-
liament,  down,  and  to  have  his  U)<)ks  alluded  to
as  the  proof  that  certain  branches  of  jurisprudence,
and  these  the  nobler  ones,  are  more  extensively  and
.successfully  cultivate<l  in  America  than  in  Eng-
lan<l,  may  well  Iw  reganiwl  as  an  offset  for  the
taunts  of  tourists  and  reviewers."  Story's  clecisions
aa  a  circuit-court  judge  are  containinl  in  thirteen
octavo  volumes,  being  the  reports  of  Cranch.
Wheaton,  Peters,  and  Howard.  fn)m  1811  to  1845.
The  retiorts  of  the  supreme  court  «luring  his  ju-
dicial life  fill  thirty-five  volumes,  of  whidi  his  ju-
dicial opinions,  retnarkable  alike  for  their  tomjMU-t
logic,  luminous  clearness,  wealth  of  learning,  and
fulness  of  illustration,  form  a  large  part.  The
notes  he  contributed  to  VVheaton's  n»|)orts  fill  184
closely  printe<l  pages.  Besides  all  these  legal  la-
bors, ne  delivered  many  disi-ourses  on  literary  and
other  themes,  wrote  numerous  biographical  sketches
of  his  contcmjKjraries,  and  contributed  elal)orate
paficrs  to  the  "  North  American  lleview"antl  the
"  American  Jurist."  He  also  wrote  for  his  friend
Dr.  LieU'r's  "  EncyclopR'«lia  Americana"  articles
filling  120  pages,  prepari'd  re|M)rts  on  c<Klificntion.
etc.,  and  drafted  some  of  the  most  important  acts


of  conppiw. He  left  an  unnubliiihad  "DlMt  of
liAw"  in  thre4>  manuwript  fulio  yoluiDM,  WDicb  b
in  the  Harvanl  law  library. The  ncrat  of  thaw
coliMsal  achii-vcinent«  was  cwawlei,  SjrsUfMtIo  ilH
dustrv,  an  extraitnlinanr  mctnorj  eqwuljr  tonaeioo*
of  nnnciplrs  and  of  rn»*'%.  fn><|uent  ohsngvof  Ubor.
and  com-etitration  of  mind. He  ecnnomised  odd
moments,  chang«>4| his work when wrery.  end
wrought  with  all  the  fort*  of  hi*  intellect. Judge
Story  had  fine  colloquial  (wwerii.  which  manifnitMl
thenisolves  not  in  wit  or  epigram,  but  in  a  wn-
tinuous  flow  of  genial  and  sfwrkling  remark. IHii
favorite  English  \nH-ts  were  l'o\^  and  (irav ; hin
favorite  I>atin  \n>vt  was  Virgil,  <>t wh<»M«  worl(^
when  travtlhng,  he  alwavK  carrie<] with him  a
well-thumU-*!  |KK-ket  edition. A  colh-ction  of  bin
"  Mi.scellani>ous  Writings"  was  |iublif«he«i  during  his
life-time  (IMJr)),  and  an  enlarge<l  i><litiun.  etlited  bjr
his  son,  William  W.  Storv.  apiieareil  after  his  dmth
(2  vols.,  Boston,  1H5I). .S«n«  also  "  Life  and  Ix^ttrm
of  JoM'ph  Stf)ry,"  by  William  W.  Story  (2  volm.
18.51). A selet'tion from his decisi<»ns,  entitled
"Notes  on  the Principle  and Practice  of Prix*
Courts,"  was  iMlit.'.l  bv  E.  T.  I'ratt  (Ixmdon,  1854).
—His  son,  WiHiani  Wetiuore.  artist,  b.  in  .Salem,
Mass.,  12 Feb.,  1«1{>,
was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  183.S,  and  at
its  law  de|mrtment  in
1840,  where  he  studied
under  his  father's  di-
rection. He  wjis  ad-
mitted to  the  l>ar,  and
devoteil  his  attention
larj^ely  to  the  pn'jMi-
ration of the "  Re-
ports of  Ca.ses  argui^l
and determinetl in
the  Circuit  Court  of
the  I'nitwl  States  for
the  First  Circuit  "  (3
vols.,  Iiost<m,1842-'7);
"Treatise  on  the  I^w
of  Contracts  not  un-
der Seal" (1844);  and
"  Tn'atise  on  the  I^aw  of  Sales  of  Per^)nnl  Prop-
erty "  (1847). At  the  same  time  he  was  a  fn-cpient
contributor  of  l»oth  prose  and  verse  to  the  "Bos-
ton Miscellany  "  an<l  other  iH>rio»lical«. Mr.  Story
was  the  jKiet  of  his  class,  and  in  1844  delivered  the
♦  B  K  iKi«'m  at  Harvanl  on  "Nature  and  Art."  in
which  he  indicated  the  tastes  which  were  to  gov-
ern his  future  life. His  first  volume  of  "Ptx'ms"
was  publishetl  in  1847,  and  in  18.56  he  deliven-d  a
IK)em  at  the  dedication  of  the  stattie  of  IWthoven
at  the  Boston  nmsic-hall. In  \H4H  his  fondness  for
art  led  to  his  going  to  Italy,  where  he  has  since
resided,  devoting  his  attention  chiefly to  sculp-
ture. Ilis  statue  of  his  father  in the  chaiiel  of
Mount Auburn  cemetery,  of  PMwanl Evervtt  in
the  B<iston  public  ranlen,  busts  of  James  Hus.<«cll
Ix)well,  The<Hlore  Parker,  and  Josiah  ^uincy.  are
well-known  exami)les  of  his  art,  and  he  nKKlelled
a bronze statue  of  (Jeorge  Pealxnly,  which was
erected  in  I^>ndon  in  IHIMI,  and  a  n-plica  of  which
was presenttnl in  1888  to  the  city  of lialtimore
thnmgh  the  lil)erality  of  Rolwrt  (Jarrvtt. He  waa
a  U.  S.  commissioner  on  fine  arts  to  the  World's
fair  at  Paris  in  1H7»,  and  has  nt-eiv.  ' ' "  'ions
from  Frame  and  Italy. Mr.  Story  li  ''•»-

t)rshit)  in  the  Acmlemia  degli  an-aW.  .....  '  ..dia,

ami  lias  nn-eive*!  the  degree  of  D.  C.  1*.  from  the
I'niversity  of  Oxfoni  and  an  honorarj-  degree  from
the  I'niversity  of  Bologna  on  iU»  HUOth  anniver-
sary. Among his other work*  are  "Sapiiho"


^v^^7^1^^^Urz<^


712


STOUGHTON


STOUGHTON


(1862) ;  "  Saul "  (1863) ;  "  Delilah  "  (1866) ;  "  Helen  "
(1869);  "Judith"  (1872);  " Sardanapalus "  (1878);
"Jerusalem  in  her  Desolation"  (1870);  and  "The-
tis and  Achilles " (1887-8).  His " Cleopatra " (1864)
and  "Semiramis"  (1872)  are  now  in  the  Metropoli-
tan museum  of  art  in  New  York  city.  Mr.  Story
is  also  an  accomplished  musician.  Since  his  resi-
dence abroad  he  has  published  "Life  and  Letters
of  Joseph  Story"  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1851);  "Poems"
(1856);  "The  American  Question "  (London,  1862);
"  Roba  di  Roma,  or  Walks  and  Talks  about  Rome  "
(1862) ;  "  Proportions  of  the  Human  Figure  accord-
ing to  a  New  Canon  for  Practical  Use"  (1866);
"Graffiti  d'ltalia"  (1869);  "The  Roman  Lawyer
in  Jerusalem  "  (1870) ;  "  Tragedv  of  Nero  "  (1875) ;
"  Castle  St.  Angelo  "  (1877) ;  "  He  and  She,  or  a
Poet's  Portfolio"  (1883);  "Piammetta"  (1885);
and  "Poems"  (2  vols.,  1886).  His  sons  are  artists
of  promise,  Waldo  being  a  sculptor  and  Julian  a

?ainter,  whose  works  are  well  known  in  London,
'aris,  and  Rome. — Joseph's  cousin,  Isaac,  poet,  b.
in  Marblehead,  Mass.,  25  Aug.,  1774;  d.  there,  19
July,  1803,  was  the  grandson  of  Rev.  Simon  Brad-
street,  and  son  of  Rev.  Isaac  Story  (1749-1816),  who
was  minister  of  Marblehead  from  1771  till  1800.  i
The  son  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1793,  and,
after  studying  law,  followed  his  profession  in  Cas-
tine.  Me.,  where  he  also  edited  the  "  Journal,"  and
at  Rutland,  Mass.  He  contributed  to  current  lit-
erature, notably  to  "  The  Farmer's  Museum,"  and
a  series  to  the  "Columbian  Centinel,"  which  he
signed  "The  Traveller."  In  1800  he  delivered  a
eulogy  on  Washington  at  Sterling,  Mass.,  where  he
then  resided,  and  in  1800  a  Fourth-of-July  oration
in  Worcester,  Mass.,  which  was  published.  Mr.
Story  issued  in  book-form  "  An  Epistle  from  Yarico
to  Inkle"  (Marblehead,  1792);  "Consolatory  Odes,
dedicated  to  those  Unfortunate  Beings  who  labor
under  the  Malignant  Influence  of  the  Democratic
Mania"  (Worcester,  1799);  and  "A  Parnassian
Shop  opened  in  the  Pindaric  Style,  by  Peter  Quince,
Esq."  (Boston,  1801).

STOUGHTON,  Edwin  WaUace  (sto-ton),  law-
yer, b.  in  Springfield.  Vt.,  1  May,  1818 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  7  Jan.,  1882.  He  came  to  New  York
city  when  he  was  eighteen  years  old,  and  there
studied  law.  After  his  admission  to  the  bar  in
1840  he  became  connected  with  important  cases,
including  some  famous  patent  trials,  notably  those
of  Charles  Goodyear.  He  was  engaged  in  the  case
of  Ross  Winans  against  the  Erie  railway  company,
and  was  counsel  for  the  latter  in  the  receiver  cases
in  the  U.  S.  courts  in  1868.  Mr.  Stoughton  was
retained  by  William  M.  Tweed  at  the  beginning  of
his  legal  troubles,  though  he  took  no  active  part  in
the  defence ;  and  he  conducted  the  suit  of  the
stockholders  in  the  Emma  mine  litigation.  During
the  administration  of  President  Grant  he  published
an  elaborate  letter  in  which  he  defended  on  consti-
tutional grounds  the  president's  use  of  the  army  in
Louisiana.  He  was  one  of  the  party  that,  after  the
election  of  1876,  went  to  New  Orleans  to  observe
the  action  of  the  returning  board,  and  was  a  warm
defender  of  Rutherford  B.  Hayes's  title  to  the
office  of  president,  which  he  supported  bv  argu-
ment as  one  of  the  counsel  before  the  Electoral
commission.  In  October,  1877,  he  was  appointed
minister  to  Russia  by  President  Hayes,  and  re-
mained there  until  Mav,  1879,  when  he  returned
to  the  United  States.  I'he  climate  of  St.  Peters-
burg did  not  agree  with  him,  and  the  seeds  of
disease  that  he  contracted  there  finally  caused  his
death.  As  a  young  man  he  attracted  some  atten-
tion by  his  contributions  to  "  Hunt's  Merchants'
Magazme,"  but  they  were  afterward  discontinued.


He  gave  $15,000  to  Dartmouth  to  found  a  museum
of  pathological  anatomy. — Mis  nephew,  Edwin
Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Springfield,  Vt.,  28  June,  1SS8;
d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  25  Dec,  1868,  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  acatlemy  in  1859,  and  assigned
to  the  6th  infantry. During  1859-"60  he  served  in

Sarrison  at  Port  Columbus,  N.  Y.,  and  on  scouting
uty  in  the  western  territories,  but  he  resigned  on
4  Alarch,  1861,  from  the  regular  army.  In  Septem-
ber he  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  4th  Ver-
mont volunteers,  and  with  his  regiment  joined  the
Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  served  during  the  pen-
itisular  campaign,  and  was  engaged  in  the  siege  of
Yorktown,  the  action  at  Lee's  Mill,  the  battles  of
Williamsburg  and  Savage  Station,  and  the  opera-
tions before  Richmond.  His  services  gaineu  for
him  promotion  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  on  5  Nov.,  1862,  and  he  was  assigned  to
the  command  of  the  2d  Vermont  brigade,  covering
the  defences  of  Washington.  While  stationed  at
Fairfax  Court-House,  Va..  he  was  captured  by  Gen.
John  S.  Mosby  on  8  March,  1863,  but,  after  confine-
ment for  several  weeks  in  Libby  prison,  he  was  re-
leased. His  commission  had  expired  by  constitu-
tional limitations  four  days  before  his  capture.
Gen.  Stoughton  then  resigned  from  the  army  and
entered  on  the  practice  of  law  in  New  York  city,
but  failing  health  compelled  his  removal  to  Boston,
where  he  died.

STOUGHTON,  Israel,  settler,  b.  in  England;
d.  in  Lincoln,  England,  in  1645.  He  emigrated  to
Massachusetts  and  early  settled  in  Dorchester.  In
November,  1633,  he  was  admitted  as  a  freeman,  and
he  was  a  member  of  the  first  general  court,  which
convened  in  May,  1634,  also  serving  in  1635-'7»
He  was  pronounced  disabled  from  holding  office
for  three  years  in  consequence  of  the  publication
of  a  pamphlet  in  which  he  denied  to  the  governor
and  his  assistants  certain  of  the  powers  that  the^
claimed,  but  in  1636  he  was  restored  to  his  privi-
leges. In  May,  1637,  he  commanded  the  Massa-
chusetts troops  that  were  sent  against  the  Pec^uots,
and  in  1642  he  became  captain  of  the  artillery
company.  He  was  appointed  a  commissioner  to
administer  the  government  of  New  Hampshire  in
1641,  and  was  assistant  to  the  governor  of  Massa-
chusetts in  1637-42  and  1644.  In  1642  he  went
to  England,  but  he  returned  in  1644  as  lieutenant-
colonel  of  Gen.  William  Rainsborow's  regiment,
in  which  command  he  served  until  his  death.
He  was  a  large  land-owner  of  Dorchester,  and

fave  800  acres  to  Harvard  college. — His  son,
l^illiam,  governor  of  Massachusetts,  b.  in  Eng-
land, 30  May.  1632 ;  d.  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  7  July,'
1701,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1650,  after
studying  theology  went  to  England,  where  he  be-
came a  fellow  at  New  college,  Oxford,  but  was
ejected  from  that  office  on  the  restoration.  He  re-
turned to  New  England  in  1662,  and  acquired  a
high  reputation  as  a  preacher.  In  1668  he  was
appointed  to  deliver  the  annual  election  sermon,
and  it  was  pronounced  one  of  the  best  that  had
been  heard  on  such  an  occasion.  He  declined  all
invitations  of  settlement  as  a  pastor,  but  served  as
an  assistant  from  1671^  till  the  dissolution  of
the  government  in  1686,  and  in  1677-'9  he  was  in
England  as  a^ent  for  the  colony.  In  1686  he  was
re-elected  assistant,  but  refused  to  serve,  occupy-
ing, however,  the  office  of  chief  justice  from  July
to  December,  1686.  He  also  became  a  member  of
the  council  of  Gov.  Edmund  Andros,  which  office
he  held  until  April,  1689,  when  he  was  one  of
the  council  of  safety  that  wrested  the  government
from  that  officer.  In  May,  1692,  he  was  appointed
lieutenant-governor,  which  place  he  heitl  until  the


-^^^^^^


^..^


D.APnj!TOS  &  c?


STOUQHTON


STOWR


718


end  of  his  lift',  an<l  nt  the  time  of  the  death  of  Sir
William  Phips  Uf«me  acting  governor.  Ili*  wa«
a{>p^>inttil  ehii'f  jiisticp  of  tho  «ujH>rior  ronrt  of  tht<
(!«lony  on  22  I)t«o..  H{U2,  and  held  that  onu-o  during
the  witchcraft  trials. When  othen«  acknowledged

that  they  hati
lx«en  deluded,  he
p«>rsisfently  con-
teiidiMl  that  he
ha<l  iu-te<I  up  to
hi8  L>ei>t  judg-
ment. Xiover-
nor  Stoughlon  i.s
8|>oken  of  aM  a
"rich  and  atrnbiU
arious  Imchelor,"
although  he  gave
to  Harvard  prf»p-
tTtv  that  CKst
JL"  1,000,  and  by
his  will  made  a
bequest  of  land  to
the  college.  In
1«»8  the  first
Stoughton  Hall
wa.s  built,  which
to  a


l^hM^-omy Jtvv^£ffLP(m.


gave idme
lerves  the  uk


new  edifice  in  1805,  that  still  preserves  me  memory
of  his  gift.  Gov.  Stoughton  also  gave  lil)erally  to
the  churches  of  Dorchester  and  Milton  and  to  the
poor  people  of  his  own  town.

STOriiHTON,  William  Lewis,  lawyer,  b.  in
Now  York.  20  .March.  1H27;  d.  in  Sturgis.  Mich.,
6  June,  1H«8.  He  early  removed  to  Sturgis,  Mich.,
and,  after  being  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851,  he
tiettlcd  in  the  practice  of  his  profession.  In  1854
fte  was  elected  prosecuting  attorney,  serving  twice,
and  in  1861  he  was  appointed  by  President  liincoln
U.  S.  ilistrict  attorney  for  Michigan.  This  office
he  resigned  in  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and
entercil  the  11th  Michigan  volunteers,  in  which  he
became  lieutenant-colonel.  His  services  were  prin-
cipally in  the  west,  and  at  Stone  Kiver  he  attained
his  colonelcy  and  commanded  a  brigade  in  (Jen.
George  H.  Thomas's  corps  at  C'hickamauga.  Mis-
sion Ridge,  Itesaca,  New  \\o\xt  Church,  KufTs  Sta-
tion (where,  while  dire<'ting  the  fire  of  a  battery,
he  lost  a  limb),  and  Atlanta.  He  continued  with
his  reginient  until  wounded,  and  on  13  March.
1865,  he  riH-eived  the  brevets  of  brigadier-general
and  major-general  of  volunteers.  In  18(56  he  was
elected  attorney-general  of  Michigan,  then  he  was
chosen  as  a  RepublicHU  to  congn>ss.  and  wrved,
with  re-election,  from  4  March,  1809.  till  W  March,
1873. Subse(juently  he  retired  to  Sturgis.

STOW,  Baron,  clergyman,  b.  in  Croydon.
N.  H.,  16  .June,  1801  ;  d.  iii  Boston,  Mass.,  27"l)ec.,
1869.  He  was  gratluate<l  at  Columbian  college,
Georgetown,  D.  ('.,  in  1825,  and  in  1S27  was  or-
dained to  the  ministry  in  Portsmouth.  N.  H.,  where
he  was  settled  a'^  pastor  of  the  Ra[)tist  church.  In
18!i2  he  was  calleU  to  the  imstorate  of  the  Ualdwin
place  Baptist  church  in  Boston,  in  which  connec-
tion he  hatl  a  successful  ministry  of  sixteen  years.
At  the  close  of  this  term  of  service  he  became  pas-
tor of  the  Rowe  street  (now  Clarendon  avenue)
church,  and  continued  in  this  relation  until  1867,
when  he  retiretl  from  regular  ministerial  work.
He  twice  visited  Europe  for  the  iK-neflt  of  his
health.  Dr.  .Stow  performe<l  a  large  amount  of
work  as  a  memU'r  of  the  executive  committee  of
the  American  missionary  union.  He  was  a  graw-
ful  and  vigorous  writer,  as  well  as  one  of  the  most
eloquent  and  successful  preachers  of  his  denomina-
tion. He  was  one  of  the  compilers  of  the  "  Psalm-


ist," a  hymnd  (1840),  and  editor  of  »  Ddl  j  Manna  "
and  the  "  Mianonarjr  KQterpriM  "  (IH44I),  a  voIuom
of  Rcrmons  on  miaviom,  to  which  he  oontributcd
one  of  great  nicriu  lie  was  the  author  of  "  lleaiotr
of  Harriet  Dow"(BoKtun.  1882);  -liistorjof  tha
Baptist  Mission  to  India"  (!(«»):  **  IliMory  of  tha
Danish  Mimion  on  the  Co«Kt  of  CoromaiHlel  **
(1h;J7):  "Daily  Manna"  (1842):  "The  Whoto
Family  in  Heaven  and  Fjirth  "  (1H45):  **Chr1stiaa
Brotli.rh<H>«r' (iK-iiM:  ami  "  Kin.t  Things"  (1880).
STOWE,  Calvin  Kllitt,  clergyman,  b.  in  Natick,
Mass..  6  April.  1M02;  d.  in  liartfonl.  Conn.,  89
Aug.,  1886.  His  ancestors  came  from  Ix)ndon  to
Boston  in  1684.  Mr.  .St<iwe  wa«  a  lad  of  six  yean
when  his  father  died,  leaving  a  widow  and  two
lH>ys  to  struggle  with  jHiverly.  and  at  the  age  of
twelve  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  (>ii|>er-maker.  lie
wius  early  distinguished  for  his  insatiable  craving
for  iMMiks,  and  a4-(|uire<i  the  rudiments  of  I^tin  bjr
studying  at  (xld  moments  during  his  B(i(>n-ntico-
ship  in  the  paper-mill.  His  earnest  desin-  and  d»>
termined  efforts  to  gain  an  education  attracted  the
attention  of  ItencvoU-nt  iMfi|ile.  who  rew>lv«<l  to
a-ssist  him,  and  in  Novemiier,  1820.  he  wan  sent  to
the  academy  in  Gorham,  Me.  He  was  graduated
at  l^iwdoin  in  1824,  remaiiuMl  there  one  year  as
librarian  and  instructor,  and  in  S'litemU-r.  1825,
entered  the  theological  semituiry  at  Andover.  Mann.
In  the  seminary,  at  the  instigation  of  Prof.  Mo(>es
Stuart,  he  complete<l  a  scholarly  translation  of
Jahn's  "  Hebrew  Commonwealth  ''(.Andover.  1H28;
2  vols..  Ix>ndon,  1829).  In  1828  he  was  graduated,
and  in  the  following  vear  he  became  e<litor  of
the  Boston  "  Recorder,'' the  oldest  religious  |>aper
in  the  United  States.  In  addition  to  his  e«liiorial
labors,  he  publishe<l  a  translation  from  the  I^tin«
with  notes,  of  "  Ijowth's  Ijcctures  on  the  Sacred
Poetry  of  the  Hebrews"  (1H29).  In  IKiO  he  was
ap|>ointcd  professor  of  Gnvk  in  Dartmouth,  and
he  married  in  18^52  Kliza.  daughter  of  Rev.  Bennett
Tyler,  of  Portland,  Me.  The  same  year  he  removed
to  Walnut  Hills,  near  Cincinnati.  Ohio,  having
tH»en  called  to  the  chair  of  sa<'re<l  literature  in
Ii»ine  theological  wminary.  In  August.  1K34.  his
wife  «lie<l  without  children,  and  in  Januarj".  1KJ6,
he  nwirried  Harriet  Klizal>eth.  daughter  of  Dr.
livman  lieecher.  the  president  of  the  stMninary.
Prof.  Stowe  l)ocame  convintvil  by  his  ex|>oricnce
as  an  instructor  that  the  great  nee<l  of  the  west  at
that  time  was  an  elDcient  common-school  system,
and.  without  neglecting  his  professional  duties,  he
devote<l  himself  heart  and  .«oul  to  this  work.  In
.May.  1836.  he  sailetl  for  Kngland.  primarily  to
purchase  a  library  for  l^ane  seminary,  but  he  re-
ceivetl  at  the  same  time  an  oflicial  a|)|H>intment
from  the  state  legislature  to  visit  as  agi-nt  tht*  pub-
lic schools  of  Kun)|>e,  fmrticularly  those  of  Prussia.
On  his  return  he  publishetl  his  "  RejKirt  on  Kle-
mentary  Education  in  Kun>|H\"  In  18.50  Prof.
Stowe  accepttnl  a  professorship  in  IV)wd«>in.  and
in  1852  he  was  ai»i»oint*Hl  to  fill  the  chair  of  sacred
literature  at  .\ndover  s«'minary.  In  1853  and  18M
he  visitoil  Kumpe  with  Mrs.  Stowe.  In  1<*4,
owing  to  failing  nealth  and  increasing  inflnnitiea,
he  resigned  his  profesM»n<hip  and  removwl  to
Ilartfoni, Conn. Besides the works mentioned

I  alKive.  he  published  "  Intnxluction  to  the  Criticism

i  antl  Interpretation  of  the  Bible  "(Cincinnati,  1885);

!  "The  Religious  Kienjent  in  f!<lucation."  a  lecture
(1844);  "The  Right  Interpretation  of  the  Sarred
.Scriptun»«,"  inaugural  address  (.\ndover,  1858);
and  "  Origin  and  History  of  the  Books  of  the  Bible,
lioth  Canonical  and  .\|xKTVphal  "  i  Ilartfoni,  1H67).
—His  wife.  Harriet  Klizabeth  Hrecher,  b.  in

i  Litchfield.  Conn., 14 June, 1812, is the third


714


STOWE


STOWE


dauprhter  and  sixth  child  of  Rev.  Dr.  Lyman
Beecher.  When  she  was  a  mere  child  of  four  years,
Mrs.  Beecher  died,  yet  she  never  ceased  to  influ-
ence the  lives  of  her  children.  Mrs.  Stowe  writes :
"Although  my  mother's  bodily  presence  disap-
peared from  our  circle,  I  think  that  her  memory
and  example  had  more  influence  in  moulding  her
family  than  the  living  presence  of  many  mothers."
After  her  death,  Mrs.  Stowe  was  placed  under  the
care  of  her  grandmother  at  Guilford,  Conn.  Here
she  listened,  with  untiring  interest,  to  the  ballads
of  Sir  Walter  Scott  and  the  poems  of  Robert  Burns.
The  "  Arabian  Nights,"  also,  was  to  her  a  dream
of  delight — an  enchanted  palace,  through  which
her  imagination  ran  wild.  After  her  father's  sec-
ond marriage,  her  education  was  continued  at  the
Litchfield  academy  under  the  charge  of  Sarah
Pierce  and  John  Brace. Of  Mr.  Brace  and  his

methods  of  instruc-


c^i^^.


^^Ji,


tion  Mrs.  Stowe
ever  speaks  with
the  greatest  enthu-
siasm. "  Mr.  Brace
exceeded  all  teach-
ers that  I  ever  knew
in  the  faculty  of
teaching  composi-
tion," she  writes.
"  Much  of  the  in-
spiration and  train-
ing of  my  early
days  consisted  not
in  the  things  I  was
supposed  to  be
studying,  but  in
hearing,  wliile  seat-
ed unnoticed  at  my
desk,  the  conversa-
tion of  Mr.  Brace  with  the  older  classes."  Nor,  in-
deed, were  the  influences  in  her  home  less  stimu-
lating to  the  intellect.  Dr.  Beecher,  like  the  major-
ity of  the  Calvinistic  divines  of  his  day,  had  his
system  of  theology  vast  and  comprehensive  enough
to  embrace  the  fate  of  men  and  angels,  and  to
fathom  the  counsels  of  the  Infinite.  His  mind  was
kept  in  a  state  of  intense  and  joyous  intellectual
activity  by  constantly  elaborating,  expounding,
and  defending  this  system.  Consequently  his  chil-
dren grew  up  in  an  atmosphere  surcharged  with
mental  and  moral  enthusiasm.  There  was  no  trace
of  morbid  melancholy  or  ascetic  gloom  in  Dr.
Beecher.  He  was  sound  in  body,  sound  in  mind,
and  the  religious  influence  which  he  exerted  on
the  minds  of  his  children  was  healthy  and  cheerful.
Under  such  circumstances  it  is  not  surprising  to
find  a  bright  and  thoughtful  child  of  twelve  years
writing  a  school  composition  on  the  profound
theme  "  Can  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul  be  proved
from  the  Light  of  Nature?  The  writer  took  the
negative  side  of  the  question,  and  argued  with  such
power  and  originality  that  Dr.  Beecher,  when  it
was  read  in  his  presence,  not  knowing  the  author,
asked  with  emphasis,  "  Who  wrote  that  ?  "  "  Your
daughter,  sir,"  quickly  answered  Mr.  Brace.  Says
Mrs.  Stowe,  speaking  of  this  event :  "  It  was  the
proudest  moment  of  ray  life.  There  was  no  mistak-
ing father's  face  when  he  was  pleased,  and  to  have
interested  him  was  past  all  juvenile  triumphs."

Dr.  Beecher  read  with  enthusiasm,  and  encour-
aged his  children  to  read,  both  Byron  and  Scott.
When  nine  or  ten  years  of  age,  Mrs.  Stowe  was
deeply  impressed  by  reading  Byron's  "Corsair."
"  I  shall  never  forget  how  it  electrified  and  thrilled
me,"  she  writes.  "  I  went  home  absorbed  and  won-
dering about  Byron,  and  after  that  listened  to


everything  that  father  and  mother  said  at  table
about  him."  Byron's  death  made  an  enduring,  but
at  the  same  time  solemn  and  painful,  impression
on  her  mind.  She  was  eleven  years  old  at  tne  time,
and  usually  did  not  understand  her  father's  ser-
mons, but  the  one  that  he  preached  on  this  occa-
sion she  remembers  perfectly,  and  it  has  had  a
deep  and  lasting  influence  on  her  life.  At  the
time  of  the  Missouri  agitation  Dr.  Beecher's  ser-
mons and  prayers  were  burdened  with  the  anguish
of  his  soul  for  the  cause  of  the  slave.  His  passion-
ate appeals  drew  tears  down  the  hardest  faces  of
the  old  farmers  who  listened  to  them.  Night  and
morning,  in  family  devotions,  he  appealed  to
heaven  for  "  poor,  oppressed,  bleeding  Africa,  that
the  time  of  aeliverance  might  come."  The  effect
of  such  sermons  and  prayers  on  the  mind  of  an
imaginative  and  sensitive  child  can  be  easily  con-
ceived. They  tended  to  make  her,  what  she  has
been  from  earliest  childhood,  the  enemy  of  all
slavery.  In  1824,  when  thirteen  years  of  age,  Mrs.
Stowe  went  to  Hartford  to  attend  the  school  that
had  been  established  there  by  her  eldest  sister,
Catherine.  Here  she  studied  Latin,  read  Ovid  and
Virgil,  and  wrote  metrical  translations  of  the  for-
mer, which  displayed  a  very  respectable  knowledge
of  Latin,  a  good  command  of  English,  with  con-
siderable skill  in  versification.  At  the  age  of  four-
teen she  taught  with  success  a  class  in  "  Butler's
Analogy,"  and  gained  a  good  reading  knowledge
of  French  and  Italian.  As  scholar  and  teacher
she  remained  with  her  sister  in  Hartford  till  the
autumn  of  1832,  when  both  removed  with  their
father  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  where  Dr.  Beecher  as-
sumed the  presidency  of  Lane  theological  semi-
nary and  tne  pastorate  of  the  2d  Presbyterian
church.  At  this  time  Mrs.  Stowe  compiled  an  ele-
mentary geography  for  a  western  publisher,  which
was  extensively  used,  and  again  engaged  in  teach-
ing with  her  sister  in  Cincinnati.  She  wrote  lec-
tures for  her  classes  in  history,  and,  as  a  member
of  a  literary  club,  called  the  Semi-Colon,  humorous
sketches  and  poems.

In  January,  1836,  she  married  Mr.  Stowe.  Dur-
ing her  resiaence  in  Cincinnati  she  frequently  vis-
ited the  slave  states,  and  acquired  the  minute
knowledge  of  southern  life  that  was  so  conspicu-
ously displayed  in  her  subsequent  writings.  Fugi-
tive slaves  were  frequently  sheltered  in  her  house,
and  assisted  by  her  husband  and  brothers  to  escape
to  Canada.  During  the  riots  in  1836,  when  James
G.  Bimey's  press  was  destroyed  and  free  negroes
were  hunted  like  wild  beasts  through  the  streets
of  Cincinnati,  only  the  distance  from  the  city  and
the  depths  of  mud  saved  Lane  seminary  and  the
Yankee  Abolitionists  at  Walnut  Hills  from  a  like
fate.  Many  a  night  Mrs.  Stowe  sank  into  uneasy
slumber,  expecting  to  be  roused  by  the  bowlings
of  an  angry  mob,  Ted  by  the  agents  of  exasperated
and  desperate  slave-holders.  In  1849  Mrs.  Stowe
published  "  The  Mayflower,  or  Short  Sketches  of
the  Descendants  of  the  Pilgrims  "  (New  York ;  new
ed.,  with  additions,  Boston,  1855),  being  a  collec-
tion of  papers  which  she  had  from  time  to  time
contributed  to  various  periodicals.  In  1850  she
removed  with  her  husb&nd  and  family  to  Bruns-
wick, Me.,  where  the  former  had  just  been  called
to  a  professorship  in  Bowdoin.  It  was  at  the
height  of  the  excitement  caused  by  the  passage  of
the  fugitive-slave  law.  It  seemed  to  ner  as  if
slavery  were  about  to  extend  itself  over  the  free
states.  She  conversed  with  many  benevolent,  ten-
der-hearted, Christian  men  and  women,  who  were
blind  and  deaf  to  all  arguments  against  it,  and  she
concluded  that  it  was  because  they  did  not  realize


8T0WE


8TOWKLL


71ft


what  slavery  r<>«llv  mrant.  Slip  (lotcrmined.  If
IKWsiblr,  t«>  make  t\win  r»^ali7.»«  it,  atxi.  an  •  mult
of  this  (Itftcriiiiiiatiuii.  wri)t«  "  riiclu  Tom's  Cahin,
or  Life  arnoiif;  (he  I»wiy."  In  the  mean  tin»e
Prof.  Stowe  wiL-*  u|>|>ointe«l  to  the  chair  of  hiblirAl
liti'iiitiire  in  the  theojn^icul  Mamillary  at  An<lover.
Muss.,  and  remove«l  thither  with  hin  familv  alMtut
the  time  that  thist  reninrkuhh>  iNHik  wilh  i)u{>h.Hhe<l.
Neither  Mrs,  Stowe  nor  any  of  her  friends  hiul  the
least  conception  of  the  future  that  awaitc«l  her
book.  She  was  herself  very  de.xtH>ndent.  It  does
not  seem  to  have  lx>en  very  widely  read  when  It
appean-d  in  the  "  National  Kra,"  at  WaHhinjfton,
I).  ('.,  from  June,  IHT)!.  till  April,  1H.V.>.  liefore  it
was  i.«4.sued  in  lKx>k-form  (IJoston.  IHTyiy,  Mw.
Stowe  says:  "It  seemed  to  me  that  there  was  no
hope;  that  nolxHlv  would  hear;  that  n«il><Mlv  would
reml,  nolxxlv  would  pitv;  that  this  frijjhtful  sys-
tem which  had  pursue<l  its  victims  into  the  free
states  mi>;ht  at  last  threaten  them  even  in  (.'anada."
Nevertheless,  nearlv  r)(K),0<)0  copies  of  this  work
were  sold  in  the  l''nited  States  alone  in  the  five
years  following  its  publication.  It  has  in'en  trans-
late<l  into  Armenian.  Bohemian.  I>anish.  Dutch,
Finni.sh,  French,  (fcrnuin,  Ilunpirian,  Illyrian,
Polish.  Portu<ru(>s«'.  nuKlern  (ire<'k,  Kussinn,  Ser-
vian, Spanish,  Swedish,  Wallachian,  Welsh,  and
other  lanj^ua^es.  These  versions  are  to  be  found
in  the  British  museum  in  Ijondon,  together  with
the  most  extensive  collection  of  the  literature  of
tills  liook.  In  really  to  the  abuse  and  recrimination
that  its  publication  called  forth,  Mrs,  Stowe  pul)-
lishe<l.  in  18.53.  "A  Kev  to  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,
presenting  the  Orijfinal  Pacts  and  I)<K-uments  upcm
which  the  Story  is  founde«l,  toj;ether  with  Cor-
roborative Statements  verifvinj;  the  Truth  of  the
,  Work."  She  also  wrote  *'  A  I'eep  into  Uncle  Tom's
Cabin,  for  Children  "  (1853).  The  story  has  lH>en
dramatized  in  various  forms;  once  by  the  author
as  "The  Christian  Slave;  a  Drama "(1 «.').')).  The  j
character  of  Uncle  Tom  was  suggested  by  the  life  j
of  Josiah  Henson  (o.  v.).

Sf)  reduced  was  Mrs.  Stowe's  health  by  her  se-  I
vere  and  pmtracted  labors  that  complete  rest  and  [
change  of  scene  became  necessary.  Conse<juently,
in  the  spring  of  1853,  accomymnied  by  her  hus-
band and  brother,  the  Rev.  Charles  lieecher,  she
sailed  for  Kngland.  In  the  following  year  a{>-
pean-d  "Sunny  Memories  of  Foreign  liand.s."  a  ;
collection  of  letters  of  Mrs.  Stowe  and  her  brother  I
during  their  travels  in  Kurt>|te  (2  vols.,  Boston,
1854).  In  1H56  she  publi.she*!  "  Dred.  a  Tale  of  the
Great  Dismal  Swamp."  The  same  Ixxjk  was  re-
is-sued,  in  188(5,  under  the  title  "  Nina  Gordon,"
but  has  now  been  again  issuwl  under  the  original
title.  Alxmt  this  time  Mrs.  Stowe  made  a  secoii'?
vi.sit  to  Kngland.  and  an  extendwl  tour  of  the
continent.  In  the  judgment  of  some  critics,  by
far  the  ablest  work  that  has  come  from  Mrs.
Stowe's  pen,  in  a  purely  literarv  point  of  view,  is
the  "Minister's  W(K>ing"  (New  York,  1859).  h
was  first  given  to  the  public  as  a  serial  in  the
"  Atlantic  Monthly,"  and  .James  Hus.si>il  lioweli
said  of  it:  "We  uo  not  Wlieve  that  there  is  any
one  who,  by  birth,  bree<ling,  and  natural  cajiacity,
has  hml  the  opportunity  to  know  New  Kngland  .so
well  as  she,  or  who  has  the  [KK'uliar  genius  so  to
profit  by  the  knowledgt*.  Alrea<ly  there  have  been
scenes  in  the  'Minister's  Wocjing'  that,  in  their
lowness  of  tone  and  (juiet  truth,  contrast  as  charm-
ingly with  the  timid  vagueness  of  the  nnwleni
school  of  novel-writers  as  the  *  Vicar  of  Wake-
field' itself ;  and  we  are  greatly  mistaken  if  it  do
not  prove  to  Ix"  the  most  «-hHn»«'teristic  of  .Mrs.
Stowe's  works,  and  that  on  which  her  fame  will


ehiefly  rert  with  postority." Mm.  Stowe  mviml

I  letters  containing rimllar eipnsMiions of com-

mentlation fn>ro  William K.  Uladrtooe,  Chari«

Kingsh'v,  and  Kinhop  What.-lv,

In  IH<i4  Priif.  St..v<  I  hi*  pn>ffMW>r«hip

at Anil.iver and r.  llnrlforH, ('«>nn^

when- th<>  family  havf  nu,  " '^ing  tbdr

winter  home  in  MandMiii.  f.  Stowe's

increasing  infirmities  nuuit  .„.  j..,.to.7i  tut  longvr
poHsible.  In  1860  Mrs.  Stowe  published  **01d«
Town  Folks,"  a  tale  of  New  EngUnd  lif«,  and  in
September  of  the  same  year,  moved  UmtbCo  bjr
reading  the  Countew  (tuiocioli'n  "  Keoollections  of
Ixird  Byron,"  contributed  a  paper  to  the  "  Atlantic
M<mthlv"on  "The  True  .Story  of  I^y  Byron's
Life."  In  reply  to  the  trm{Miit  of  adrenw  criilcisai
that  this  na|>er  evok*-*!,  tihe  tiublishcd  **  Ladf
Byron  vindicatwl :  a  IliKtorv  ot  the  Uyron  Con-
troversy "  (Boston.  1809).  n'rr  seventieth  birthday
was  celebrate<l  with  a  ganlen  |mrty,  mainly  of  lit-
erar)'  (N>ople,  in  Cambriilge.  Mas.H. '  .She  siient  the
summer  of  1888,  in  failing  health,  at  North  llavon,
Ijong  Island,  (ieorge  .Sand  has  |>aid  the  following
tribute  to  the  genius  of  Mrs.  .Stowe :  "  I  cannot  say
she  has  talent  as  one  un<lerstands  it  in  the  worlcl
of  letters,  but  she  has  genius  as  humanity  fwls  the
nee<l  of  genius — the  genius  of  gtKxlnessC  not  that
of  the  man  of  letters,  but  of  the  saint.  .  .  .  Pan,
penetrating,  and  profound,  the  spirit  that  thiM
fathoms  the  reces-ses  of  the  human  soul."  The  ao-
comiMinying  steel  engraving  reiiresents  Mn.  Stowe
as  she  ap(>eared  in  middle  lire;  the  rignette,  at
threesi-ore  and  ten.

Besides  the  works  that  have  lieen  mentioned.
Mrs.  Stowe  has  written  "(fe«»graphy  for  my  Chil-
dren" (lioston,  18.'>5);  "Our  CharleV,  and  what  to
do  with  him  "  (IKW);  "The  IVarl  of  Orr's  IsUnd;
a  Story  of  the  Coast  of  .Maine  "  (18*12):  "  Agne«  of
S)rrento  "  ( 18«2) ;  "  Keply  on  liehalf  of  the  Women
of  America  to  the  Christian  Addr»*ss  of  many
Thousand  Women  of  (treat  Britain  "  (18(H);  "The
l{avag«'ii  of  a  Carp»'t  "  (1804(;  "Mouse  and  Home
PajMjrs,  by  Christopher  Crowfleld  "  (18(J4):  "Re-
ligious Poems"  (1865):  "Stories  altout  our  I>«»g»**
(1865);  "Little  Foxes  "(18(Vi):  "t^ueer  Little  Peo-
pie"  (18({7):  "Daisy's  First  Winter,  and  other
Storii's"  (1867);  "The  Chimnev  Comer,  bv  Chris-
topher Crowfleld"  (1868);  "  Afen  of  our  "Times"
(Hartford.  18(18);  "The  Ameriran  Woman's  Home,"
with  her  sister  Catherine  (Philadelphia,  1869);
"  Little  Pussy  Willow  "  (Iktst«>n,  187l») ;  "  Pink  and
White  Tvrannv"  (1871);  ".Sam  Ijiwsjm's  Fire-
side Stories"  ('1871);  "  Mv  Wife  and  I"  (1872);
"Palmetto  I.eaves"(18rJ):  "  IMtv's  Bright  Idea,
and  other  Tales"  (1875);  "We  and  Our  Neigh-
lK>rs"  (1875);  "Fcn.tsteps  of  the  Maj^ttr"  (1876);
"  Bible  IIeroint>s"(1878);"  Poganuc  Petiple"(I878);
and  "A  Dog's  Mission "  (1881),  .Most  of  thi-so
works  have  lieeii  retiublislie<l  abroa^l.  There  is  altMt
a  selection  from  her  writings  entitled  "(iolden
P'ruit  in  .Silver  Basket-s"  (Ixiidon.  1*59).  In  1808
she  l)ecame  co-e<litor  with  Donald  (t.  Mitchell  of
"Hearth  and  Home"  in  New  York.  Her  life  will
Ik-  written  by  her  son.  the  Rev.  Charles  Kdward
Stowe.  who  is  pastor  of  Windsor  avenue  Congr»>
gational  «-hurch  in  Hnrtfonl,  Conn.

STtlWKLU  Charles  Henry,  microsoopiat,  h.  in
Perry.  N.  Y..  27  Oct.,  18.')0.  lie  was  frraduated  at
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  Michi-
gan in  1872.  and  has  since  been  connected  with
that  institution  as  instructor,  and  later  as  profesaor
of  histology  and  microsi-ojiy.  Dr.  Stowell  is  a
memU^r  of  scientific  societM*.  and  edite<l  for  six
ve«rs"The  Micnh^-ope,"  a  monthly  ioumal,  pul>-
lislied in Ann Arlmr. Tlo  has  pubii-lM-il  "Stu-


716


STRACHAN


STRANAHAN


dents'  Manual  of  Histology "  (Detroit,  1882) ;
**  Microscopic  Diagnosis"  (18*^2);  "  The  Microscop-
ical Structure  of  the  Human  Tooth"  (1888);  and
"Physiology  and  Hygiene"  (Chicago,  1888). — His
wife,  Louisa  Maria  Reed,  b.  in  Grand  Blanc,  Mich.,
23  Dec,  1850,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Michigan  in  1870,  and,  after  a  post-graduate  course
of  one  year,  received  the  degree  of  M.  S.  In  1877
she  became  instructor  of  microscopic  botanjr  in
the  school  of  pharmacy  of  the  University  of  Michi-
^n,  and  in  1878  she  married  Prof.  Stowell.  She
is  a  member  of  scientific  societies,  and,  by  her  re-
searches in  microscopy,  gained  an  election  to  the
Royal  microscopical  society  of  Great  Britain  in
1882.  Mrs.  Stowell  takes  an  active  interest  in  the
advancement  of  woman's  work,  and  lectured  before
the  International  woman's  congress  in  Washington
in  1888.  She  was  associated  with  Prof.  Stowell  in  the
editorship  of  "  The  Microscope."  In  1888  she  as-
sumed charge  of  the  microscopical  department  of
"  The  Pharmaceutical  Era,"  and  also  assisted  her
husband  in  the  preparation  of  "  Microscopical  Di-
agnosis" (Detroit,  1882).  Besides  many  articles  in
the  scientific  press,  she  has  published  "  Microscop-
ical Structure  of  Wheat  "  (Chicago,  1880).

STRACHAN,  John,  Canadian  Anglican  bishop,
b.  in  Aberdeen,  Scotland,  12  April,  1778;  d.  in
Toronto,  1  Nov.,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at
King's  college,  Aterdeen,  in  1796,  studied  theology
at  St.  Andrew's,  and  taught  in  a  village  school  un-
til 1799,  when  he  emigrated  to  Canada.  He
opened  a  school  at  Kingston  and  tanght  for  three
years,  preparing  himself  in  the  mean  time  to  take
orders  in  the  Church  of  England.  He  was  or-
dained a  deacon  by  Bishop  Mountain  in  May,  1803,
a  priest.  3  June,  1804,  and  appointed  to  the  mission
of  Cornwall,  where  he  opened  a  grammar-school,
and  had  among  his  pupils  several  that  have  since
become  eminent  in  Canada.  In  1812  he  removed
to  York  (now  Toronto),  and  became  rector  in  that
place.  In  1813,  after  the  explosion  by  which  Gen,
Zebulon  M.  Pike  was  killed  at  the  old  fort,  York,
he  visited  Gen.  Henry  Dearborn,  and  was  success-
ful in  dissuading  him  from  sacking  the  town.  In
1818  he  was  nominated  an  executive  councillor,
took  his  seat  in  the  legislative  council,  and  re-
mained a  member  of  the  government  till  1836,  and
of  the  upper  house  till  1841.  In  1825  he  became
archdeacon  of  York,  and  in  1839  bishop  of  Toronto,
After  1818  he  took  an  active  part  in  politics,  and
a  bitter  strife  arose  between  his  party  on  the  one
side  and  that  of  William  L,  Mackenzie  on  the
other,  which  eventually  culminated  in  the  rebellion
of  1837.  During  the  time  that  he  was  a  member
of  the  executive  council  fifty-seven  rectories  were
established  in  Upper  Canada  at  his  suggestion,  and
the  foundation  of  Trinity  college,  Toronto,  was
largely  owing  to  his  efforts.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  St.  Andrew's
and  that  of  D.  D.  from  the  University  of  Aberdeen
in  1807.  Bishop  Strachan  published  seventy  essays
in  the  '•  Kingston  Gazette  "  in  1811  under  the  name
of  *'  Rickoner,"  and  several  letters  and  pamphlets.
He  practically  ruled  the  Church  of  England  in
Upper  Canada  during  his  lifetime,  and  did  more
than  any  other  person  to  establish  it  securely  in
that  part  of  the  countrv.

STRACHEY,  William,  colonist.  He  left  Eng-
land in  1609  on  the  "  Sea  Venture "  with  Sir
Thomas  Gates,  and  was  shipwrecked  on  the  Ber-
mudas, but  in  1610  reached  Virginia  on  a  boat  that
had  been  constructed  from  the  wreck,  and  was  sec-
retary of  the  colony  for  three  years.  Strachey
wrote  "  A  True  Repertory  of  the  Wracke  and  Re-
demption of  Sir  Thomas  &ates  upon  and  from  the


!  Islands  of  the  Bermudas,"  which  was  published  in

j  the  fourth  volume  of  Purchas's  "  Pilgrims."  He
also  compiled  for  the  colony  in  Virginia  "  Lawes
Divine.  Morall,  and  Martiall "  (London,  1612),  and

I  was  the  author  of  *'  Historic  of  Travaile  into  Vir-
ginia Brittania  "  (1818),  published  by  the  Hakluyt

1  societv,  from  an  original  manuscript,  in  1849.
STllAlN,  Isaac  G.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Rox-
bury.  Pa.,  4  March,  1821 ;  d.  in  Aspinwall,  Colom-
bia," 14  May,  1857.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as
midshipman  in  1837,  and  was  advanced  to  the
grade  of  passed  midshipman  in  1843.  While  in
the  South  Atlantic  ocean  in  1845  he  led  an  explor-
ing expedition  into  the  interior  of  Brazil,  and  in

1848  he  visited  the  peninsula  of  Lower  California.
In  1849  he  obtained  permission  to  leave  his  vessel
at  Valparaiso  for  the  sake  of  making  the  overland
ioumey  to  Rio  Janeiro,  where  he  rejoined  his  ship.
The  result  of  his  experiences  he  gave  to  the  pubhc
as  "The  Cordillera  and  Pampa:  Sketches  of  a
Journey  in  Chili  and  the  Argentine  Provinces  in

1849  "  (New  York,  1853).  He  was  promoted  lieu-
tenant, 27  Feb.,  1850,  and  was  attached  to  the  com-
mission that  in  1850  located  the  boundary-line  be-
tween the  United  States  and  Mexico.  In  1854  he
had  charge  of  the  expedition  to  survey  the  Isthmus
of  Darien.  The  extremities  to  which  his  party
were  reduced  in  that  affair,  and  the  heroism  with
which  he  sustained  his  command  under  extraordi-
nary difficulties,  brought  him  to  the  notice  of  the
public.  In  the  summer  of  1856  he  sailed  in  the
"Arctic"  on  her  voyage  to  ascertain  by  soundings
in  the  North  Atlantic  ocean  the  possibility  of  an
ocean  telegraphic  cable  between  the  United  States
and  Great  Britain.  Lieut.  Strain  was  a  member  of
the  American  ethnological  society,  and  to  its  pro-
ceedings and  those  of  the  American  geographical
society  he  contributed  interesting  accounts  of  his
expeditions,  including  a  paper  on  "The  History
and  Prospects  of  Interoceanic  Communication
(New  York,  1856).  His  death  was  the  result  of
undue  exposure  while  he  was  on  the  isthmus.

STRAKOSCH,  Manrice,  musician,  b.  in  Bu-
tschowitz,  Moravia,  15  Jan.,  1825;  d.  in  Paris,
France,  9  Oct.,  1887.  His  father  removed  to  Ger-
many in  1828,  and  young  Strakosch  there  began
the  study  of  music.  He  soon  gained  a  reputation
as  an  excellent  pianist,  and  was  well  received  in  all
the  European  countries  in  which  he  travelled.  In
1848  he  came  to  the  United  States,  and  soon  de-
voted himself  entirely  to  managing  operatic  troupes,
organizing  his  first  company  m  1855.  In  1852  he
married  Amalia  Patti,  a  sister  of  Adelina.  His
compositions  for  the  piano  were  at  one  time  very

Sopular.  and  among  them  the  music  of  one  of
layard  Taylor's  songs.  He  wrote  a  small  volume
of  "  Souvenirs "  in  French  not  long  before  his
death. — His  brother,  Max,  b.  in  Brunn,  Moravia,
27  Sept.,  1835,  was  associated  with  him  in  most  of
his  enterprises,  and  some  of  the  most  famous  artists
travelled  under  their  management,  including  Louis
M.  Gottschalk.  Parepa-Rosa,  Marie  Roze,  Carlotta
and  Adelina  Patti,  Karl  Formes,  Pasquale  Brig-
noli,  Italo  Campanini,  Pauline  Lucca,  Therese  Tit-
jens.  Christine  Nilsson.  t^nd  Marietta  Alboni,

STRANAHAN,  James  Samuel  Thomas,  capi-
talist, b.  in  Peterboro,  N.  Y.,  25  April,  1808.  He
received  his  education  in  the  common  schools  of
his  neighborhood,  where  he  afterward  taught,  and
then  studied  civil  engineering.  In  1827  he  visited
the  region  of  the  upper  lakes  for  the  purpose  of
opening  trade  with  tne  Indians ;  but,  finding  this
undesirable,  he  engaged  in  the  wool  tratle.  He  be-
came associated  in  1832  with  Gerrit  Smith  in  de-
veloping the  manufacturing  interest^  of  Oneida


8TRAN0K


STRAUS


717


count?. The  town  of  KIormico  wm  the  result,  knd  '
in IHijH  he  was  sent  as  a  Whijj  to  represent  that
<li^tri(;t  in  the  Icfcisilature. In  184U  he  raraovud  U>
NfWiirk,  N..I.,  niid  Un-anio  interested  in  the  (x>n-
htriu'tion  of  railroads,  a<-cf|itini;  »t<H'k  in  iMtynuMit
for his  work, lie  st-ttii'd in Unniklyn  m'  1K4-1.
which  has  finttf  Umhj  hi»  home. In  IKA  he  wa.-*
sent  as  a  Whi^  to  eongre^M,  and  twrvi'd  from  'A  '
Dec..  1855,  till  3  March.  Ib57. .Mr.  .Stranalian  was  i
a  member  of  the  fli^t  Metro|jolitan  police  (ommiH-  !
sion  in 185^,  and  dclej^te  to  the  I(epublic:an  na-  I
tional  conventions  in  1800  and  1804.  MTvin^  as  a  i
presidential  elector  in  the  latter  year. During  the  '
civil  war  he  was  an  active  sup|K>rter  of  the  Nation-
al f^ovcrnment  and  pri'isidenl  of  the  war-fund  com-
mittee. 'Hiis  organization  founded  the  Iir(H)klyn
•'  Union,"  in  order  that  the  Kovernment  might  have
an  organ  devoted  to  its  sup|K>rt. In  18<>()  he  was
appointc<l  president  of  the  park  commisi<ion.  and
he  held  that  office  for  more than  twenty  years.
During his administration l'rt>s[)e<;t park was
created,  and  the  system  of  l)oulevardii,  uicluding
the  Ocean  and  P^isteni  parkways, is  d'le  to  his
suggestions. He  has  long  been  one  of  the  mana-
gers and  is  now  (1888)  president  of  the  Union  ferry
company,  and  the  grt>at  Atlantic  docks,  which  are
the  largest  works  of  the  kind  in  the  Unite«l  .States,
were  built  under  his  direction. Mr.  Stranahan  is
not  only  the  president  of  the  dock  company,  but
also  the  largest  stockholder  and  general  manager
of  aiTairs. Tie  was  als<i  as.s(>ciated  with  the  build-
ing of  the  East  river  bridge  from  the  beginning  of
that  work,  and  was  president  of  the  Ixmrd  of  di-
rectors in  1884.

STRANOE,  Robert,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia,  20
Sept..  1790;  d.  in  Favetteville.  N.  C,  19  Feb..  1854.
,He  was  educatetl  at  llamp<len  Sidney  college,  and
then  studied  law.  After  being  admitted  to  the
bar  he  settled  in  Fayetteville.  N.  ().,  and  in  1821
was  electiH.1  to  the  North  Carolina  house  of  dele-
gates, where  he  served  in  1822-'3  and  1826.  He
was  elected  in  1820  judge  of  the  superior  court,
and  held  that  place  until  1836.  when  ne  withdrew
from  the  l)ench  to  take  his  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate.
He  continued  a  member  of  that  body  until  1840,
when  he  resigned  after  refusing  to  oljey  the  in-
iitructions  of  the  North  Carolina  legislature.  On
his  return  to  Fayetteville  he  resumed  his  profes-
sion, and  subsequently  was  solicitor  of  the  5th  ju-
<licial  district  of  North  Carolina.  The  degree  of
LL.  I),  wjis  conferred  on  him  by  Rutgers  in  1840.
Judge  Strange  published  for  private  circulation  a
novel  entitled  "  Fioneguski.  or  the  Cherokw  Chief,"
in  which  he  preserved  many  of  the  traditions  of
the  region  in  which  he  resided.

STRANGE.  Thomas  B.,  Cana<lian  soldier,  b.
in  Meerut,  India,  15  .S'pt.,  IKH.  He  entered  the
Royal  artillery  as  2d  lieutenant  in  1851,  and  re-
tired from  the  service  in  1881  with  the  rank  of
major-general.  He  served  during  the  Indian  mu-
tiny, and  was  present  at  the  siege  and  capture  of
Lucknow.  Gen.  Strange  was  appointed  comman-
dant of  the  School  of  gunnerv.  Quel)ec,  in  1871,
inspector  of  artillerv  for  the  t)ominion  in  18?2,
commandant  of  artillery  for  QucIh'c  in  the  same
year,  and  was  retired  in  1882.  He  commanded  the
AUx-rta  fiehl  -  forces  during  the  northwest  cam-
paign in  1885,  and  was  awarded  a  medal.

STRATTON,  Charles  Carroll,  clergyman,  b.
in  Mansfield,  Pa.,  4  Jan.,  IKW.  He  early  settletl
in  Oregon,  and  was  e<lucate<l  at  Willamette  uni-
versity. In  1858  he  entere<l  the  ministry  of  the
Metho<list  Episcopal  church  and  held  various  pas-
torates until  1H75,  except  during  18<J7-'8,  when  he
returned  to  Willamette  and  took  his  degree. He


was  elected  president  of  the  Univenlty  of  the  P»»
eiflc  in  1N77,  and  held  thnt  fxrvf  for  ten  resra,  dur-
ing which  time  the  ni'  froiii  aliout  lUO
to  mon*  t han  400.  Tli'  ippliann-n  in-
creaMHi  corrcMpomlinKiy,  aim  me  annual  tnoooM  of
the  iii.Hiitution  vasadraaoed  from  about  97j000  to
|25.(MXi.  In  1887  b«  aor.M>«'-'i  .1...  piwldaiioj  of
MilU  college,  Oakland.  ( <>  plaea  ha  now
(INMN)  holds.  He  was  a  n  to  the  Reneral
wmference  of  the  Methndihi  ehurch  in  Bmnkljrn,
N.  v.,  in  18?2.  and  i»>  that  in  'ineinnati  in  18H0.
The  degree  «)f  I).  I).  "  ufion  him  by
Northwefttem  and  V  ;  »itieji  in  I8?y.
He  inliteil  the  "  Aut..i....u.iiiiin  'tr,  O.  {!»•
veil  "  (New  York,  IKKl),  and  lin-  i  volume
of  the  wrmons  and  liM-tun-H  of  1; :.  i\en.

STRATTON.  Charlptt  SherwixHt.  dwarf,  b.  in
BridgeiKtrt,  Conn..  4  Jan..  IKW;  «|.  in  .Mid«llehor-
ough.  Mass.,  15  July.  1kn:(.  He  wa.t  fin*t  exhibited
as  a  dwarf  by  Phineas  T.  lianuim  at  his  American
museum  in  New  York  city  on  8  lK«o..  1842,  who
gjive  him  the  title  and  name  of  (Jen.  Torn  Thumb.
At  that  time  he  was  not  more  than  two  feet  high,
and  weighe<l  less  than  sixte«'ii  |iounds.  He  was  en-
gagetl  at  a  salar)'  of  three  dollars  a  wii'k  and  trav-
elling expenses;  but,  as  he  proved  a  great  succesR,
his  salary  was  soon  increased  to  twenty-five  dollar*
a  week,  and  at  the  end  of  his  wn-ond  year  he  re-
ceived fifty  dollars  a  week.  In  1844  he  visited  Eu-
rope under  the  management  of  Mr.  Itanium,  and
api»eared  at  the  courts  of  England.  France,  and
migium.  In  1857  he  again  vi.Mte<l  Euro|)e,  and
on  later  occasions  he  travelk-d  extensively  on  the
continent.  He  accumulat*-*!  a  large  fortune,  and
settled  in  Bridgenort.  In  1802  he  met  I^vinia  NVar-
ren.  al.so  a  dwarf,  who  was  exhibited  by  Mr.  liar-
num.  and  married  her  on  10  Feb.,  1863.  The  wed-
ding ceremony  was  jierfornied  at  (J race  chun'h,  in
New  York  citv,  with  "Comino<lore"  Nutt  as
gr(K)msman  and  Minnie  Warn-n  as  bridesmaid.
Suljsequently  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Stratton  travellml  over
the  world  and  gave  exhibitions  wherever  they  went.
As  he  grew  older  he  became  stout  and  weighed
seventy  pounds,  and  his  height  increa»e«l  to  forty
inches.'  The  dwarfs  death  was  the  result  of  a
stroke  of  a|M)plexy.  He  was  buritxl  in  Mountain
Grove  cemetery,  BridgeiK)rt.  where  a  marble  shaft
forty  feet  in  height  was  raistii  to  his  niemorr.  on
the  top  of  which  is  a  full-length  statue  of  the  little
general.— His  wife.  Merry  i^ivinla  Bump,  b.  in
Middle»)orough.  Mass..  31  Oct..  1841.  was  drat  en-
gaged by  Mr.  Ihirniim  in  1802.  under  whose  man-
agement she  assume<l  the  name  of  Warren.  When
exhibiteil  with  (ten.  Tom  Thumb  ^he  was  l«oth
shorter  and  lighter  than  her  husliand.  but  her
height  increased  to  forty  iiichi's  and  her  weight  to
fifty  {xmnds.  After  the' death  of  Mr.  Stratt«»n  she
lived  in  retirement  until  her  marriage  on  6  April,
188.'}.  to  Count  Primo  Magri.  an  Italian  dwarf,
with  whom  she  has  •iince  given  exhibitions  in  the
Unite<l  States  an<l  Eun)|»e.

STRATTON,  Henry  Bwlfrht,  e<lucator.  b.  in
Amherst.  Ohio.  24  Aug..  1H24;  il.  in  New  York
city.  20  Feb..  1807.  He  was  educattnl  in  the  public
s<'h<X)ls  of  liorain  county  and  at  Olxrlin  mllese,
but  was  not  gnwluatwl.  With  Henry  B.  Bryant  oe
establishe<l  the  Bryant  and  .Stratton  business  col-
leges, which  at  the  time  of  his  death  numbered
more  than  fifty,  located  in  the  principal  cities  of
the  I'niteil  States  and  Canada.

STRAl'S.  <Nrar  Solomon,  merchant,  h.  in  Ot-
terlxTg.  Rhenish  Bavaria.  23  Deo..  1850.  He  emi-
grated with  his  (tarents  to  the  United  State*,  and
settled  in  Talbotton.  Ua.  At  the  cloee  of  the  civil
war  he  removed  to  New  York,  vhers  he  vaa  grado-


718


STRAWBRIDGE


STRIBLING


ated  at  Columbia  college  in  1871  and  at  its  law-
school  in  1873.  lie  practised  law  until  1881,  and
then  entered  mercantile  life,  retaining  his  interest
in  literature.  In  March,  1887,  he  was  appointed  by
President  Cleveland  U.S.  minister  to  Turkey.  Mr.
Straus  has  been  connected  with  various  move-
ments for  reform  in  local  politics.  He  is  a  close
student  of  American  history,  on  which  ho  has  lec-
tured and  written  articles  for  periodicals,  and  he
has  published  "  The  Origin  of  the  Republican  Form
of  Government  in  the  United  States  of  America"
(New  York,  1886).

STRAWBRIDGE,  Robert,  pioneer,  b.  inDrum-
mer's  Nave,  near  Carrick-on-Shannon,  County  Lei-
trim,  Ireland ;  d.  in  Maryland  in  1781.  He  came  to
this  country  some  time  between  1760  and  1765,
settled  on  Sam's  creek,  Frederick  co.,  Md.,  and  soon
opened  his  house  for  religious  services.  Shortly
afterward  a  Methodist  society  was  formed,  and  a
place  of  worship,  known  as  the  Log  meeting-house,
was  erected.  Mr.  Strawbridge  now  travelled  con-
stantly through  the  state,  forming  new  societies,
and  in  order  that  he  might  go  on  these  Journeys
his  farm  was  cultivated  for  him  by  his  neighbors.
After  residing  on  Sam's  creek  about  sixteen  years
he  removed  to  Long  Green,  Baltimore  county,
where  the  use  of  a  farm  had  been  given  him  for
his  life.  He  died  while  he  was  on  one  of  his  preach-
ing tours.  It  is  a  matter  of  dispute  whether  he  or
Philip  Embury  founded  the  first  Methodist  so-
ciety and  built  the  first  chapel  in  this  country,  but
most  authorities  give  Embury  priority.  A  full
discussion  of  the  point  may  be  found  in  Joseph  B.
Wakelev's  "  Lost  Chapters  Recovered  from  the
Early  history  of  American  Methodism "  (New
York,  1858),  and  John  Atkinson's  "  Centennial  His-
tory of  American  Metliodism  "  (1884).

STRAZNICKY,  Edward  R.  (strats-nik'-y),
librarian,  b.  in  Moravia,  Austria,  in  1830;  d.  in
New  York  city,  9  Feb.,  1876.  He  was  educated
at  the  University  of  Vienna,  taking  degrees  in  the
departments  of  medicine  and  philosophy,  and  ac-
quired by  travel  a  familiar  knowledge  of  modern
languages.  During  the  Hungarian  rebellion  he
served  as  an  officer  in  the  revolutionary  army.
At  the  defeat  of  the  Nationalists  he  went  into
exile,  and  his  property  was  confiscated.  After  a
brief  residence  in  England,  he  came  to  the  United
States,  and  found  mercantile  employment  in  Phila-
delphia. In  1859  he  became  assistant  librarian  in
Astor  library,  New  York  city,  and  in  1872  he  was
elected  superintendent,  which  office  he  held  till
the  time  of  his  death.  He  was  also  secretary  of
the  American  geographical  society.

STREET,  Alfred  Billings,  author,  b.  in  Pough-
keepsie,  N.  Y.,  18  Dec,  1811 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
2  June,  1881.  He  removed  at  an  early  age  to
Monticello,  Sullivan  co.,  N.  Y.,  and  was  educated
at  Dutchess  county  academy,  after  which  he  studied
law  with  his  father,  Randall  S.  Street,  and  practised
in  Monticello.  In  1839  he  removed  to  Albany,  in
1843-'44  edited  the  "  Northern  Light,"  and  from
1848  till  his  death  he  was  state  librarian.  Mr.
Street  began  at  an  earljr  age  to  write  poetry  for  the
magazines,  and  he  attained  a  respectable  rank  as  a
descriptive  poet.  Some  of  his  productions  were
highly  praised  by  critics,  and  several  of  his  poems
have  been  translated  into  German.  His  publica-
tions include  "  The  Burning  of  Schenectady,  and
other  Poems "  (Albany,  1M2) ;  "  Drawings  and
Tintings"  (New  York,  1844);  "Fugitive  Poems"
(1846) ;  "  Frontenac,  or  the  Atotarho  of  the  Iro-
qiiois,  a  Metrical  Romance  "  (London,  1849 ;  New
York,  1850);  "The  Council  of  Revision  of  the
State  of  New York,"  a  history  (Albany, 1859);


"  Woods  and  Waters,  or  the  Saranacs  and  the
Racket,"  describing  a  trip  in  the  Adirondack  re-
gion (New  York,  1860);  "A  Digest  of  Taxation
m  the  United  States "  (Albany,  1863);  a  collected
edition  of  his  poems  (2  vols.,  1866) ;  and  "  The  In-
dian Pass,"  describing  explorations  in  p]ssex  coun-
ty, N.  Y.  (1869).  He  also  contributed  sixteen
poems  to  John  A.  Hows's  "  Forest  Pictures  in  the
Adirondacks  "  (1864),  and  published  various  poems
that  he  read  at  different  colleges,  including  Geneva
(now  Hobart)  (1840);  Hamilton  (1850);  and  Yale
(1851) ;  also  one  on  the  battle-field  of  Saratoga.

STREET,  Angustns  Russell,  donor,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  5  Nov..  1791 ;  d.  there,  12
June,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1812,
and  studied  law,  but  was  compelled  to  abandon  it
on  account  of  feeble  health,  and  remaitied  an  in-
valid during  the  greater  part  of  his  life.  From
1843  till  1848  he  resided  in  Europe,  travelling  and
devoting  himself  to  the  study  of  art  and  the  mod-
ern languages.  Mr.  Street  inherited  a  fortune,
and  gave  largely  to  benevolent  objects.  He  pre-
sented to  Yale  its  school  of  the  fine  arts,  one  of  its
finest  buildings,  also  making  partial  provision  for
its  endowment,  founded  the  Street  professorship
of  modern  languages,  and  made  provision  in  his
will  for  the  establishment  of  the  Titus  Street
professorship  in  the  theological  department.  His
daughter  married  Admiral  Andrew  H.  Foote.

STREET,  Whiting,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Wal-
lingford,  Conn.,  25  March,  1790 ;  d.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  31  July,  1878.  He  was  educated  at  public
schools  in  West  Springfield,  Mass.,  and  was  suc-
cessively a  farmer,  a  freight-boatman  on  Connecti-
cut river,  and  a  bank  director.  He  accumulated  a
large  fortune,  and  at  his  death  left  $106,000  to  the
city  of  Holyoke  and  twenty-one  adjacent  towns,
to  be  used  for  the  benefit  of  the  worthy  poor  that
should  not  be  already  in  charge  of  the  public.

STRIBLING.  Cornelius  Kinchiloe,  naval
officer,  b.  in  Pendleton,  S.  C,  22  Sept.,  1796 ;  d.  in
Martinsburg,  W.  Va.,  17  Jan.,  1880.  He  entered  the
navv  as  a  midshinman,  18  June,  1812,  and  served
in  the  frigate  "  Mohawk  "  on  Lake  Ontario  in  1815,
where  he  participated  in  the  blockade  of  Kingston.
He  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  1  April,  1818,
cruised  on  the  Brazil  station  in  1819-'20,  and  then
in  the  West  Indies  suppressing  piracy.  He  com-
manded the  sloop  "  Peacock  "  in  the  East  Indies
in  1835-'7,  and  was  on  leave  for  two  years  after  his
return.  He  was  commissioned  commander,  24  Jan.,
1840,  and  in  1842-4  had  the  sloop  "Cyane"  and
frigate  "  United  States  "  successively  on  the  Pacific
station.  For  the  next  two  years  he  had  command
of  the  receiving-ship  at  Norfolk,  and  he  then  went
out  as  fleet-captain  in  command  of  the  ship-of-the-
line  "  Ohio,"  ol  the  Pacific  squadron,  during  the
latter  part  of  the  Mexican  war,  returning  to  New
York  in  April,  1850.  He  was  superintendent  of  the
naval  academy  at  Annapolis  in  1850-'3,  was  com-
missioned captain,  1  Aug.,  1853,  and  commanded
the  steam  sloop  "  San  Jacinto  "  on  special  service
in  1854-'5.  He  was  commandant  of  the  Pensacola
navy-yard  1857-'9,  and  served  as  flag-officer  in
command  of  the  East  India  squadron  in  1859-'61.
When  the  civil  war  operied  he  returned  home,  and,
notwithstanding  the  secassion  of  his  native  state,
adhered  to  the  Union.  He  served  on  the  board  to
regulate  the  compensation  of  government  officers
in  1861,  and  on  the  light- house  board  in  1862.  By
operation  of  law  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list
in  December,  1861,  but  he  continued  to  render
valuable  service  in  command  of  the  navy-yard  at
Philadelphia  in  1862-'4,  and  from  February  till
July,  1865,  as  commander-in-chief  of  the  Eastern


STRICKLAND


STR1N(JHAM


719


Oulf  binckadinpr  Mqiiailron ;  aftrr  which  he  was  •
nu'ininT  of  tho  li^ht-hoiist'  Ixuinl  until  1H72.  Ho
WHS  cominisxiniKMl  cominotlon?  on  Iho  retired  lint,
10  .Iiilv.  1H<1'2.  iitid  mir-wlinirnl.  2.")  .lulv.  1866.

STRICKLAND,  Saiiiii<>I,  ('Hiitwlinn  niithnr.  h.
in  Kovdon  Hall,  SiitTolk,  Kii^'lnml.  in  1N4»0;  d.  in
liwkftit'ld,  l'p|M'r('nimihi.  in  1H»7.  He  entunnl  tlu«
inilitHry  stTviit*,  attanuHl  tlio  rank  of  liuiit^nant-
coloncl,  and  emigrat«'«l  to  Canwla  in  1H20.  Ho  wa.H
a  brother  of  Susanna  MiMHlif,  A^jncs  Stricklantl.
and  Cathorino  Parr  Traill  («.  v.).  He  wrote  "  Twen-
ty-seven Years  in  Canada  West,  or  the  Kxperienci!
of  an  Ejirlv  Settler."  e<lited  bv  Agnes  Strickland
(2  vols..  London.  1K*>:]).

STRICKLAND,  William,  arrhitect.  b.  in  I'hil-
Mlelphia,  Pa.,  17H7  ;  d.  in  Na-iliville,  Tenn..  7  April,
IHM.  lie  studied  under  IkMijamin  II.  Ijatrolx>.  and
in  1809  became  a  landscajw-painter.  At  this  time
and  8ubsei|uently  be  did  (■onsi<lerable  work  aa  an
a^iuatint  engraver,  producing  a  M'ries  of  views  of
Ptiiiadelphia  and  a  few  ^Mirtraits  of  deoide<l  merit.
His  first  iiniK>rtant  architectural  work  wius  the  old
Masonic  hall.  Chestnut  ^t^eet,  Philadelphia,  which
was  opene<l  for  use,  27  Dec.,  ISIO.  The  style  wa.s
Gothic.  His  next  im|>ortant  work  was  the  U.  S,
bank,  modelled  after  tne  Parthenon  at  Athens,  and
finished  in  August,  1824.  He  now  took  his  |)lace
as  one  of  the  chief  architects  in  the  country,  and  a.s
such  built  the  new  Chestnut  street  theatre,  the
Arch  street  theatre,  U.  S.  custom-house,  St.  Ste-
phen's Episcopal  church,  the  Merchants'  exchange,
U.  S.  mmt,  and  the  U.  S.  naval  asylum,  all  in
Philaflelphia.  Mr.  Strickland  wjis  one  of  the  first
architects  and  engineers  that  turned  his  attention
to  the  construction  of  railroads,  and  he  went  to
Europe  to  study  the  system.  On  his  return  he  built
»the  Delaware  breakwater  for  the  IT.  S.  government.
His  last  work  was  the  state- house  at  Nashville,
Tenn.,  and  he  died  while  engaged  in  surM-rintend-
ing  its  constniction.  By  a  vote  of  the  legislature
of  the  state  his  remains  were  placed  in  a  crypt  in
that  etli flee.  He  jniblished  "Triangulation  of  the
Entrance  into  Delaware  Ray  "  (Philadelphia) ;  "  Re-
[Mjrt  on  Canals  and  Railways"  (182ri);  and.  with
Gill  and  Campl)ell.  "Public  Works  of  the  Unitwl
States"  (London.  1841).

STRICKLAND,  William  Peter, clergyman, b.
in  Pittsburg.  Pa.,  17  Aug.,  1H<)1>;  d.  in  Ocean  Grove,
N.  J.,  15  July,  1884.  He  was  educate<l  at  ( )hio  uni-
versity, Athens,  Ohio,  from  which  he  afterward  re-
ceivecl  the  degree  of  D.  D.  In  1832  he  entered  the
ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  Ohio,
and,  after  serving  in  the  itinerancy  and  also  for  five
years  as  an  agent  of  the  American  Bible  wK-iety.  he
removed  to  New  York  in  1856,  where  he  was  con-
nected with  the  Methodist  lxK)k  concern,  and  wa*
an  a.ssociate  editor  of  the  "Christian  Advw>ate."
From  1865  till  1874  he  supplied  the  pulpit  of  the
Presbvterian  church  in  Bridgehampton.  L.  I.,  and
then  he  was  installed  as  its  regular  pastor,  but
three  years  later  he  resignetl  on  account  of  his  wife's
health.  Afterward  he  lalwred  as  an  evangelist.
In  1862  he  servetl  as  chaplain  of  the  48th  New  York
regiment  at  Port  Royal.  S.  C.  Dr.  Stricklan<l  pub-
lished "History  of  the  American  Bible  .Six-iety"
(New  York,  1849  ;  continued  to  18.56.  18.56);  "  His-
tory of  the  Missions  of  the  Meth<Kiist  Epi.'Ko|)al
Church  "  (Cincinnati,  1850) ;  "  Genius  and  Mission
of  Methodism"  (Boston,  1851);  "Manual  of  Bibli-
cal Literature"  (New  York.  1853);  "  Light  of  the
Temple"  (Cincinnati,  1^54);  "The  Astrologer  of
Chaldea,  or  the  Life  of  Faith"  (1855):  "Chris-
tianity demonstrate*!  by  Facts"  (1855):  "Pioneers
of  the  West"  (New  York.  18.56);  "The  Pionwr
Bishop,  or the Life  and Times  of Francis  As-


bupjr "  n858) :  "Old  Mackinaw,  c.r  the  F..rtn-«.  of
the  Ijikm  and  it<«  SummndinfTi "  (PliiljMlel|thia,
l"'  ■.b(}nil»-r"(NewYork,18eO).

II  'U«  vnlumoi  of  aenDona  and

iilinr  woFK-^.  iiniMiii;  them the "  AutobioCTiphjr  Of

Peter  Cart  Wright  "  ( |H54b.  and  waa  editonaUj  ooo>
ne4-ted  with  f^-veral  jounialM  in  the  w«at,  baridaa
the  one  mention<H|  aliove.

STRINUKR.  Hamael.  phTrician.  b.  in  Mary-
lami  in  17:M:  iI.  in  Alhauy.  S'.  Y..  11  Jal^.  1H17.
He  studie<l  meilicine  in  Philadelphia  with  Dr.
Thomas  Ii«>nd.  wasa|ii  •■dicaJ  depart*

ment  of  the  army  in  I  lliam  Shmcj.

and  servwl  in  the  cainiNiitn  "i  •  ."^ui ''• '■  "ga.

He  then  M*ttl«-<1  in  Allnnv.  and  on  i'  175,

was  at>|N>inteii  dire<-tor  and  |ihyi>ictaii .  >pi-

tals  of  the  northern  defiartmeiit,  and  authorizetl  to
appoint  a  surgetm  for  ttie  fleet  that  wax  then  filtinfc
out  u[)on  the  laki>s.  He  at-coniftaninl  the  troopa
in  the  invasion  of  Canada,  but  wax  dicniiiaed  tne
'«««rvice  l»y  c-ongw'ss,  9  .Ian..  1777:  and  in  February
that  IxhIv  onlennl  an  in(|uirv  to  lie  made  wincem-
ing  medicines  that  he  had  liought.  Gen.  Philip
S-huvler  remonstrat(>d  against  his  removal,  and  on
15  March,  1777,  he  was  reprimandeii  bv  eongrecK.
Dr.  Stringer  afterwani  nractisc-d  in  Albany  with
great  HMJUtation  till  his  tiealh.

STRINGHAM,  JanieM  S.,  physician,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1775;  d.  in  St.' Croix.  W.  I..  28
June,  1817.  He  was  graduattil  at  Columl>ia  in
1793,  and  l)egan  to  study  theologj-.  but  altandoncd
it  for  medicine,  which  he  pursueil  fin>t  under  Dr.
Samuel  Bard  and  Dr.  David  Hosack  in  New  York,
and  then  at  the  University  of  t^linburgh.  where  he
receive<l  his  degree  in  1769.  He  was  profej«or  of
chemistry  in  Columbia  in  1802-'I3,  ami  of  medical
jurisprudence  in  the  College  of  physicians  and  mir-

K-ons  from  1813  till  his  death.  He  was  the  first  to
fture  here  on  the  latter  s<-ience.  and  may  \tv  regard-
ed as  its  founder  in  the  l'nite<l  Staten.  Dr.  String-
ham  was  one  of  the  most  efficient  of  the  early  pro-
moters of  science  in  this  country.  He  wai»anhy-
sician  of  the  New  York  hospitaf,  a  memlwr  of  the
Royal  me<lical  society  of  Edinburgh,  and  a  fellow  of
the  New  York  literary,  philosophical,  ami  historical
societies.  He  publisTlie*!  "  IK'  Al>s4>ri»entium  Sy»-
temate,"  his  inaugural  di.ss«>rtation ;  and  various
essays  and  j>ajKTs  in  nie<lical  journals.

StRINGHAM.  Sila.H  Hnrton,  naval  officer,  h.
in  Middletowii.  Orange  co..  N.  Y..  7  Nov..  1798;  d.
in  Brooklyn.  N.  Y.,  7  Feb.,  1870.  He  entered  the
navy  as  a  mid-
shipman, 15  Nov.,
1809,  and  in  the
frigate  "  Presi-
dent "  partici-
pate«l  in  the  en-
gagements with
the  "Little  Belt"
and  "  lielvidere."
He  was  commis-
sioned lieuten-
ant. 9  Dee..  1814,
and  s«»rv»»<l  in  the
schooner  "S|»ark"
in  the  Minliterra-
nean  in  L  15-'18,
{>artici|Mting  in
the  Algerine  war.
During  a  stonn
at  Gibraltar,  up-
on one  oix-asion,
he  went  in  a  l>oat  with  »ix  men  to  reflrue  the
crew  of  a  Fn-neh  brig  that  had  cN|wiized.  He  nuD-
ceeded  in  getting  the  crew,  but  waa  unable  to  ge*


<//y


C^V^X^A^X^Uv*^


720


STROBEL


STRONG


back  to  port,  and  was  blown  off  to  Algcsiras,
where  his  lx)at  capsized  in  the  surf  on  the  beach,
and  one  of  his  crew  and  two  Frenchmen  were
drowned.  In  1819-'21  he  served  in  the  sloop
"  Cyane  "  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  brought  home
four  slavers  as  prize-master.  He  was  executive
officer  of  the  "Ilornet"  in  the  West  Indies  in
1821-'4,  for  the  suppression  of  piracy,  and  assisted
in  the  capture  of  the  "  Moscow,  the  most  dreaded
piratical  vessel  in  those  waters.  He  was  commis-
sioned commander,  3  March,  1831,  and  captain,
y  Sept.,  1841,  was  commandant  of  the  New  York
navy-yard  in  1844-'0,  and  with  the  ship  "Ohio"
took  part  in  the  bombardment  of  Vera  Cruz  in  1847.
He  was  in  charge  of  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  in
1848-'52,  and  the  Boston  navy-yard  in  1856-^00,  and
in  1853-'6  commanded  the  Mediterranean  squad-
ron as  flag-officer.  When  the  civil  war  began  he
was  summoned  to  Washington  to  advise  upon  the
preparations  for  war,  especiallv  in  relation  to  the
relief  of  Fort  Sumter,  which  lie  strongly  urged,
but  his  advice  was  not  followed  until  it  had  become
too  late  to  be  feasible.  He  took  command  of  the
North  Atlantic  blockading  fleet,  and  planned  the
expedition  to  Hatteras  inlet.  Gen.  Benjamin  F.
Butler  accompanied  him  with  nine  hundred  men.
The  squadron  bombarded  the  forts,  sailing  in  an
ellipse,  by  which  means  the  vessels  concentrated
their  fire  on  the  forts  and  manoeuvred  so  skilfully
that  none  were  hit.  Both  forts  surrendered  after
the  bombardment,  and  the  troops  were  landed  to

farrison  them  on  29  Aug.,  1861.  Not  one  of  the
rational  troops  was  injured.  The  Confederates
lost  twelve  killed  and  thirty-five  wounded,  and
seven  hundred  and  fifteen  prisoners,  and  large
quantities  of  guns  and  stores  were  captured.  This
was  the  first  naval  victory  of  importance  in  the
war.  Stringham  declined  further  active  service  on
account  of  his  age,  and  was  retired,  as  commodore,
21  Dec,  1861.  He  continued  to  render  valuable
service  as  commandant  of  the  Boston  navy-yard  in
1862-'5,  and  was  promoted  to  rear-admiral  on  the
retired  list,  16  July,  1862.  He  was  port-admiral  at
New  York  in  1870-'2,  and  was  on  waiting  orders
until  his  death.

STROBEL,  William  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  7  May,  1808;  d.  in  Rhinebeck,
N.  Y.,  6  Dec,  1884.  He  received  his  classical  edu-
cation in  his  native  place,  and  pursued  his  theo-
logical course  at  Hartwick  seminary,  where  he  was
craduated  in  1829.  In  the  same  year  he  was
licensed  to  preach  by  the  ministerium  of  New
York,  and  in  1830  he  was  ordained  to  the  ministry
by  the  synod  of  South  Carolina.  He  served  as  mis-
sionary among  the  destitute  Lutherans  in  South
Carolina  in  1829-'30,  was  pastor  in  Columbia,  S.  C,
in  1830-'l,  and  in  New  York  citvin  1831-'41,  prin-
cipal of  Hartwick  seminary,  N.  Y.,  in  1841-'4,  and
held  other  pastorates  in  New  York  state  and  Mary-
land till  1881,  when  he  retired  from  the  active
duties  of  his  office  on  account  of  advancing  age
and  failing  health,  and  lived  in  retirement  at  Rhine*
beck,  N.  Y.,  until  his  death.  He  was  president  of
the  general  synod  in  1879-'80,  and  held  other  of-
fices. He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.,  in  1846,  from
Hamilton  college,  and  was  the  author  of  numerous
articles  in  periodicals  of  the  church,  which  were
afterward  published  separately.  Among  them  are
"Jubilee  Tract"  (Baltimore,  1867);  "Influence  of
the  Death  and  Resurrection  of  the  Saviour  upon
the  World  " ;  and  an  introduction  to  Dr.  George  B.
Miller's  posthumous  sermons  (New  York,  1860).

STRONG,  Au^iistns  Hopkins,  educator,  b.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  3  Aug.,  1836.  His  great-grand-
father, Philip,  was  first  cousin  to  Jedediah,  noticed


below.  His  father,  Alvah  Strong,  published  for
thirty  years  the  Rochester  daily  "  Democrat."
The  son  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  18.')7,  and  at
Rochester  theological  seminary  in  1859.  He  then
spent  some  time  abroad,  studying  in  the  German
universities  and  travelling  in  ICurope  and  the  E&st.
In  1861  he  became  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church
of  Haverhill,  Mass.,  and  was  ordained  to  the  min-
istry. In  1865  he  accepted  a  call  to  the  pastorate
of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  and
remained  there  until  1872,  when  he  was  elected

S>resident  and  professor  of  biblical  theology  in
iochester  theological  seminary.  This  place  he
still  holds.  Brown  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1870.  He  preaches  often,  and  gives  much  time
to  the  general  affairs  of  the  denomination  with
which  he  is  identified.  He  is  a  trustee  of  Vassar
college.  Dr.  Strong  has  written  much  for  reviews
and  newspapers  on  a  variety  of  subjects,  literary
as  well  as  theological.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Sys-
tematic Theology "  (Rochester,  1886),  which  has
received  high  commendation  for  its  ability  and
learning,  and  also  of  "  Philosophy  and  Religion  "
(New  York,  1888).

STRONG,  Caleb,  senator,  b.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  9  Jan.,  1745 ;  d.  there,  7  Nov.,  1819.  He  was
fourth  in  descent  from  John,  founder  of  the  family,
who  came  to  this  country  from  Taunton,  England,
in  1630,  and  finally  settled  in  Northampton,  Mass.
After  graduation  at  Harvard  in  1764,  he  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1772.  During
the  Revolution  he  was  a  member  of  the  general
court  and  the  Northampton  committee  of  safety,
and  from  1776  till  1800  he  was  county  attorney.
He  was  sent  to  the  State  constitutional  convention
in  1779,  where  he  aided  in  drawing  up  the  constitu-
tion, and  to  the  state  council  in  1780,  and  from  the
latter  year  till  1789  he  was  in  the  state  senate.  In
1781  he  declined  a  seat  on  the  supreme  bench.  In
1787  he  was  chosen  to  the  convention  that  framed
the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  and,  although
illness  in  his  family  compelled  him  to  return  te-
fore  it  was  completed,  he  exerted  himself  in  the
state  convention  to
procure  its  ratifica-
tion. In  1789  he  was
elected  one  of  the  first
U.  S.  senatoi-s  from
Massachusetts,  and  he
served  till  his  resigna-
tion in  1796.  He  was
governor  of  his  state
from  1800  till  1807,
and  again  from  1812
till  1816.  As  a  Fed-
eralist, he  earnestly
opposed  the  war  of
1812,  and  when  requi-
sition was  made  upon
him  for  troops,  he  de-
nied the  right  of  the
president  on  constitu-
tional grounds.  He
claimed  that,  as  governor  of  the  state,  he  should  be
the  judge  of  the  exigency  in  which  the  constitution
allowed  the  president  to  call  out  the  militia,  and
that,  when  this  was  done,  the  state  troops  should
be  commanded  by  their  own  officers.  The  state  su-
preme court,  being  called  upon  for  an  opinion  on
these  points,  sustained  the  governor.  But  when
the  administration  withdrew  nearly  all  the  Nation-
al troops  from  the  coast  of  Massachusetts,  leaving
it  defenceless,  he  was  active  in  adopting  measures
for  the  safety  of  the  state.  See  his  "Life"  by
Alden  Bradford  (Boston,  1820) ;  his  "  Speeches,  and


0cw^^-::^'4:xy^3^^^P


STItOXG

other  Piipers.  18(X)-1W»7"  (Ncwburv|K.rt.  Miuw..
1H()H);  HMil  "Thf  Str«»ii>r  Kiimilv,"  )iv  Ilenjamin
W.  I)wii;ht  (2  vols..  AlUnv.  IHTlj.

STRON<i.  (ieorve  CrtMltolt,  w.ldior.  b.  in
St«K'kl»ri<ltr«'.  V't..  1(1  Oct.,  IWi;  d.  in  Xew  York
city.  JW  July.  IHftl.  I,<winir  his  fathiT  mrlv  in  lift-.
h<>  wn.s  lulopti^l  hy  his  uiulf.  Alfn-«l  li.  Strong,  of
Rust  ham  I  it  (HI,  Ma.ss.  Ifi*  was  ^jnuluat.-*!  at  tht*
I'.  S.  militarv  aca4h>iny  in  \Hr*7.  assipml  to  the
onlnam-i'.  ami  in  IH5JJ  lK«(am»'  assistant  at  Wator-
vlicl  arst>nai.  of  which  he  took  conimaml  in  May,
18<M.  He  was  onlnance  ofT'u'er  on  (»en.  Ir.vjn  Mc-
iKiweil's  stafT  at  Hull  Itiin.  ami  was  then  attached
siK-t'ossively  to  the  staffs  of  (Jen.  (Jeorjfe  H.  Mc-
Clellan  and  (ten.  IJenjarnin  F.  Htitlcr.  wiiow  chief
of  staff  he  became  in  May,  WVi.  lie  had  pn-vious-
!>•  lH>en  enjrajred  in  theorpmization  of  tlie  New
Orleans  ex|RHliti<m,  an<l  on  1  Oct..  1M(U,  had  Un'ri
commissioni"*!  maior an<l  assist^int  adjntant-p'neral.
Ho  commanded  the  ex|HHlition  from  Ship  island  to
Biloxi,  Miss.,  in  April,  1M(52.  and  that  to  I'oncha-
toula  in  Septemlwr,  when  he  destroye<l  a  larjre  train
and  itillictt-d  much  (himajre  on  the  em-mv.  He  was
made  bripulier-p'neral  of  volunteers,  2J»"Xov.,  1S(J2,
was  on  sick-leave  in  New  York  frf)m  the  followinjr
Dewndtor  till  June,  18(W,  ami  then  coinmandiHl  a
brijrade  in  the  ojH'rations  a;;ainst  Charleston,  S.  (".
He  hjul  lxH>n  commissioned  captain  of  onlnance,
8  Man-h,  1H03.  He  led  the  successfid  attack  on
Morris  island,  where  he  was  the  first  to  land.  At
the  assault  on  Fort  Wagner  on  \H  July,  while  he
was  leading  and  cheerinfr  on  the  stormi'njj  column,
he  was  mortally  wounded.  He  was  at  once  n-movecl
to  New  York  city.  (ten.  Stronj;  wjis  the  author  of
"Ca«let  Life  at  West  Point"  (Boston.  1H()2).

STROX(i.  James,  scholar,  b.  in  New  York  citv.
'14  Aug.,  1822.  His  father,  Tliomas.  came  froin
JJngland  to  this  country  in  IHlTj.  The  son  was  left
an  or|)han  at  an  early  age,  and  in  IS^JS)  lK»g«n  the
study  «)f  miHlicine,  but  the  failure  of  his  health  led
to  itsal»andonment.  He  was  graduated  at  Weslevan
in  184-4,  tau''ht  two  years  in  Poultncy.  Vt.,  and  then
failing  health  again  conu>elled  his  retirement  to
a  farm  in  Newtown,  I^n^  Island.  Eighteen  months
later  he  settled  at  Flushmg,  where  he  followed  bil)-
tical  studies.  He  held  various  local  olTlccs,  t«K)k  an
active  interest  in  the  development  of  the  town,  and
projected  and  built  the  Flushing  railroa«l. of  which
he  was  president.  He  gave  gmtuitous  private  in-
struction to  classes  in  Greek  and  Hebrew,  which  led
to  his  first  literary  laltor.  the  preimration  of  brief
manuals  of  (Jreek,  Hebrew,  and  Chaldee  grammar,
which  were  afterward  publishwl  (IKoO- '(»>).  From
1858  till  18«1  he  was  professor  of  biblical  literature
and  acting  president  of  Troy  university,  where  in
the  former  year  he  delivered  an  inaugural  on
"Scholastic  Education  and  Biblical  Interi>retation  "
(Troy.  IKIJ)),  and  he  then  n-turned  to  Flushing  to
engage  in  public  improvements.  Sim-e  1H(W  he  has
been  professor  of  exeget  ical  theologvin  Drew  theo-
logical semimiry,  Madison.  N.  J.  \Vi>slevan  gave
him  the  degrees  of  I).  I),  and  LL.  D.  in  'l8.'>(J  and
1881  resfHX-tively,  Dr.  Strong;  travelled  in  Egypt
and  Palestine  in  1874,  and  is  a  mendM-r  of  the
American  branch  of  the  Palestine  exploration
committee.  He  is  also  one  of  the  Old  Ti-stament
company  of  the  committee  for  the  revision  of  the
authorized  version  of  the  Bible.  In  1872  he  was  a
lay  delegate  to  the  genenil  conference  of  the
Methixlist  Episoopiil  chun-h.  He  is  the  author  of
"A  New  Harmony  and  Ex|H)sition  of  the  Oosfxds"
(New  York,  IM-VJ);  "  Harmony  in  Orvek"  (18.54):  [
"Scri|>ture  IIi.ston'  delineate<l  from  the  Biblical
Records  and  all  other  Accessible  Sources"  (Madi-
son, N,  J.,  1878);  "  Irenics,  a  Series  of  H-ways  show-  ,

VOL,  v.— 46


8TRONO


721


ing  the  Virtiud  Agroement  between  SoImiw  and
the  Bible  "(New  York.  IHH8):  and  "TheTahernacle
of  Iftnud  in  the  I)e*ert "  (IHHK).  Uo  hn*  ,-i\\U^\,  for
the  Anieriran  edition  «»f  I.«ng(''ii  conimentarr
the  imrts  on  "  Daniel"  (1878)  and  *'E»lber"  (ISm
and  pub|iKhe<l  a
'•  Literal  Trans-
lation of  KcY'lfr-
sia-stes"  (1877).
The  chief  work
of  his  life  ij«  the
" ('vcloi>a*dia  of
Biblical,  Th«>.
logical,  and  Ec-
clesiastical Liter-
ature" (10  vols..
18(57-'8!:  supple-
ment. 2  vols..
18K.'>-*7).  In  the
()n>|iarati(m  of
the  first  three
volumes  of  this
work,  which  was
Ix-gun  in  18.W,
he  was  the  a.-'so-
ciate  of  its  pro-
jector. Dr.  John  McClintcK-k  (</.  v.).  wh<i  took  rharcv
of  the  theological  nart.  while  he  attended  to  the
department  of  biblical  literature,  but  nince  the
death  of  Dr.  McClintock  Dr.  Stn.ng  has  had  wle
charge.  He  has  also  pre|>ared  various  question
manuals  for  Sunday-M-hools  and  Bible  chuwea.
Iwisetl  on  his  "  Harmony  of  the  CJomwIs."  tieveraJ
of  which  were  edited  b'v  Daniel  P.  Kidder.  D.  D.
(New  York.  I8,V{-'4).  anil  with  Orniige  Judd  and
Mrs.  Julia  .M.  (Min  less«ins  for  every  Sunday  in  the
year  (4  vols,,  18(52- '5).  on  the  [>lan' afterward  tued
in  the  "  International  l^*ssons."

STR0X(4.  Janiex  Hooker,  naval  offi«-er,  b,  in
Canandaigua.  .N.  Y.,  2(t  April.  1814;  d.  in  Colum-
bia. S.  ("..  2;{  Nov..  1SH2.  He  was  ap|Kiinted  a
midshipman  in  the  navy  while  he  was  a  student  in
the  Polytechnic  college  at  Chittcnango.  N.  Y.,  2
Feb..  1829.  but  remained  at  the  collep*  until  he
was  graduatwl  in  IKW.  He  made  his  Hr>t  cruise
on  the  Brazil  Nation  in  lKi:i- '5,  and.  while  attached
to  the  sl<K>p  "  I^-xington."  commanded  a  Uial  ex-
jM'dition  that  capturecl  a  pimtical  establishment
in  the  Falkland  islands,  where  he  hacl  a  hand-to-
hand  conflict  with  the  pinit<>s,  ami  won  credit
by  his  valor  and  ability.  The  ves.«i«>ls  that  had
l>een  capluriHl  wen'  re:<tored  l<»  their  crewtv.and  the
|)irates  were  taken  to  Buenos  Ayres  for  trial  hv
the  Argentine  govenuneiit.  He  became  paneed
midshipman,  4  June.  IKIG.  and  lieutenant.  8  Sept..
1841,  and  after  various  cruises  cominandt*d  the
store-ship  "  Belief  "  in  IK'iO.  He  wa>^  nMiimiNsionMl
commander,  24  April,  18(31,  and  had  the  steainent
"Mohawk"  and  "Flag."  on  the  .South  Atlantic
blockade  in  18<n-*2,  and  the  steamer  "  Mommga-
hela"on  the  Western  (iulf  blockmle  in  18(5;j-"5.  in
which  he  renderecl  g<KMl  >crvic«*  at  Arkansas  t«M
and  es[>ecially  at  the  liattle  of  Mobile  l«y,  wners
he  was  the  first  to  ram  the  iron-clad  "Tennessee,"
and  was  highly  cftmmended.  After  lieing  coin-
missiomnl  ca(>tain.  5  .\iig..  18(15.  he  wan  on  duty
at  the  Bnniklyn  navy-vanl  in  18(J(^*7.  and  cum-
mandnl  the  steamer  "Canandaigua,"  of  the  Medi-
tc>rranean  S4|UHdn>n.  in  184iO-'7(l.  He  was  com-
missiont>d  commodore.  2  March,  1870.  and  M*r>'ed
as  light -house  in>|iector  for  two  years,  lie  waa
proinot4><I  to  the  rank  of  rear-aclmiral.  10  Sept^
187:{  was  (H>mniander-in-chief  of  the  South  Atlan-
tic M|uadnin  from  187:i  till  1875.  and  was  |ila<vii
on  the  ntired  list,  25  April.  187d.


722


STRONG


STRONG


STRONG,  Jededlah,  politician,  b.  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  7  Nov.,  1738;  d.  there,  21  Aug.,  1802.  His
father,  Supply  Strong,  was  one  of  the  first  settlers
of  Litchfield  in  1723,  and  is  said  to  have  owned
one  eighth  of  the  township.  The  son  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale,  and  began  the  study  of  divinity,  but
abandoned  it  for  law.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
but  devoted  himself  to  politics,  in  which  he  long
wielded  great  influence,  lie  was  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1771,  and  sat  in  that  body  for  thirtv
regular  sessions  thereafter,  during  several  of  which
he  was  clerk  of  the  house.  In  1774  he  was  chosen
to  the  Continental  congress,  and  declined,  but  he
served  in  that  body  in  1783-'4,  and  in  1780-91  he
was  a  judge  of  the  county  court.  In  1774-'5  he
was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  inspection,  and
in  1775  he  was  made  a  commissary  of  supplies  in
the  army.  In  April,  1775,  the  legislature  §ent  him
to  Albany  to  secure  all  "the  arms  belonging  to
this  colony  left  there  during  the  French  war."  In
1788  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  convention  that
ratified  the  U.  S.  constitution.  He  became  dissi-
pated, and  died  in  poverty  and  obscurity.

STRONtr,  John,  pioneer,  b.  in  Coventrv,  Conn.,
10  Aug.,  1788;  d.  in  Addison,  Vt.,  10  June,  1816.
He  removed  in  1705  to  the  eastern  side  of  Lake
Champlain,  where  he  built  the  first  house  that  was
erected  by  an  English  settler  north  of  Massachu-
setts. He  was  driven  from  his  home  by  Burgoyne's
invasion  in  1777,  and  separated  from  his  family,
but  accidentally  found  them  in  Dorset,  Vt.,  where
he  resided  several  years,  representing  the  town  in
the  legislature  in  1779-82,  and  serving  as  assistant
judge  of  Bennington  county  in  1781-'2.  He  re-
turned to  his  old  home  in  Addison,  Vt.,  in  1783,
sat  again  in  the  legislature  in  1784-'0,  was  first
judge  of  the  county  court  in  1785-1801,  and  judge
of  probate  in  1786-1801.  In  1791  he  sat  in  the
convention  that  ratified  the  U.  S.  constitution.
He  was  known  as  Gen.  John  Strong.  —  His  son,
Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  17  July,
1702;  d.  in  Vergennes,  Vt.,  5  Dec,  1832,  became  a
large  landholder  at  Vergennes.  During  the  war
of  1812  he  raised  of  his  own  accord  a  body  of
soldiers,  and  hastened  to  the  relief  of  the  garrison
at  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.  He  received  for  his  services
the  formal  thanks  of  the  legislatures  of  Vermont
and  New  York,  and  a  gold  sword  from  the  latter.
— John's  brother.  Auonijah,  b.  in  Coventry,  Conn.,
5  July,  1743;  d.  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  12  Feb.,  1813,
was  a  lawyer,  and  served  in  the  Revolutionary
army  as  commissary-general. — Adonijah's  grand-
son,'Theroii  Rndd,  jurist,  b.  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  7
Nov.,  1802;  d.  in  New  York  city,  15  May^l873,  was
the  son  of  Martin  Strong,  who  was  for  many  yeai-s
a  county  judge,  and  member  of  both  houses  of  the
Connecticut  legislature.  The  son  studied  law  with
his  father,  at  Litchfield,  and  in  Salem,  N.  Y.,  and
on  his  admission  to  the  bar  in  1826  opened  an
oflice  in  Palmyra,  N.  Y.  He  was  district  attorney
for  Wayne  county  in  1834-'9,  sat  in  congress  in
1839-41,  having  been  elected  as  a  Democrat,  and
in  1842  was  chosen  to  the  legislature.  From  1852
till  1860  he  was  a  judge  of  the  New  York  supreme
court,  and  during  one  year  of  that  time  he  was  a
member  of  the  court  of  appeals.  More  opinions
written  by  Judge  Strong  were  published  while  he
was  on  the  bench  of  the  latter  court  than  by  any
other  member  except  Hiram  Denio.  On  his  retire-
ment from  the  bench,  he  resumed  business  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  where  he  had  removed  in  1853,
but  in  1867  he  went  to  New  York  city.  He  had  a
large  practice,  and  his  services  were  also  frequent-
ly m  demand  as  a  referee. — Another  grandson  of
Adonijah,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Somers,  Conn.,  6


M^a^f^  J^^^VT^^


May,  1808,  was  the  eldest  of  eleven  children  of
Rev.  William  L.  Strong.  The  son  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1828,  and  engaged  in  the  study  of  law,
teaching  at  the  same  time,  at  one  period  in  Bur-
lington, N.  J.,  where  his  legal  preceptor  was  Garret
D.  Wall.  He  finished  his  legal  studies  by  a  six
months'  course  in
Yale  law  -  school.
Deciding  to  prac-
tise in  Pennsylva-
nia, he  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in
that  state  in  1832,
and,  settling  at
Iteading,  mastered
the  German  lan-
guage, then  much
spoken  in  that  re-
gion, and  soon
ranked  high  as  a
lawyer.  In  1846  he
was  a  candidate  for
congress,  and  was
twice  elected  on  the
Democratic  ticket,
serving  from  1847
till  1851.  In  his  second  term  he  was  appointed
chairman  of  the  committee  on  elections.  He  de-
clined a  third  nomination,  and  retired  from  active
polities,  but  when  the  civil  war  began,  though  then
occuj)ying  a  high  judicial  post,  he  gave  all  his
supjwrt  and  influence  in  aid  of  the  government.
In  1857  he  was  elected  a  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  Pennsylvania,  and  he  served  eleven  years,
attaining  a  high  reputation  as  a  jurist.  His  opin-
ions, in  volumes  30-60  of  the  state  reports,  exhibit
great  care  in  preparation,  clearness  of  statement,
precision  and  vigor  of  style,  and  accurate  knowl-
edge of  law.  In  1868  he  resigned  his  seat  on  the
bench,  and  opened  an  office  in  Philadelphia,  at
once  obtaining  a  large  and  lucrative  practice.  In
February,  1870,  he  was  appointed  a  justice  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  United  States,  and  served
until  December,  1880,  when  he  resigned.  His
great  knowledge  of  law,  keen  discrimination,  and
sound  judgment  made  him  an  invaluable  associate
in  consultation,  and  his  clear  and  masterly  opinions
helped  largely  to  sustain  the  dignity  and  authority
of  the  court.  Of  his  opinions,  those  in  the  legal-
tender  cases,  the  state  freight-tax  cases,  and  the
civil-rights  cases,  including  Tennessee  v«.  Davis,
exhibit  in  an  eminent  degree  his  great  power  of
analysis  and  rigorous  logic.  Justice  Strong  was  a
member  of  the  electoral  commission  in  February,
1877,  and  in  his  opinions  contended  that  congress
has  no  power  to  canva.ss  a  state  election  for  presi-
dential electors  (which  was  the  great  question  at
issue),  and  that  in  the  cases  that  he  specially  re-
viewed (those  of  Florida  and  Oregon)  the  canvass
of  the  state  authorities  was  clear  and  decisive.
Besides  his  official  and  professional  labors.  Justice
Strong  has  long  taken  an  active  part  in  the  coun-
sels of  the  Presbyterian  church,  of  which  he  is  a
member.  He  has  for  years  been  president  of  the
American  tract  society  and  of  the  American  Sun-
day-school union,  and  has  taken  part  in  other
benevolent  enterprises.  He  has  delivered  many
public  addresses  and  lectures,  and  has  frequently
contributed  to  magazines  and  reviews.  He  de-
livered in  1875,  before  the  Philadelphia  bar  and
the  American  philosophical  society,  of  which  he
was  a  member,  an  address  on  the  "  Life  and  Char-
acter of  Horace  Binney,"  and  in  1879  an  address
l)efore  the  law  department  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  on  tne  "Growth  and  Jlodiflcations


STRONG


8TBONO


7S8


of  Private  Civil  Ijaw."  He  has  also  (leliver(<<I  a
course  of  ItH^luriw  to  the  pn»fi«s«»on»  aiitl  Htuilentji
of  the  Union  t heojojf ic«l  M>minury  of  New  York,
and  for  several  yean*  iiftures  to  the  law  dviiartment
of  Coiumbian  university,  WashinjrTton.  linfayettf
gave  him  the  dejjri'e  of  Lli.  I),  in  1N<{7,  and  Yule
and  I*ritKvtt)n  in  1H70,  The  |H>rtrait  of  Ju!<tice
Stnmjc  is  copietl  from  an  engravinf;  that  appearwi
in  the  "  Dt-niocnitic  Uevifw  '  in  \tCAK

STKONtJ,  Jositth,  clergvnian.  >>.  in  Na|M>rviile,
I)u  Vat^c  CO.,  111..  1»  .Ian..  1847.  Mis  father,  of  the
same  name,  removed  in  lN.'i2  to  Hudson,  Ohi<»,
where  the  8<3n  was  gra<luate4l  at  Western  Reserve
eolle^^e  in  1S<{9.  He  studied  at  I^ane  theol<)|;ieal
seminary  in  IHOO-'?!.  and  after  holding  C'onun'jfa-
tional  iMustonites  in  Huds«)n,  Stuidusky.  and  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio.  Ut-ame  in  1H8«)  j;eni'ral  a^eiit  of  the
p]vant;elical  alliance  in  the  I'nittHl  .States. He  has

Culilisiied  "Our  Coimtry."  of  which  20,000  copies
ave  U'eii  sold  (New  York,  188tf).
STRONW,  Nathan,  clergyman.  I».  in  Coventr%'.
<'onn..  10  Oct.,  1748;  d.  in  Hartford.  Conn.,  ^
Dec.,  1810.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  was  pa.s-
tor  at  Covefitry,  Conn.  The  S4)n  wjis  graduated  at
Yale  in  1709,  and  was  tutor  then*  in  1772- 'a.  He
ha<i  begun  t«  study  law,  but  abandoiuHl  it  for  di-
vinity, and  on  5  Jan.,  1774,  was  onlained  jMistor  of
the  1st  church  in  Hartford.  He  acted  as  a  chajn
lain  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  and  served  the
patriot  cause  ably  with  tongue  and  j)en.  Prince-
ton gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  I),  m  1801.  Dr.
Strong  was  a  man  oi  wide  erudition,  and  great
natural  jKiwers.  His  sennons  were  clear  and  pithv.
and  he  had  great  fjicility  in  extem|H)rizing.  fn
1795  he  investwl  \mrt  of  the  estate  that  his  father
had  left  in  a  mercantile  establishment,  where  fail-
lire  involved  him  in  i)ecuniary  difficulties.  He  pro-
jected and  sustainea  the  "Conn<>cticut  P^.vangeli-
cal  Magazine."  which  was  continued  from  1800  till
1815:  and  he  also  was  the  chief  founder  of  the
Connecticut  missionary  society  in  17U8.  and  its
principal  manager  till  1800.  liesides  separate  dis-
courses, he  published  "  The  Doctrine  of  Eternal
Misery  consistent  with  the  Infinite  Benevolence  of
Go<l,"  in  replv  to  a  work  by  Rev.  Dr.  Joseph  Hunt-
ington (Hartford,  179<5), and  two  volumes  of  "Ser-
mons "  designeil  to  give  aid  and  direction  to  reviv-
als (1798  and  1800).  He  also  projecte«l  and  was
the  i)rincipal  compiler  of  the  "  Hartford  Collection
of  Hymns,"  several  of  which  he  wrote  (171K*). — His
lirother,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Coventrv.Conn..
21  Sef.t..  175:J;  d.  in  Norwich.  Conn..  18  Dec.  IWM,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1772,  and  was  for  tiftv-
six  years  jiastor  of  the  1st  church  in  Norwich.  He
was  known  for  his  wide  information,  winning  man-
ners, and  the  fervency  and  solenniity  of  his  pray-
ers. Princeton  gave  him  the  degrt'e  of  D.  I),  in
1807. He  publishecl  several  single  discourses.

STRONCt,  Nehemiah,  educHtx)r,  b.  in  North-
ampl«in.  Mass..  24  Feb..  17130;  d.  in  HridgeiH>rt.
Conn..  12  Aug..  1807.  He  was  graduate<l  at  Vale
in  1755.  was  tutor  there  in  1757-'0O.  and  serve«l  as
na.st^ir  of  a  church  at  Oranby.  Conn.,  in  1701-'8.
In  Decemlwr,  1770.  he  U'canjethe  first  professor  of
mathematics  ami  natural  philosophy  at  Vale,  which
chair  he  held  till  1781.  He  then  resigne<I  and
studied  law,  but  practised  little,  and  after  n'siding
in  New  Milford.  Conn.,  remove*!  to  BridgejMirt.
Prof.  Strong  nwirrie<l  a  woman  whose  first  hus-
Iwnd.  as  was  universally  l»elieve<l.  had  perishe<l  at
stai,  but  he  returned  unexjiectetUy,  and  claime<l  his
wife,  who  left  her  s«HMnd  huslwind  for  her  first.
President  Timothy  Dwiuht  spoke  i>(  him  as  "  a  man
of  vigorous  understanding.'  He  published  "As-
tronomy  Improved"  (New Haven, 1784).  — His


brother.  KiMe«B,  jurist,  h.  in  Northaropton,  II
0  March.  17H6:  d.  in  Amhertt,  Uarn^  14  Dec^  1800.
wan  gnuluateil  at  Yale  in  17M,  and  atudicd  thf
ology.  but  after  pn  n.  l.ii.!.'  MvenU  ]r«af»,  and  »l«^
dining  offefH  of  p  mi  of  bin  Iw-alth.

left  the  minUtry  a  .w  In  Springfield,

Mass.  He  wan  luhiuili-d  u»  oil  attomcv  in  1701.
and  atlaineil  n'pulation  at  the  bar.  lie  waa  a
reprewntative  ni  the  p'neml  court  in  ITOT-D.a
stata  Bcnator  in  179:t.  and  a  judge  of  the  i4atc  mi-
preme  court  in  1800- *5.  Harvard  gave  him  th«  d»-
gre«'  of  lAi.  D.  in  180.1.— Simeon'*  grandfOD,  Hat*
Hhail  MaMon,  lawyer,  b.  in  Ambent,  Maaa.,  8 Sept.,
I8i:t;  d.  in  lliuiiie,  Wi».,  9  March,  1804.  wan  the
mn  of  Hezekiah  W.  Strong,  who  attaine<i  n-ptita-
tion  as  a  lawyer  in  Troy.  N.  Y. The  -  <!

two  years  at  Amhen<t  and  one  at  I'l.:
n-ad  law  and  was  admitteil  to  the  \mr  at  i  r<>v.  nml
in  June,  \KW,  removeil  to  Racine.  Wis.  In  1839  he
was  electinl  to  the  territorial  council,  where  he  waa
one  of  a  committee  to  revise  the  lawH  «»f  the  terri-
tory, and  he  served  again  in  l844-'7.  In  1846  he
was  in  the  con%'ention  that  framed  a  state  consti-
tution, where  he  took  an  active  |mrt.  but  resigned
l>efort>  the  close  of  the  session,  and  lalwred  Miooem-
fully  for  its  defeat  at  the  |m>I1s.  In  1840  he  waa
elected  again  to  the  legislature,  and  took  an  im-
iK>rtant  part  in  the  revision  of  the  state  statutes.
Mr.  Strong  wa*^  an  active  sup|K>rter  of  the  Nation-
al government  during  the  civil  war.  He  was  a
large  contributor  toward  the  establishment  of  Ra-
cine college. —  Marshall  Ma.son's  nephew,  Latham
Cornell,  jMHit,  b.  in  Trov.  N.  Y..  12  June.  1H45;  d.
in  Tarrvtown.  N.  Y..  17  Ik-c..  187i».  was  the  son  of
Henry  Wright  Strong,  a  lawyer  of  Tn>y.  who  wan
six  years  reconler  of  the  city,  and  five  vears  in  the
state  s(>nate.  The  son  was  graduated  in  1808  at
Cnion  c<}||ege.  where  he  was  class  jKR-t,  and.  after
studying  at  HeidellH-rg.  was  for  three  yean  aaao-
ciate  «Hlitor  of  the  Troy  "  Daily  Whig."  suhneqaent-
ly  devoting  himself  to  literature.  His  first  verws
were  written  when  he  was  fifteen  years  ol«l.  and  he
coiitinue<I  to  contribute  po«>try  to  jR*riodicals  till
his  death.  He  was  also  the  author  of  letters  fn»m
Kurojie.  and  "  Sleepv  Hollow  .Sketches"  in  Troy
newsimpers.  His  puhlishe<l  volumes  include  "  Cas-
tle Windows"  (Troy.  1870) ;  "  Poke  0'M<¥)nshine"
(New  York.  1878);  and  "  Mi«Isummer  Dreams"
(1879).— Simeon's  gn'at-gramlson.  William  Kaier-
Hon,  soldier,  b.  in  Granville.  Washington  co.,  N.  Y.,
10  Aug.,  1840.  is  the  son  of  John  R  Stmng.  a  mer-
chant and  manufactun'r.  who  in  18.W  remove*]  to
Wis<'onsin  and  Ijecame  a  farmer.  The  s<in  studi*-*!
law  in  Racine.  Wis.,  in  1857- '01.  and  wa>»  admitttni
to  the  Ijar  in  the  latter  year.  He  then  raisetl  a
company,  which  was  assigne*!  to  the  2<1  Wist«on»in
regiment,  and  as  its  canlain  ser\'e<I  at  Blarkbuni's
Fortl  and  IJull  Run.  lie  was  promolwl  major  of
the  12th  Wisconsin  on  12  Sept..  an<l  saw  service  in
Mi.sst)uri.  Kansas,  and  New  Mexico.  He  was  then
on  stall  duty  with  the  .\riny  of  the  Tennesse**.  uiih
rank  of  lieutenant-<M>Ionel,  serv«il  in  the  '»
burg  camjMiign,  ami  in  18<M  became  ins|ieft<>i  -
eral  of  the  De|>artment  and  Army  of  the  Ten lu-.—
see.  He  was  chief  of  staff  to  (ten.  Oliver  O.  IIi»w-
ard  in  the  march  thr«>ugh  the  Candinas.  was  pro-
niote*!^*^^^,  torank  from  22  Jul v,  18<M.for  "gal-

lantr>on  the  field  of  Imttle"  at \"- nnd  on

21  March.  \Ht\.\  was  bri'vetted  bri.  ral  of

volunt«vrs. He  was  inspiftor-geu' :  Kreed-

men's  bureau  from  .Mav.  1865,  till  .SoptemU'r,  1886,
and  frf)m  1807  till  1873  wa-»  sivrptarr  of  the  Peah-
tigo  lumlwr  company  in  Chicago,  Ilf.,  of  which  he
has  Iteen  president  since  the  latter  year. — WIlllAM
Kerley,  soldier,  grandson  of  Simeon's  first  cousin.


724


STRONG


STRONG


Josiah,  b.  in  Duanesburg,  N.  Y.,  30  April,  1805 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  15  March.  1868,  became  an
extensive  wool  merchant  in  New  York  city,  but
early  retired  from  business  to  his  estate  in  Geneva,
N.  Y.  He  returned  to  his  former  occupation  for  a
time  in  1843,  but  at  the  openinjf  of  the  civil  war
was  in  Egy{)t.  He  had  been  active  in  politics  as  a
Democrat,  but  at  once  set  out  for  France,  where  he
met  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont  and  others,  and  was
instrumental  in  the  purchase  of  arms  for  the  Na-
tional government.  On  his  return  he  mjide  patri-
otic addresses,  and  on  28  Sept.,  1801,  on  the  solici-
tation of  merchants  in  New  York,  was  made  a
brigadier-general  of  volunteei"s.  He  served  for
some  time  under  Fremont,  and  was  in  command  at
Cairo,  111.,  but  on  20  Oct.,  1803,  resigned  his  com-
mission. On  his  return  to  New  York,  while  riding
in  Central  park,  he  was  thrown  from  his  carriage,
receiving  injuries  that  paralyzed  him  for  life,  and
finally  caused  his  death.

STRONG,  Paschal  Neilson,  clergyman,  b.  in
Setauket,  Suffolk  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  Feb.,  1793 ;  d.  in
St.  Croix,  W.  I.,  7  April,  1825.  He  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1810,  at  the  head  of  his  class,  stud-
ied theology  under  Dr.  John  M.  Mason,  and  was
ordained  as  one  of  the  pastors  of  the  Collegiate
Dutch  Reformed  church,  New  York,  14  July,  1810.
In  1824  he  was  seized  with  a  pulmonary  affection,
which  was  the  cause  of  his  early  death.  He  had
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.,  and  served  as  a  trus-
tee of  Columbia  in  1822-'25.  During  his  short  pas-
torate he  obtained  a  reputation  as  a  pulpit  orator.
Dr.  Strong  published  *'  The  Pestilence  a  Punish-
ment for  Public  Sins:  a  Sermon  preached  after  the
Cessation  of  the  Yellow  Fever  "  (New  York,  1822),
which  attracted  much  attention. — His  brother,
Thomas  Morris,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cooperstown,
N.  Y.,  20  April,  1797;  d.  in  Flatbush,  Long
Island,  N.  Y.,  14  June,  1801,  was  graduated  at  Co-
lumbia in  1810,  studied  at  Princeton  theological
seminary,  and  wjis  pastor  of  the  Dutch  Reformed
church  in  Flatbush  front  1822  till  his  death.  He
published  a  "  History  of  the  Town  of  Flatbush  "
(New  York,  1842).

STRONG,  Samuel  Henry,  Canadian  jurist,  b.
m  Dorsetshire,  England,  in  1825.  He  accompanied
his  father,  the  Rev.  Samuel  T.  Strong,  to  Canada
when  a  boy,  and  wjis  educated  at  Kingston  and
Ottawa.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1848,  and  began  practice  in  Toronto.  In  1850
he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  commission  for
consolidating  the  public  general  statutes  of  Up-
per Canada,  and  Canada,  and  labored  at  this  work
till  its  completion  in  1859.  He  was  elected  a
teacher  of  the  Law  society  of  Upper  Canada  in
1800,  appointed  queen's  counsel  in  1803,  and  made
vice-chancellor  for  Ontario,  27  Dec,  1869.  He  was
transferred  to  the  court  of  error  and  appeal,  27
May,  1874,  and  on  8  Oct.,  1875,  was  appointed  a
puisne  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Canada.

STRONG,  Selah,  jurist,  b.  in  Setauket,  Suffolk
CO.,  N.  Y.,  25  Dec,  1737;  d.  there,  4  July,  1815.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Provincial  congress  in
1775,  served  as  a  captain  in  the  Revolution,  was  a
state  senator  in  1792-'0,  and  first  judge  of  the
county  court  of  common  f)leas  from  1783  till  1793.
— His  grandson,  Selah  Brewster,  jurist,  b.  in
Setauket,  1  May,  1792 ;  d.  there,  29  Nov.,  1872,  was
the  son  of  Thomas  S.  Strong,  who  was  first  judge
of  the  common  pleas  for  his  county  in  1810-'23.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1811,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1814,  and  was  district
attorney  of  Suffolk  county  from  1821  till  1841.  He
was  a  member  of  congress  in  1843-'5,  having  been
chosen  as  a  Democrat,  and  in  1847-'00  was  a  judge


of  the  state  supreme  court.  In  1807  he  was  fL
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention.
Judge  Strong  gained  a  high  reputation  by  his
opinions  on  the  bench. — Another  grandson,  OliTCr
Smith,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  11
Dec,  1800  ;  d.  in  Mount  Vernon.  N.  Y.,  30  April,
1874,  was  the  son  of  Benjamin  Strong  (1770-1851),
a  merchant  of  New  York,  who  was  president  of
the  Dry  Dock  company  in  1833-'7,  and  of  the  Sea-
man's savings  bank  in  1834-'51,  and  for  31  years
engineer  of  the  fire  department.  Oliver  was  grad-
uated at  Columbia  in  1825,  became  a  merchant  in
New  York,  and  from  early  youth  was  active  in
philanthropic  measures,  f^rom  1856  till  his  death
he  was  president  of  the  Society  for  the  reformation
of  juvenile  delinquents,  of  which  he  had  long  been
a  director,  and  the  prosperity  of  the  House  of  ref-
uge is  largely  due  to  his  efforts.  He  was  also  a
director  of  the  New  York  institution  for  the  deaf
and  dumb,  made  himself  familiar  with  methods  of
deaf-mute  instruction,  and  by  his  earnest  efforts
before  the  legislature  secured  many  measures  for
their  moral  and  mental  improvement.  He  resided
for  many  years  in  Jersey  City,  and  in  1848  was
chosen  to  the  New  Jersey  legislature. — Another
grandson,  George  Templeton,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  26  Feb.,  1820 ;  d.  there,  21  July,  1875,
was  the  son  of  George  Washington  Strong  {1783-
1855),  a  lawyer  of  much  repute  in  his  day,  who  was
successively  the  partner  of  John  Wells,  George
Griffin,  and  Marshall  S.  Bidwell.  The  son  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1838,  became  a  lawyer,
and  married  a  daughter  of  Samuel  B.  Ruggles.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  treasurer  and  one  of
the  executive  committee,  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  com-
mission, in  which  capacity  he  rendered  valuable
service.  Mr.  Strong  was  an  accomplished  scholar,
and  his  library  was  among  the  finest  in  the  city.
It  was  sold  in  New  York  city  in  November,  1878.

STRONG,  Theodore,  mathematician,  b.  in
South  Hadley,  Mass.,  26  July,  1790 ;  d.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  1  Feb.,  1869.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1812,  and  became  a  tutor  in  mathemat-
ics at  Hamilton.  He  held  the  professorship  of
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  from  1816
until  1827,  and  then  accepted  a  call  to  Queen's  col-
lege (now  Rutgers),  where  he  filled  a  similar  chair.
He  continued  an  active  member  of  the  faculty
until  1861,  when  he  was  matle  professor  emeritus,
but  in  1863  he  severed  his  connection  with  the
college,  of  which  he  had  served  also  as  vice-presi-
dent from  1839.  His  original  work  was  entirely
in  the  line  of  pure  mathematics,  and  in  his  knowl-
edge of  this  subject  it  may  be  doubted  whether  he
had  a  superior.  He  siicceeded  in  solving  by  a  di-
rect method  the  irreducible  case  of  cubic  equa-
tions left  by  Cardan,  which  had  baffled  the  test
mathematicians  of  Europe,  and  he  also  discovered
a  method  of  extracting  by  a  direct  process,  for  the
first  time,  any  root  of  any  integral  number.  The
honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Hamilton  in  1815,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Rut-
gers in  1835.  He  was  a  member  of  the  chief  sci-
entific societies  of  the  United  States,  and  was
named  by  congress  in  1863  as  one  of  the  corporate
members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  His
papers,  about  60  in  number,  are  devoted  almost
exclusively  to  mathematics, and  appeared  princi-
pally in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"  and
m  the  "  Mathematical  Miscellany."  Among  the
memoirs  that  he  read  before  the  National  academy
of  sciences  are  "  Notes  on  the  Parallelogram  of
Forces  and  on  Virtual  Velocities  "  (1864) ;  "*'  On
the  Integration  of  Differential  Equations  of  the
First  Order  and  Higher  Degrees"  (1864) ;"  A  New


STRONG


STRUVK


785


Thixtrv  of  tlio  Kii-st  I'rinriplen  of  tho  DifTonMitial  '
CalciiIuH"  (1H<;.*»):  "A  Now  Thwiry  of  I'lnn«'tnry
Motion  "  (IHOO):  and  "  On  a  Procfss  of  Inti-Kratioii
umhI  in  tlieCaM*  of  a  IManot'fl  Oil>it  clistiirlMHi  liy
Small  lAin-es  "  (1807).  IIi'als4)  pulijif.h*'*!  "  A  Troa-
tiw  on  KliMiipntary  and  Ilijfhcr  Alfji-bra"  (Now
York.  IMU),  and  "A  Trt«tiso  on  tin-  DilTfn'ntial
and  Intojrrnl  Calculns"  (1HI59).  Sf  a  Mkotrli  of
his  life  \>y  Joseph  1*.  Hnulley  in  "  Hiocraphi<-al
Memoirs  of  the  National  Aca<lemy  of  htciences"
(Washinjrt<m.  18«fl).

STRON<i,  TitiiH,  tlerpryman,  h.  in  Kr.iffhton,
Mass..  2i>  .Ian.,  17H7;  d.  in  (irtH-nfield.  Mas.s..  in
June,  1S.V).  At  the  ape  of  fourti-en  he  went  into  a
printinK-<»in('e  in  Northamjiton,  Ma.ss..  to  learn  the
trade,  and  continue*!  there  f«)r  four  years.  Next
he  iM'jfan  the  study  of  law,  but  >;ave  it  up  hy  reason
of  failinp  health.  He  taught  in  various  nlaees,
and  bejran  to  study  thooloey  in  1807.  Altiiou^rh
of  a  Congregationalist  faniilv,  he  sought  for  onlers
in  the  Protestant  Kpiscopaf  ehurch  in  1812.  He
was  onlainwl  deacon  in  Iknlham.  Mass..  24  March.
1814,  l)y  liishop  Griswold,  an<i  priest  in  St.  JanuVs
church,  (Jrwnfield,  7  April,  1814,  l>y  the  «ime
bishop.  He  became  rector  of  the  church  in  (Jreen-
field.  and  held  that  post  during  the  rest  of  his  life.
Trinity  gave  him  the  degrinj  of  1).  I),  in  IWW.
Dr.  Strong  aided  in  the  growth  of  the  Kpiscojwl
church  in  Massachusetts,  \  ermont,  and  New  Ham[>-
shire.  He  published  "'Tears  of  Columbia,  a  IV>-
iitiwil  Poem"(lH12):  "A  Candid  Kxainination  of
the  Kpiscopal  Church  "  (1818):  "Young  Scholar's
Manual"  (1821);  "The  Deerfield  Captive,  a  Tale
for  Children"  (ISJJl);  and  "A  Sermon  on  the
Death  of  Rev.  Dr.  William  Croswell  "  (Boston,
1851).  He  also  published  oc-casional  sermons  and
addres.ses,  and  contribute<l  freely  to  journals  and
magazines  on  religious  and  other  topics.

STROTHER,  David  Hunter,  author,  b.  in
Martiiisburg,  Va.  (now  W.  Va.).  1(J  Sept.,  181(i;  d.
in  Charleston.  W.  Va.,  8  March.  1888.  In  1821>  he
went  to  Philadelphia  to  study  dmwiiig  with  Pietro

Ancora,  and  seven
years  later  l»ecame
a pupil  of Samuel

F.  n.  Morse  in  New
York.  He  went  to
the  west  in  IKW,
travelling  thnnigh
various  states,  and
in  1840  visited  Ku-
rof)e,  remaining  five
years.  On  his  return
he  settled  in  New
York,  where,  under
thedirei'tion  of  John

G.  Chapman,  he  ac-
(juired  the  art  of
drawing  on  woo<l
for the engnivers.

O^  In  1848  he  ret u rue*  1

nublishiHl, under  the
pen-name  of  "Porte  Crayon."  the  first  of  his  series
of  ymfn'Ts  in  "  Har|H'r*s'  Magazine."  They  relate
chiefly  to  Virginia  and  the  south,  and  were  illus-
trate<l  by  himself.  .Many  i>f  them  were  afterward
published  in  lK>ok-form  under  the  title  of  "The
Hlackwater  Chn>nicle  '•  (New  York,  18.W)  an<l  "  Vir-
ginia Hlustratwl"  (18.17).  At  the  oin-ning  of  the
war  in  18<n  he  joined  the  National  army  as  captain
and  assistant  a«ljutant-general,  l»e<'ame  colonel  of
the  H«l  West  Virginia  cavalry,  and  resigrie<l  in  Sep-
tember, 1804. hi 1805  he  rec-eivcd  the  brevet  of


brigwlier-genernl  of  vohinleerK  .\fter  hU  rvlum
to  his  home  at  fVrkeley  Spring*  he  omtinurd  for
S4»yeral  years  to  furnish  i»ket<'he«  to  the  magucineM.
He  was  a  cli'Vcr  writer  and  an  arliKt  of  evitioidrrabU*
ability. His  (H'ticil  wa  .k«ii>nally  emplovMl

in  illustrating  the  w<  'n-nt,  notably  John

I*.  Kenni-ilyV  "  Swallov.  i.,„,,  Hiid  "Rub'uf  the
I^>wl."  In  I871I  he  was  apiiointeil  coiHRil'>gaiCfml
to  Mexico,  which  |M>st  he  h)-ld  until  1^188.

STROrn.  <ieoiT(>  MrlKmpll.  jurist,  b.  in
Strou<lsliurg.  I'a..  12  (K-t.,  17H5:  «1.  in  ()enn»n-
town.  Pa..  20  June.  1875.  lie  wni*  gnwiualetl  «t
Princet4in  in  18|7,  nnd  ailmitte<l  to  the  Imr  of
Pennsylvania  in  1819.  For  many  year*  h«  w«*
judge  of  the  <listri<i  ••ourt  of  Philadelphia.  He
was  a  contributor  to  law  magazines  and  the  author
of  a  volume  entitletl  ".Sketch  of  the  I*awi«  relative
to  Slavery  in  the  Several  States"  (Philadelphia,
1827:  enlarg.Ml  ed.,  18.',«).

STRl'ENSEK,  Karl  (rtmo'-en-My).  Oerman
iiavigator,  b.  in  Bremen  aUiut  1595;  d.  in  AmMer-
dam  about  lO.'iO.  He  was  the  son  of  a  pilot,  en-
tere<l  the  s«'rvice  of  the  Dutch  Kasi  India  com-
pany, and  acquirifl  the  reputation  of  a  suce<'ssful
navigator.  Im- discovery  of  the  .Strait  of  Ix*maire,
which  allowed  the  Dutch  to  rea<'h  the  Pacific
ocean  in  a  few  days,  greatly  annoyed  the  Siwnish
authoritie.s.  and  they  intendi><l  to  /orlify  the  strait,
which  they  claime«l  to  be  a  Sfianish  iH>swf*ion.
The  states-general  of  Holland,  with  the  intention
of  antici|)ating  Sjmin,  ordere<l  .Stniense**  with  a
fleet  to  chooM"  a  favond)le  jK>int  for  const  met  ing  a
fortress.  Sailing  from  the  Texel  in  HMJl,  St ruen»ee
entered  the  Strait  of  Jjcmaire  in  Dt-cemU-r.  and
stoj)ping  at  Mauritius  liay,  he  made  a  sur>'ey  of  the
small  Stathouder  ishmds.  which  he  found  t^ie  mort
convenient  for  buihling  a  fort  to  comnuuxl  the
strait.  He  afterward  sailwl  around  Staten-land,
taking  exact  jistronomicaloliservations  at  different
|M>ints  of  the  coast,  and  cm  his  return  to  the  Strait
of  licmaire  made  numerous  sounilings.  After  hi*
arrival  in  Amstenlam  he  pres*'ntwl  his  n'|»ort  to
the  states- general,  but  the  project  of  fortifying
the  strait  was  afterwanl  aliandone<l  as  im|»racti-
cable.  A  narrative  of  his  jouniey  wais  written  by
his  clerk  under  the  title  "  Ik'sch'ryving  der  Reit,
ondenionjen  onder  gezag  en  vrntr  kosten  van  de
Kdele  Heeren  der  Staten  generaal,  nmir  de  Zfe-
engte  van  I^*-  Main-  en  de  Zui«lze<'  d«M>r  Karl
.Struensee  van  Bremen  "  (.\msterdan>.  1045 ;  Frvnch
version.  1(547;  I^tin.  1048).

STRl' VE,  <<iiKta>'  von,  German  agitator,  b.  in
Munich.  Bavariji,  11  Oct..  1805;  d.  in  Vienna,
Austria.  21  Aug..  1870.  He  studied  law.  spent  a
short  time  in  the  diplomatic  s<»rvi«*  of  the  duke
of  Ohlenburg.  then  settUnl  a.s  an  adv.n-Me  in  .Mann-
heim, liaden.  and  soon  U-came  known  as  a  hiU-ral
jounialist  and  |)olitical  speaker.  He  alsi.  gave  at-
tention to  phrenology,  and  publishinl  thnt-  Ixioks
on  the  subject.  As'eilitor  of  the  "Mannheimer
Journal."  he  was  n'|)eate<ny  ctmdemnetl  to  im-
prisonment. When  he  was  t-ompilliHl  in  1H46  to
ri'tire  from  the  management  t>f  this  iwimt.  he
founde«l  the  "  Deut-sche  Zus<hauer."  m  which  he
addressinl  his  radical  M«iitiments  tn  h  largiT  lirele
of  nadirs.  He  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Baileii
uprising  of  1S48.  and  attempteil.  with  Friedrich
Hitker.  to  establisl)  a  n«public.  After  the  failun-
of  the  first  insurrwtion.  he  fled  to  France,  and
thenc-e  to  Switzerland.  wher»«  he  and  Carl  P.  Ilein-
zen  «lrew  up  a  "plan  for  revol.  '  re-

publicanizing  (lermany." In  ."^  he

returned  with  a  Nnly  t»f  follow.; .md

^tir^e^l  ui»  a  »«>cond  insurrection.  After  hit  defeat
at  StaulTen.  ho  was  am^ted,  25  Sept..  IK48,  and


726


STRYKER


STUART


on  30  March,  1849,  was  condemned  to  five  years'
solitary  confinement  for  high  treason.  He  was
taken  to  the  Bruchsal  penitentiary  on  12  May,  but
on  the  following  day  the  revolutionists  took  posses-
sion of  the  government,  and  set  him  free.  lie  went
to  the  fortress  of  Rastadt,  and  stirred  the  soldiers
of  the  garrison  to  revolt  and  fight  on  the  side  of
the  people  against  the  Prussians.  lie  was  the
leader  of  the  Itepublicun  party  in  the  constituent
assembly.  When  that  body  was  dissolved  after
the  victory  of  the  Prince  of  Prussia  over  the  armies
of  Biulen  and  the  Palatinate,  Struve  again  escaped
into  Switzerland.  The  authorities,  after  two
months,  expelled  him  from  that  country.  He  went
to  France,  and  afterward  to  England,  and  in  1851
emigrated  to  the  United  States.  He  edited  the
"  Deutsche  Zuschauer  "  in  New  York  city,  but  soon
discontinued  its  publication  because  of  insufficient
support.  He  wrote  several  novels  and  a  drama  in
German,  and  then  undertook,  with  the  assistance
of  his  wife,  the  composition  of  a  universal  history
from  the  standpoint  of  radical  republicanism.  In
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  vol-
unteer service  as  an  officer  in  the  8th  New  York
regiment,  but  retired  when  Prince  Felix  Salm  Salra
succeeded  Louis  Blenker  as  its  colonel.  In  1863
he  returned  to  Germany,  availing  himself  of  a
general  amnesty,  and  thenceforth  he  devoted  him-
self to  literary  pursuits  and  lectured  on  phrenology
in  Stuttgart,  Coburg,  and  Vienna.  He  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  consul  at  Sonneberg  in  1865,  but  the
I'huringian  states  refused  to  issue  his  exequa-
tur. His  publications  include  "  Politische  Briefe  "
(Mannheim,  1846) :  "  Das  otfentliche  liecht  des
deutschen  Bundes  "  (2  vols.,  1846);  "  Grundziige  der
Staatswissenschaft "  (4  vols.,  Frankfort,  1847-8);
"  Geschichte  der  drei  Volkserhebungen  in  Baden  "
(Bern,  1849) :  "  Weltgeschichte  "  (6  vols..  New  York,
1856-'9;  7th  ed.,  with  a  continuation,  Coburg,
1866-'9);  "Das  Revolutionszeitalter "  (New  York,
1859-'60);  "  Diesseits  und  jenseits  des  Oceans"
(Coburg,  1864-'5);  "  Kurzgefasster  Wegweiser  fiir
Auswanderer"  (Bamberg,  1867);  "Pflanzenkost  die
Grundlage  einer  neuen  Weltanschauung  "  (Stutt-
gart, 1869);  "Das  Seelenleben,  oder  die  Natur-
geschichte  des  Menschen"  (Berlin,  1869);  and
"Eines  Fiirsten  Jugendliebe,"  a  drama  (Vienna,
1870).  —  His  wife,  Ainalie,  d.  on  Staten  island,
N.  Y.,  in  1862,  was  the  author  of  "  Erinnerungen
aus  den  badischen  Freiheitskarapfen  "  (Hamburg,
1850);  and  "Historische  Zeitbilder  "  (3  vols.,  Bre-
men, 1850).

STRYKER,  John,  soldier,  b.  2  March,  1740;  d.
near  Millstone,  N.  J.,  25  March,  1776.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  Revolutionary  war  he  was  commis-
sioned a  captain  of  a  troop  of  light  horse  in  the
Somerset  county,  N.  J.,  militia,  and  afterward  at-
tached to  the  state  troops.  He  was  a  zealous  pa-
triot during  the  entire  war  and  performed  conspicu-
ous service  whenever  the  British  foraging  parties
attempted  to  raid  into  the  Jerseys.  lie  had  the
confidence  of  the  public  to  an  unusual  degree,  espe-
cially in  that  portion  of  New  Jersey  around  Mill-
stone, Somerset  co.,  where  he  owned  a  large  in-
herited estate.  His  family  mansion  still  remains
to  this  day. — His  son,  Peter  I.,  practised  as  a  phy-
sician in  Millstone  and  Soraerville,  was  afterward
a  judge,  and  during  three  sessions  was  president
of  the  New  Jersey  senate,  and  by  virtue  of  this
office  acted  for  several  months  as  governor  of  the
state. — His  grand-nephew,  James,  jurist,  b.  on
Staten  island,  N.  Y.,  2  Jan.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Sharon,  i
Conn.,  3  June,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Colum-
bia in  1809,  studied  law  with  De  Witt  Clinton,  and
began  practice  in  New  York  city  at  the  age  of


twenty-one.  During  the  war  with  Great  Britain
in  1812-'15  he  served  as  a  captain.  He  removed  to
Buffalo  in  1830,  having  been  appointed  judge  of
the  court  of  Erie  county,  and  retained  that  post
for  ten  years.  He  edited  for  several  years  the
Buffalo  "  Republic,"  and  he  also  founded  and  con-
ducted the  "American  t^uarterlv  Register  and
Magazine"  (6  vols.,  Philadelphia,  i848-'51).

STRYKER,  William  Sciidder,  soldier,  b.  in
Trenton,  N.  J.,  6  June,  1838,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1858,  and  began  the  study  of  law.  In
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  assisted  in  organ-
izing the  14tn  New  Jerstiv  volunteers,  and  in  E'eb-
ruary,  1803,  was  ordered  to  Hilton  Head,  S.  C,
where  he  served  as  aide  to  Gen.  Quincy  A.  Gill-
more,  with  the  rank  of  major,  participating  in  the
capture  of  Morris  Island  and  in  the  night  attack  on
Fort  Wagner.  Returning  to  the  north  on  account
of  illness,  he  became  senior  paymaster  in  charge  of
all  disbursements  in  the  district  of  Columbus,  Ohio,
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  meritorious
services,  and  resigned  on  30  June,  1866.  Soon  after-
ward he  was  placed  on  the  military  staff  of  the
governor  of  New  Jersey,  and  since  12  April,  1867,
he  has  filled  the  office  of  adjutant-general  of  the
state.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1866,  and  for
some  time  was  president  of  the  Trenton  banking
company.  Gen.  Strvker  has  compiled  a  "  Roster  of
Jerseymen  in  the  Revolutionary  War"  (Trenton,
1872)  and  a  "  Roster  of  New  Jersey  Volunteers  in
the  Civil  War  "  (1876).  He  has  also  published  many
monographs  relating  to  the  history  of  New  Jersey,
among  these  being  "  The  Reed  Controversy  "  (Tren-
ton, 1876) :  "  New  Jersey  Continental  Line  in  the
Virginia  Campaign  of  1781 "  (1882);  "  New  Jersey
Continental  Line  in  the  Indian  Campaign  of  1779
(1885) ;  and  "  The  New  Jersey  Volunteers  (Loyal-
ists) in  the  Revolutionary  War"  (1887).

STUART,  Alexander  Hugh  H.,  statesman,  b.
in  Staunton,  Va.,  2  April,  1807;  d.  there,  13  Feb.,
1891.  His  father,  Archibald  Stuart,  saw  service
in  the  war  of  the  Revolution,  studied  law  under
Thomas  Jefferson,  was  a  member  of  the  conven-
tion that  ratified  the  U.  S.  constitution,  and  be-
came president  of  the  state  senate  and  judge  of
the  general  court  of  Virginia.  The  son  spent  one
year  at  William  and  Mary  college,  and  then  studied
law  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1828.  The  same  vear  he  was  admit-
ted to  practice  in  Staunton.  lie  began  his  politi-
cal career  as  a  member  of  the  Young  men's  con-
vention held  in  support  of  Henry  Clay  at  Wash-
ington in  1832.  He  was  elected"  to  the  Virginia
house  of  delegates  in  1836,  and  the  two  succeeding
years,  but  declined  re-election  in  1839.  He  was  a
member  of  congress  from  1841  till  1843,  and  took
an  active  part  in  the  debates.  He  was  a  presiden-
tial elector  on  the  Clay  ticket  in  1844,  and  on  the
Taylor  ticket  in  1848,  and  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Fillmore  secretary  of  the  interior,  serving  from
12  Sept.,  1850,  till  3  March,  1853. He  was  a  dele-

fate  to  the  national  convention  that  nominated
lillard  Fillmore  for  the  presidency  in  1856,  sat  in
the  Virginia  senate  from  1857  till  1861,  and  was  a
member  of  the  Virginia  convention  of  1861.  As
an  Old  Line  Whig  he  opposed  the  secession  of  his
state  to  the  last.  After  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Rob-
ert E.  Lee  at  Appomattox,  he  was  one  of  the  leaders
of  the  first  movement  in  the  south  to  re-establish
peaceful  relations  with  the  U.  S.  government,  and
presided  at  a  mass  meeting  at  Staunton  with  that
object  on  8  May,  1865.  He  was  elected  to  congress
in  the  same  year,  but  was  excluded  by  the  oaths
that  were  required.  In  December,  1868.  he  began
what  was  known  as  "  the  new  moveij^ent "  of  the


STUART


STUART


727


"commitUH?  of  nine,"  which,  with  tho  0(>-o|«rKtion  I
of  l'n»>i«h'iit  (iniiit,  rt'dwined  Ihf  state  from  luili*
tnry  rule  niul  accuriHl  th«  rtMnovul  of  objwtion-
at>le  |)n»visi(>iis  in  the  t'nilerwiKNl  conMlilulioii.
Ill*  was  ntrtor  of  tho  University  of  Virf(ini>i  from
IM7«»  till  1882.  and  fn.in  IHS4  till  188<i,  whi-n  he  n-
bigne<l  iHfause  of  ailvaneeil  ajfe.  lie  was  a  nienilxT
of  thi<  boani  of  trustees  of  the  Ueor^ia  Peabody
oducutionai  fund,  and  the  hist  survivur  of  the
Fillmore  cahinet.  Mr.  Stuart  was  for  many  years
president  of  the  Virijinia  historical  s«KMety. — His
cousin.  JamcH  EwelT  Ilrown,  S4)ldier,  h.  ni  Pat-
rick countv,  ViL,  0  Feb.,  1H:{;{  ;  d.  in  RK'hmond,
Va.,  12  Mav,  1804.  entered  the  V.  S.  njilitary
aca<lemy  after  spendinf;  two  years  at  Kmory
and  Henry  college,  was  gra«luated  in  18.'>4,  joined

the  rejjiment  of
mounte<l  riflemen
that  was  then  si'rv-
inj;  in  Texas,  and
took  a  creditable
part  in  actions
wUh  the  A|ia<-ho
Indians.  In  18r>.'i
he  was  transferred
to  the  1st  U.S. cav-
alry with  the  rank
of  2d  lieutenant.
He  married  Flora,
a  daufjhtcr  of  Col.
Philip  St.  (teorge
C'<M)ke,  on  14  Nov.,
180."),  and  on  20
Dec.  was  [)romotetl
1st  lieutenant.  In
1850  his  regiment
was engaged in

?uolling  the  Kansas  disturl»ances,  and  in  18o7  in
ndian  warfare.  He  was  wounded  in  an  action
with  the  Chevenncs  on  Solomon's  river.  In  18.V.>
he  went  to  Washington  to  negotiate  with  the  war
department  conceniing  the  sale  of  a  sabre-attjich-
ment  that  he  ha<l  invented.  Going  to  Harper's
Ferry  with  Robert  E.  Lee  as  a  v«)lunteer  aide,  he
identified  John  Brown.  He  rejoined  his  regiment
at  Fort  Riley,  but  in  March.  1801,  obtained  leave  of
al>»ence,  iKMug  resolveil  to  direct  his  cnurse  by  the
action  of  his  state,  and  sent  in  his  resignation  after
Virginia  secedinl.  It  was  accepted  on  7  May,  just
after  he  had  received  notification  of  his  promotion
to  a  captaincy,  to  date  from  22  April,  18<U.  He  was
commissioned  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  infantry  in
the  service  of  the  state  of  Virginia,  and  as  colonel
of  cavalry  on  10  July.  He  performed  im|K)rtant
services  in  charge  of  the  outp)stsof  (Jen.  Jos«>ph  K.
Johnston's  army.  At  Bull  Run  he  c-ontributcd  to
the  Confederate  victory  by  efllciently  guarding  Hen.
Thomas  J.  Jackson's  left  flank,  and  driving  l»ack
the  Natitmal  attacking  force.  During  the  longccs-
sati(»n  of  operations  he  fH»rfect<*d  his  system  of  pick-
ets, was  engaged  in  many  cavalry  skirmishes,  and
Ikh  ame  brigadier-general  on  24  Sept.,  1801.  He  was
defeated  by  Cien.  l-iilwartl  ().  C.  Ord  at  Dranesville.
When  the'Con federates  retired  from  Vorktown  to
Richmond,  his  cavalry  guarded  their  rear.  In  the
n>i«ltlle  of  June,  1802".  he  conducte<I  a  daring  raid
in  the  rear  of  Gen.  McClellan's  army  on  the  Chicka-
hominy,  in  ortler  t^  determine  the  position  of  the
National  right.  He  was  incessantly  engageil  dur-
ing the  seven-days'  fight  lx«fore  Richmond.  On
2^i  July,  1802.  he  was  commissiontHl  as  major-gen-
eral of  cavalry.  On  '22  Aug.  he  crosstnl  the  R^ip-
pahannot'k,  iH«netrate<l  (ten.  John  Pope's  camp  at
Catlett's  station,  captun-tl  his  oilicial  correspond-
ence and  personal  effects,  and  made  prisoDen  of


•eTeml  oflUcrr*  -  "^  ' '  '  ..},i

he  made  an  atta  4(it

intn  th«  town  a  nngwie  of  iMlftulry,  »hJcU  took
many  prisoners  aod  OMTied  off  atom  of  mat  Tains.
His  cavalry  was  enngcd  in  Um  ■eoodid  battle  of
Bull  Run,  and  led  toe  advance  of  Stonewall  Jack-
son's cor|>s  in  the  etuuing  invasion  of  Manrland.
He |N>rforme<l imiKirtant wnriceii  at Antlrtam.

fruanling  with  artillery  an  eminence  on  Jnckwn'B
eft  that  was  cMsential  to  the  MH'uri*^  'on-

federate  {Nwition.  and  leailing  the  n  t|uit

result^"*!  in  the  repulse  of  (}en.  I*a1wui  > .  .'^umner'a
cor[>s.  A  few  wiH-k-f  later  he  chmmhI  the  PotOOMM
near  \Villiams|K>rt  at  Ihehemlof  1.800  picked  troop-
ers, gaimnl  the  rear  of  the  National  army,  rode  as
far  north  as  .Mercer>burg  ami  ChnmiM-rHl'tuix.  Pa.,
retununl  «)n  the  other  side  of  MH'lellan'n  i>o«iition.
and  recrosse<l  the  river  below  IIaqM>r'H  Ferr>\  At
Fre«lericksburg  .Stuart's  cavalry  guanled  t)i«  ex-
treme right  of  the  Confwlerate'line.  In  a  raid  to
Dumfries  he  ascertaini-«l  the  intendeti  moveroenta
of  the  National  tnK»|>s  by  means  of  forgi"d  tele-
grams that  he  sent  to  >\'ashington.  In  March,
180:{,  he  encountered  the  National  cavalry  at  Kelly**
Ford.  At  Chancellorsville  the  cavalry*  scrwned
Stonewall  Jackson's  march  to  the  rightOf  the  Na-
tional army.  After  Gen.  Jackson  was  mortally
wounded,  and  (ten.  Ambrose  P.  Hill  was  disabled,
the  commaml  of  Ja<'kson's  corps  devolve<l  temttora-
rilv  on  .Stuart,  who  tfK>k  command  in  the  nicht  of
2  Slay  and  dirc?ct«»«l  its  movements  during  tne  »-
vere  fighting  of  the  following  day.  He  le»l  two
charges  in  [H>rs^)n,  and  carrietl  the  ridge  of  Haiel
Grove,  which  was  the  key  to  the  flehl.  He  was  sent
forward  to  guard  the  flanks  of  the  advancing  col-
umns of  liee's  army  in  the  (tettysburg  canifiaign,
but  was  oppose«l  ami  chwke<l  by  the  National  cav-
alry at  Fleet wo<hI  Hill  and  Stevensburg.  with  hea%'y
losses  on  Ufth  sides.  At  .\l<lie  he  was  successful
in  an  encounter  with  the  National  cavalry,  but  at
Middleburg  and  Upperville  he  was  defeatwl.  He
was  directed  to  cr«>ss  the  P(»toraa<'  in  ailvance  of
the  infantry  column,  and  take  |K»sition  on  its  right.
He  held  the  [>ass  in  the  Blue  Ridgi>  for  a  while,
and  then  mmle  a  raid  in  the  rear  of  the  National
army,  rejoining  the  main  IkxIv  at  the  dose  ot  the
conflict  at  (Jettysburg.  The  K-sponsibility  for  this
movement  and  its  influence  on  the  event  have
Ix-en  the  subject  of  much  controversy.  In  the  re-
treat fn»m  (tettysburjj  Stuart  ginird*-*!  the  gaps  in
the  mountains.'  While  the  Confeilerate  army  wa»
intrenchi*<l  on  the  northern  Iwnk  •»!  the  Potomac,
he  engage*!  in  inde<'isive  conflicts  witb  the  cavaln*
of  Gen.  Judson  Kil|>atri«k  and  (Jen.  John  Bufonl.
While  the  cavalry  held  the  line  of  the  I{ap|Vihan-
mx-k,  during  the  n-st  of  the  summer  i>f  IWW,  he
evjidinl  (Jen.  KiljMitrick  at  ('ul|H'i«»>r  Court-Hous*-,
retire<l  from  (ten.  Bufonl  at  Jack's  .Shop,  after  a
severe  conflict,  but  fon-eil  liack  the  National  car-
airy  under  Gen.  Alfn-d  Pleasonton  at  Brandy  Sta-
tion, and  by  a  ruse  routed  the  bripide  of  (Jen.  Hen-
ry K.  Davies  near  Buckland.  After  (Jen.  (trant
c'rosstnl  the  Rapidan.  Stuart  le«l  the  ajJvance  of
(ten.  Ambn»se  P.  Hill's  cor|Ps.  When  (Jen.  Philip
H.  .Sheridan  with  his  cavalry  movetl  <»n  Richmond.
.Stuart,  by  a  rapid  c-ircuitous  man-h.  interixm-d  his
cavalry,  i^mcentrating  his  forces  at  Yellow  Taveni.
wher»''  he  was  mortally  woumletl  in  the  ob»tiiuUa
encagement  that  endisl  in  the  defeat  of  the  Con-
fe<lerates.  See  "Life  and  C«m|iaigns  of  Maior-
General  J.  H  B.  .Stuart."  bv  his  chief-of-nlaff.  Maj.
Henrv  B.  .M.Cl.llan  JUwi.-ii.  IHXoi.

STVART,  Arabrone  l*aM>al  Sfvllon.wlucator,
b.  in  Sterling.  Mass..  22  Nov..  1820.  He  was  prad-
uated  at  Brown  iu  1847.  and  till  ItMtt  Uught  in


728


STUART


STUART


Acadia  collepre,  Horton,  Nova  Scotia,  where,  after
teaching  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  North  Dan  vers,
Mass.,  he  returned  in  1853  as  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  chemistry,  but  in  1858  he  resigned  and
for  three  years  studied  chemistry  at  Gottingcn  and
Heidelberg.  On  his  return  he  was  called  to  the
charge  of  the  Worcester  academy,  and  later  became
assistant  instructor  of  chemistry  in  the  Lawrence
scientific  school  of  Harvard.  In  1808  he  accepted
the  chair  of  chemistry  in  Illinois  industrial  uni-
versity, where  he  remained  until  1874.  Prof.
Stuart  has  since  resided  chiefly  in  Lincoln,  Neb.,
where  he  is  interested  in  various  financial  institu-
tions. He  is  a  member  of  the  Chemical  society  of
Berlin,  a  fellow  of  the  American  association  for
the  advancement  of  science,  and  a  corresponding
member  of  the  New  York  academy  of  sciences.
His  chemical  researches  have  been  published  in
the  transactions  of  societies  of  which  he  is  a  mem-
ber and  in  technical  journals.

STUART,  Charles,  author,  b.  in  Jamaica,
West  Indies,  about  1783;  d.  near  Lake  Simcoe,
Canada,  in  1865.  His  father  was  a  British  officer,
who  fought  at  Bunker  Hill  and  in  other  battles  of
the  Revolution,  and  was  subsequently  stationed  in
the  West  Indies.  The  son  at  the  age  of  eighteen,
when  living  at  Belfast,  Ireland,  received  a  lieuten-
ant's commission  in  the  Madras  army.  He  was
promoted  captain,  received  a  severe  wound  in  an
encounter  with  native  insurgents,  and  after  thir-
teen years'  service,  returned  to  England,  and  was
retired  with  a  pension.  Some  time  later  he  re-
ceived a  grant  of  land  on  Lake  Simcoe,  and  was
commissioned  as  a  local  magistrate.  About  1822
he  settled  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  as  principal  of  the  acad-
emy, which  he  taught  for  several  years.  Prom
that  period  he  spent  much  of  his  time  in  the  United
States.  He  was  one  of  the  early  emancipationists,
and  took  part  with  Gerrit  Smith  in  anti-slavery
meetings,  Capt.  Stuart  was  the  author  of  several
pamphlets  that  were  published  by  the  British  and
foreign  anti-slavery  society,  the  most  effective  of
which  was  "  Prejudice  Vincible,"  which  was  re-
printed in  this  country.  He  published  a  volume
of  short  poems,  and  a  religious  novel  entitled  "  Par-
raul  of  Lum  Sing,  or  the  Missionary  and  the
Mountain  Chiefs."  His  principal  other  works  were
"  The  West  India  Question  :  Immediate  Emancipa-
tion would  be  Safe  and  Profitable "  (New  Haven,
1833) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Granville  Sharp  "  (New  York,
1836);  and  "Oneida  and  Oberlin:  the  Extirpation
of  Slaverv  in  the  United  States"  (Bristol,  1841).

STUART,  Charles  Beebe,  engineer,  b.  in  Chit-
tenango  Springs.  N.  Y..  4  June,  1814;  d.  in  Geneva,
N.  Y.,  4  Jan.,  1881.  He  entered  upon  the  profes-
sion of  civil  engineering,  was  for  some  time  state
engineer  of  New  York,  entered  the  service  of  the
U.  S.  government,  and  completed  the  Brooklyn  dry-
docks.  He  was  appointed  engineer-in-chief  of  the
U.  S.  navy  on  1  Dec,  1850,  and  resigned  on  30  June,
1853.  He  published  "  The  Naval  Dry-Docks  of  the
United  States  "  (New  York,  1851) ;  "  the  Naval  and
Mail  Steamers  of  the  United  States  "  (1853) ;  "  Rail-
roads of  the  United  States  and  Canada"  (1855);
"Water- Works  of  the  United  States"  (1855);  and
"Civil  and  Militarv  Engineers  of  America"  (1871).

STUART,  Charles  E.,  senator,  b.  in  Columbia
county,  N.  Y.,  25  Nov.,  1810;  d.  in  Kalamazoo,
Mich.,  in  1887.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  settled  in  Kalamazoo,  Mich.  Prom
1841  till  1846  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  legis-
lature, after  which  he  entered  the  National  house
of  representatives  as  a  Democrat,  serving  from  6
Dec,  1847,  till  3  March,  1849.  He  was  defeated  in
1848,  but  at  the  next  election  was  again  successful.


and  at  the  close  of  his  second  term  was  elected  to
the  U.  S.  senate,  serving  from  4  March,  1853,  till  3
March,  1859.  In  the  senate  he  was  chairman  of
the  committee  on  public  lands.  He  attended  the
National  Union  convention  at  Philadelphia  in  1866.

STUART,  (ieorge,  educator,  b.  m  Saratoga
countv,  N.  Y.,  about  1834.  He  was  taken  to  Phila-
delphia at  the  age  of  six  years,  passed  through  the
public  schools  of  that  city,  and  after  graduation  at
the  high-school  in  1852  engaged  in  teaching.  He
was  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  in  tlie  high-
school  in  1853-'6.  tutor  of  Latin  and  Greek  in
Haverhill  college  in  1856-'9,  professor  of  English
branches  in  Girard  college  in  1859-'62,  then  prin-
cipal of  a  grammar-school  till  1866,  and  since  that
date  has  been  professor  of  Latin  in  the  high-school.
As  co-editor  of  the  "Chase  and  Stuart  Classical
Series"  he  has  published,  with  Prof.  Thomas  Chase,
elementary  Latin  books  and  school  editions  of
Caesar's  "  Gallic  War  " ;  Cicero's  "  Select  Orations  " ;
and  works  of  Sallust,  Cornelius  Nepos,  Tacitus,
Virgil,  and  Ovid.  He  is  also  the  author  of  an  edu-
cational tract  on  "  The  liaison  d'etre  of  the  Public
High-School,"

STUART,  George  Hay,  philanthropist,  b.  in
County  Down,  Ireland,  2  Aprd,  1816 ;  d,  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  1  April,  1890.  He  came  to  Philadel-
phia in  1831,  and  was  a  merchant.  During  the
civil  war  he  was  president  of  the  U.  S.  Christian
commission.  He  presided  over  the  international
conventions  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  associa-
tions in  1859  and  1801,  and  over  the  Presbyterian
national  convention  in  Philadelphia  in  November,
1867,  was  aji  officer  in  the  American  Sunday-school
union,  the  American  Bible  society,  and  the  Ameri-
can tract  society.  He  twice  declined  a  seat  in
President  Grant's  cabinet,  but  consented  to  serve
on  the  first  board  of  Indian  commissi()nei*s,  and
was  chairman  of  its  purchasing  committee.  Mr.
Stuart  was  a  munificent  giver  to  foreign  missions
and  other  religious  and  charitable  objects.

STUART,  Gilbert,  artist,  b.  in  Narragansett,
R.  I.,  3  Dec,  1755 ;  d.  in  Boston.  Mass.,  27  July,
1828.  The  name  Charles  was  given  to  him  by  his
father,  an  ardent  Jacobite,  but  Stuart  dropped  it,
and  used  only  his
first  name.  He  at-
tempted portrait-
ure when  a  mere
boy,  and  produced
several  pictures
which,  if  not  re-
markable as  paint-
ings, were  at  least
good  likenesses.
Two  of  these  early
attempts,  portraits
of  Mr.  and  Mrs.
John  Bannister,
are  now  in  the  Red-
wood library,  New-
port. He  had  no
regular  instruction
until  he  became,  in
1770,  the  pupil  of
Cosmo  Alexander,  a  Scotchman.  When  Alexan-
der returned  to  his  native  land,  about  two  years
later,  he  took  his  young  pupil  with  him.  Unfortu-
nately for  Stuart,  his  master  died  soon  after  arriv-
ing in  Edinburgh,  and  left  his  protege  in  charge
of  Sir  George  Chambers.  The  latter  did  not  long
outlive  Alexander,  and  Stuart  was  thus  thrown  on
his  own  resources.  It  is  said  that  he  worked  his
passage  home  on  a  "  collier  bound  to  Nova  Scotia,"
and  while  on  board  he  seems  to  have  experienced


■^^J^^'i^  Q^lZcL/?-^


STUART


STUART


790


much  n)u>;h  us»gf ;  hut  ho  never  pnoko  of  thin
rnatt»T.  uriii  iiiiy  refeivnce  to  it  (fnve  niin  evident
|Miin.  On  iirrivinK  in  this  country,  nfter  an  al»-
sonc*  of  alxtut  two  years,  ho  t)ef^n  to  prat'tise  as  a
|M>rtrait-painter  in  S'ewport.  Ho  hail  a  stronjr  de-
sin-  to  revisit  KiirojH*,  in  order  to  piin  a  more
coniplt'te  knowh'dfje  of  his  art,  and  esiM-eially  to
study  iiiulcr  iiis  count rvman.  Henjaniin  West.  '  As
in  the  event  of  war.  wliidi  then  ap|>eare<l  inevita-
ble, it  woidd  Ik<  imfMisjiihle  for  him  to  visit  Kne-
hind  for  some  time,  he  emlwrke<i  for  Ijontlon  in
the  sprinjf  of  1775.  Then?  he  had  much  difficulty
in  finding;  employment  for  his  iiencil,  and  sufTereil
from  jx)vertv  at  times.  He  ha<l  Insen  several  years
in  liondon  Wfore  he  summoneil  courage  to  go  to
West,  who  in  1778  rweivwl  him  kindly  and  gave
him  much  jussistance  and  instruction.  .Stuart  lived
with  him  'or  several  years,  during  which  time,  his
earnings  being  as  yet  scantv.  his  knowle<li;e  of
music  wa.s  of  great  service  tf>  tiim.  He  had  always
been  greatly  interested  in  the  art.  ami  had  learneil
to  play  upon  several  instruments.  He  now  ac-
cepted a  position  as  organist  in  a  church,  with  a
salary  of  i'80  a  year.  After  several  vears,  at  the
a<lvice  of  West,  lie  op«MU'd  a  studio.  'I'he  first  iM)r-
trait  that  brought  the  young  artist  into  notice  was
a  full-length  of  W.  Grant,  of  Congalton.  which  he
had  painted  while  still  a  tiupil  of  West.  When  it  was
exhibitetl  at  .Somerset  House,  it  attracted  much  at-
tention, and  Stuart  soon  l>e<'ame  a  fashionable  art-
ist in  liondon.  He  married  Charlotte  Coates  in  1780,
and  two  years  later,  on  an  invitation  from  the  Duke
of  Rutland,  went  to  Dublin,  where  many  noblemen
and  jK'ople  of  wealth  and  fa.shion  sat  to  him.  After
R  stavin  Dublin  of  at>out  four  years  he  returned  to
the  Cnifed  States  in  1792.  He  s|>ent  some  time  at
*  first  in  New  York,  where  he  paintetl  numerous  por-
traits, among  them  those  of  Sir  John  Temple,
John  Jay.  and  Gen.  Matthew  Clarkson.  He  went,
in  171i4.'  to  Philadelphia,  with  a  letter  to  Gen.
Washington  from  Jonn  Jay.  His  long-cherished
wish,  to  paint  the  iK)rtrait  of  Washington,  was  thus
to  l>e  fulfilled.  Washington  sat  to  him  the  fol-
lowing year,  but  Stuart  was  not  satisfied  with  his
first  attempt,  and  it  is  l)elieved  by  some  that  he
sul)sequentty  destroyed  the  pictJire.  Rembrandt
Peale,  however,  says  that  .Stuart  made  five  copies
of  the  painting.  He  next  executed  a  full-length
for  the  3larquis  of  Lansdowne.  This  wius  followed
bv  the  head  known  tw  the  "  Athetuinim  |K)rtniit."
The  latter  was  long  accepted  as  tlu>  best  liken«'ss
of  Washington,  but  it  is  said  that  this,  jis  well  as
the  linnsdowne  f)ortrait,  is  inferior  as  a  |><irtrait  to
Stuart's  first  picturt>of  Washington.  Of  this  third
jiortrait  only  the  head  was  finished.  l»ut  it  formed
the  basis  of  all  of  Stuart's  subsecjuent  |Mirt raits  of
Washington.  A  large  numU-r  of  replicas  of  it
were  exiK-uted  by  Stuart  and  other  artists,  and  it
has  b»t'n  frequently  eiigniv«'d,  notably  bv  Asher  IJ.
Durand  in  18:^4.  Stuart  offered  it  to  the  state  of
Mjissachu8t>tts  for  |il,(»(K);  but  the  offer  was  not
a^'cepted.  After  his  death,  his  widow  sold  it,
together  with  the  c<impanion  i>ortrait  of  .Mrs.
Washington,  for  f  1.5(X).  It  U'longs  to  the  Ii<«<ton
athena»um.  While  in  Phihwlelphia  Stuart  paint»'<l
a  lari:e  numl)er  of  |>ort raits,  and  when  the  city  of
Washington  was  foundeil.  and  congress  rt'move<l
to  that  place,  he  went  there  in  18(W.  During  his
stay  he  was  intimately  associat*^!  with  the  most
eminent  men  of  the  country,  and  his  |K>ncil  was
kept  as  busy  as  ever.  In  18(ir>  he  removed  to  IJos-
Um,  where  "he  afterward  resided.  There  were  no
signs  of  failing  health  until  18'i.*>-*«,  when  hi.«i  left
arm  showed  symptoms  of  paralysis.  Yet  he  still
tried  to  paintj  and  succeeded  iu  finishing  several


heads.  Rut  soon  the  gout,  which  had  Mti—d  him
severe  suffering  at  liim*  util..l  ..■■  t>i>  "hot  umI
Htomai'h, This  \'  '  ler  bear-

ing his  pains  win  months,

died  during  July  of  ihul  yi-Mr.  Washington  All-
ston  was  askeil  to  i)riinoun«i>  a  culogr  on  Stuart,
but his  fi-eble  health  fon-e«l  liim  t<-  He

wrote  an  obitunry,  liowever,  which  w  i in

the  Itoston"  Daily  Adverti»<er."  IVf'-.ii.iii;  >niMrt
was  a  great  favorite  in  «»«-iety.  of  which  he  w«j»
very  fond.  He  had  a  true  artiM'A  nature,  and  was
fre«juently  brought  into  trouble  by  his  n^kli-««
ex^H'nditures:  at  his  death  his  fainilr  wait  left
quite  destitute. His remarkable  conversational

tKiwers  were  usually  emplovml  to  gn«M|  effwt  while
le  was  (K-cupiiHl  with  his  sitters.  At  such  timw  it
was  his  custom  to  draw  on  his  store  of  narrati%'ea
an»l  ane<-<loles,  and.  as  .MUton  says,  "by  l«nishing
all  restraint,  to  call  forth,  if  |M>ssible,  some  invof
untary  tniitsof  the  natural  chanu-ter.  ...  It  was
this  which  enabk^l  him  to  animate  his  canvas,  not
with  the  ap|M>arance  of  a  mere  p>neral  life,  but
with  that  [MKMiliar,  ilisiinctive  life,  which  sepa-
rates the  humblest  intlividiial  from  his  kind.  .  .  .
Were  other  evidence  wanting,  this  talent  alone
were  sufficient  to  establish  his  «-laims  as  a  man  of
genius."  Stuart  pr<Hluce<I  during  his  career  an
excee<linglT  large  numlN<r  of  |K>riraits — how  many
cannot  with  certainty  U»  aM-ertained.  The  cata-
logue of  the  exhibition  of  his  |N»rtniits,  held  in  1^0
in  Roston,  gives  a  li.st  of  7.'»4  numU'rs,  ami  even
this  is  not  <piite  complete. .Some  of  the  more  im-

IK>rtant,  Ix^ides  tliojic  already  mentione«l,  are  the
)uke  of  XorthumU>rlan<l  and  his  children  ;  John
Kemble;  James  (inn-nleaf  ami  Roliert  .Morris
(17y5);  John  Trumbull ;  TlK><»«lore  .Sedgwick  :  John
.S.Copley;  Gen.  Henry  Knox;  Gen.  Henry  l^ee;
Thomas  Jefferson  ;  Mr.  and  Mrs.  James  Madison  :
Mr.  and  .Mrs.  John  Ouincy  Adams  (1818);  Madame
Jerome  Bonaparte;  .Josiah  (^uincy  (180«J  and  1824):
John  A(lams  (182.'»);  Fisher  .Ames;  Jos<-ph  Storj- ;
and  John  Ja<"ob  Astor.  His  la.st  |M>rtrait  was  that
of  John  C^uincy  Adams,  a  full-length,  of  which
only  the  head  was  coinplete«l  when  Stuart  died.
Thoma>i  SuUv  sul>se<{uently  finished  it,  that  i.s  he
painted  the  Ixnly  and  accessories.  M<»st  of  these
|K>rtraits  are  in  "the  |M>ssession  t>f  private  individ-
uals, but  s«'veral  are  ownwl  by  the  Pennsylvania
academy  «)f  fine  arts,  the  Ix>nox  library.  New  York,
the  New  Y<»rk  histori<-al  s<K-iety.  the  Ikiston  art
museum,  the  Re<lwo«Kl  library,  the  .Maryland  his-
torical s<K'iety,  and  Harvanl  university.  He  had  a
remarkable  eye  for  i-olor — "color  was  one  of  Stu-
art's strong  jsunts,"  as  his  daughter  says — and  wa^
a  master  in  the  rendering  of  fiesh.  In  {tainting
flesh  his  practice  was  to  lay  the  pure  ct>lors  (lint'lly
on  the  canvas,  and  then  «lnig  them  together  by
a  large  brush.  He  was  esinn-ially  sui"ces>ful  in
his  heads,  the  figun-  and  drajiery.  at  least  in  some
of  his  (Mirtraits,  Is-ingat  times  quite  careleMaljr exe-
cuted. Verv  nuiiiv  of  his  works  have  been  fi»-
<iuently  copJe«l  by  liims«'lf  ami  others,  and  a  \<um
niimUT  have  Ijeen  engrave*!.  See  "  Life  and  Worfa
of  (rilU'rt  Stuart."  by  G»«orge  C.  .Ma»-m  (New  York.
lH7}»)._His  daughter.  Janc,  b.  aUiut  IHIO;  d.  in
New|>ort.  R.  I..  2.*'  April,  18HH.  fo||owe«l  for  many
vears  the  profi"*sion  of  j>ortrait-|>ainting.  She  con-
templatiMl  writing  a  life  of  her  father,  and  pub-
lishe<l  .siveral  |>aiK*rs  in  "  Siribner's  Monthly  "  in
1M77.  The  work  was  sul»<«»i|Hently  written,  at  her
rw|uest.  bv  Ge«»rge  Champlin  Mason.

SXrAftT,  Hamilton,  ditor.  b.  tn  Jefferaon
coutity.  Ky..  4  Se|it..  IHia.  He  was  educated  in
common  Ncho«»ls  in  Scott  county,  Kv.,  and  began,
at  the  age  of  eighteen,  to  write  for  tne  preaa> In


730


STUART


STUART


1838  he  removed  to  Texas,  where  he  established
the  "Civilian,"  an  independent  Democratic  jour-
nal, which  he  continued  for  nearly  forty  years.
He  has  resided  in  Galveston  since  its  foundation,
was  its  mayor  in  1848-'52,  and  served  as  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1847-8.  During  the  republic
he  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  Presidents  Houston
and  Jones,  and  was  opposed  to  the  policy  of  an-
nexation, but  after  Texas  was  admitted  to  the
Union  he  was  unwilling  to  annul  the  compact.  He
was  appointed  collector  of  customs  of  Galveston
in  1851,  and  held  that  office  until  1801,  when,
owing  to  his  opnosition  to  secession,  his  services
were  not  retainea  by  the  Confederate  government.
Mr.  Stuart  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitu-
tional convention  in  1866,  and  subsequently  be-
came one  of  the  editors  of  the  Galveston  "  News."

STUART,  James,  traveller,  b.  in  Dunearn,
Fifeshiro,  Scotland,  in  1776;  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 3  Nov.,  1849.  Having  killed  in  a  duel  Sir
Alexander  Boswell,  the  eldest  son  of  Dr.  Johnson's
biographer,  he  came  to  North  America,  and  in
1828-'30  travelled  in  the  United  States.  His  views
on  the  natural  resources  and  political  phases  of
the  republic  are  characterized  by  keenness  of  ob-
servation, and,  when  published  in  book-form,  un-
der the  title  of  "Three  Years  in  North  Amer-
ica" (Edinburgh,  1833),  attracted  much  attention,
and  his  sketch  in  it  of  his  visit  to  the  Saratoga
battle-field,  including  a  description  of  its  topo-
graphical features  is,  next  to  Prof.  Silliman's  in
"Silliman's  Tour,"  the  best  extant.  The  book
called  forth  several  adverse  criticisms  from  those  of
the  English  reviews  that  were  unfriendly  to  repub-
lican institutions,  which  elicited  a  reply  from  him
in  a  work  entitled  "  A  Refutation  of  Aspersions
on  Stuart's  '  Three  Years  in  North  America ' "
(London,  1834).  He  edited  for  several  years  the
London  "  Courier."  The  violent  partisan  attitude
that  he  assumed  in  politics  called  for  chastisement
frequently  in  the  pages  of  "  Blackwood's  Maga-
zine," especially  from  John  Wilson,  in  the  "  Noctes
Ambrosianae."  where  he  figures  under  the  name  of
the  "  Stot"  (steer).  Stuart  was  noted  for  his  taste
in  art,  and  his  social  qualities  rendered  him  wel-
come in  society,  although  his  adherence  to  prin-
ciples frequently  led  him  into  serious  difficulties.

STUART,  John,  British  officer,  b.  in  England
about  1700;  d.  there  in  1779.  He  came  to  this
country  in  1733  with  Gen.  James  E.  Oglethorpe.
When  Fort  Loudoun  was  invested  by  the  Chero-
kees  in  the  French  war,  he  made  terms  with  Oco-
nostota,  who  consented  that  the  garrison  should
march  out  with  their  arms  and  have  free  passage
to  Virginia.  They  were  massacred  on  the  route,
but  Stuart,  who  was  popular  with  the  Indians,  was
spared.  In  1863  he  was  appointed  general  agent
and  superintendent  of  Indian  alfairs  for  the  south-
em  department.  On  14  Oct.,  1768,  he  concluded
a  treaty  with  the  Cherokees,  fixing  the  western
boundary  of  Virginia  at  Kanawha  river,  to  the
chagrin  of  the  people  of  that  province.  He  had
a  deputy  with  each  tribe,  and  exerted  great  influ-
ence over  the  southern  Indians.  When  the  Revo-
lutionary war  began,  he  conceived  the  idea  of  sup-
pressing the  revolt  of  the  colonies  by  the  aid  of
the  savages.  The  British  cabinet  approved  his
plan,  which  was  to  land  a  body  of  troops  in  west-
ern Florida,  which  should  march  througn  the  terri-
tory of  the  Creeks,  Chickasaws,  and  Cherokees,
and  with  the  warriors  of  those  nations  destroy  the
settlements  and  exterminate  the  Whigs  by  a  sud-
den blow,  their  attention  being  diverted  by  the
landing  of  an  army  from  Boston  and  an  attack  on
Charleston  by  tbe  British  fleet. Letters  were  dis-


tributed by  Stuart  among  the  loyalists  in  South
Carolina,  urging  them  to  join  the  royal  standard
as  soon  as  it  should  be  raised  in  the  Cherokee
country.  He  circulated  among  the  tribes  in  the
spring  of  1776,  and  arranged  for  the  murderous
raid  to  take  place  simultaneously  with  the  appear-
ance of  Sir  Peter  Parker's  naval  force  on  the
coast.  But  it  was  frustrated  by  the  vigilance  of  the
Kentucky  settlers.  (See  Ocoxostota  and  Sevier,
John.)  Stuart,  after  the  defeat  of  the  Indians  and
the  discovery  of  his  plans,  which  Sir  Henry  Clinton
made  two  later  attempts  to  carrv  out,  fled  to
Florida,  and  in  1779  returned  to  fengland. His

Sropertv  was  confiscated  in  1782. —  His  son.  Sir
ohn,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Georgia  in  1761  :  d.  in
Clifton,  England,  1  April,  1815,  was  educated  at
Westminster  school,  entered  the  foot-guards  as
ensign  in  January,  1779,  served  under  Lord
Cornwallis  in  this  country,  and  was  dangerously
wounded  at  Guilford.  lie  was  a  major-general
during  the  Napoleonic  wars,  gained  a  victory  over
Gen.  Jean  Louis  Reynier  at  Maida.  Sicily,  4  July,
1806,  for  which  he  was  knighted,  and  was  subse-
quentlv  made  a  lieutenant-general.

STUART,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Harrisburg,
Pa.,  24  Feb.,  1740;  d.  in  Kingston,  Canada,  15
Aug.,  1811.  He.  was  the  son  of  a  Presbyterian
emigrant  from  the  north  of  Ireland,  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1767,  entered
the  communion  of  the  English  church,  studied  and
was  ordained  priest  in  England,  and,  after  his  re-
turn in  1770.  labored  for  seven  vears  as  a  mission-
ary among  the  Indians  of  the  >fohawk  valley,  into
whose  language  he  translated  the  gospel  of  Mark
and  the  church  catechism.  After  the  revolt  of
the  colonies,  his  loyalist  principles  and  supposed
connection  with  efforts  to  rouse  the  Indians  against
the  Americans  led  to  his  expulsion  by  the  Whigs.
His  house  and  church  were  plundered,  and  he  took
refuge  in  Schenectady  in  1778,  and  in  1781  emi-
grated to  Canada,  where  he  was  soon  afterward
appointed  chaplain  of  a  provincial  regiment.  He
labored  as  a  missionary  among  the  Indians  of  Up-
per Canada,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  the  Church
of  England  among  the  white  inhabitants  of  the
province,  his  parish  covering  its  entire  are*.  For
some  time  he  taueht  an  academy  in  Kingston,
which  town  he  made  his  home.  lie  was  chaplain
to  the  legislative  council  some  time  before  his
death. — His  son,  George  Okill,  clergyman,  b.  in
Fort  Hunter,  N.  Y..  in  1776 ;  d.  in  Kingston,  On-
tario, 5  Nov.,  1862,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1801,  after  first  studying  in  Windsor  college.  Nova
Scotia,  was  ordained  priest  in  1804,  and  was  rector
of  a  church  in  York  (now  Toronto)  till  1811,  when
he  removed  to  Kingston  to  succeed  his  father.  In
1820  he  was  made  archdeacon  of  Kingston.  He
received  the  degree  of  LL  D  from  Windsor  col-
lege in  1832,  and  in  1848  that  of  D.  D.  from  Har-
vard. In  1862  he  became  dean  of  the  newly
created  diocese  of  Ontario. — Another  son.  Sir
James,  bart.,  jurist,  b.  in  Fort  Hunter,  N.  Y.,  2
March.  1780:  d.  in  Quebec,  Canada,  14  July,  185^^,
studied  at  Windsor  college.  Nova  Scotia,  read  law
with  Jonathan  Sewell,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1801.  He  was  assistant  secretary  to  the
lieutenant-governor.  Sir  Robert  S.  Milnes,  for  sev-
eral yeai-s,  at  the  same  time  practising  law  in
Quel)ec,  and  in  1825  was  appointed  solicitor-gen-
eral for  Lower  Canada.  In  1808  he  was  elected  to
represent  Montreal  in  the  legislature.  He  was  re-
moved from  office  in  1809  in  consequence  of  a
difference  with  the  executive.  He  n>niained  in
the  assembly  till  1817,  and  was  in  that  body  the
foremost  representative  of  the  English  party  and


STUART


STUART


781


an  ploqiiont  opponent  of  ('hiof-Juntlce  Sewcll,  In
1H22  he  Wiu<4  M-nt  to  Kn^rland  nn  n  (lt>k'(ntt«>  of  tlio
|HH)plo  of  Moiitn>ul  to  iulv(x.-Ato  tlu>  reunion  of  the
pnivinet's,  HOti  whilt«  thort'  rt'<'t'ivi'(l  the  aii|H>int-
ini'Mt  of  attoriioy-m'nerul  for  I^>W(>r  ('ana«la.  Il««
iMM'anio  an  t-xwutivo  couiu'iilor  in  1H27.  hikI  the
same  year  was  elected  to  represent  Sore!  in  tlie  pro-
vincial parliament.  Ilis  |iolitical  course  UhI  to  \\in
i>us[HMision  from  ofnce  in  March,  \K\\.  Thi.n  act
of  the  jfovernor-jjeneral  was  appmvetl  l)y  the  Brit-
ish minister  for  the  colonies  m  N'ovemU'r.  1832.
The  sueceedinj;  colonial  minister,  to  re|tair  the
injustice  that  hail  Ikhmi  done  to  Mr.  Stuart,  offered
him  the  |H>st  of  chief  justi<'e  of  Newfoundland  ;  but
he  declined,  and  resuiiunl  the  practice  of  law  in
OueU'c.  In  ISJW  the  Karl  of  Durham,  at  the  con-
clusion of  his  inquiry  into  the  state  of  the  Cana-
dian provinces,  ap|>ointe4l  Stuart  chief  justice  of
Ijower  Canada  in  the  place  of  Jonathan  Sewell,  who
wa.s  n'tire<l.  Durinj;  Sir  John  Colborne's  adminis-
tration he  acted  Jis  chairman  of  the  special  council
of  Ijower  Canada,  and  frame«l  the  law  forthereffis-
traticm  of  titles  and  mort>;at;es,  the  corjMiration
acts  for  QuelH'c  and  Montreal,  and  a  jjeneral
municipal  system  for  the  province.  He  prepared
the  act  of  union  that  was  |>asse«l  by  the  British
parliament  in  1840,  and  in  that  year  wascreateil  a
baronet. — Another  son,  Andrew,  lawyer,  b.  iu
Kin-rston,  Canada,  2.">  Nov.,  i7M">:  d.  in  (^uel>ec,
21  Feb.,  1840,  was  educated  in  the  ><Iuk>I  of  Rev.
John  Strachan,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  liar  in  1807.  He  esiablished  his  reputation  as
an  elcKjuent  advocate  in  1810,  when  defendinjf
Justice  Pierre  Bedard.  and  from  that  time  till  liis
death  was  employed  in  nearly  every  difllcult  or
important  suit,  lie  entered  the  provincial  imrlia-
ment  in  1815  as  representative  of  the  lower  town
of  Quebec,  and  afterward  represent<»d  the  upfwr
town  until  the  constitution  was  susr)en<led  in  18JJ8,
except  in  1834,  when  his  defeat  and  that  of  others
who  soufjht  to  curb  popular  passions  \vd  to  the
formation  of  the  Constitutional  association,  i>f
which  he  was  chosen  chairman,  and  by  which  he
was  sent  in  1838  to  England  for  the  iuir|Kise  of
promoting  the  union  of  LT^pjwr  and  Lower  Canada.
From  18:^8  till  his  death  he  held  the  ollice  of
solicitor-general.  He  contributed  five  p»iiiers  on
historical  and  antiquarian  topics  to  the  '*Trans<»c-
tions"  of  theOuebec  literary  and  historical  society
and  published  "Notes  upon  the  Southwestern
Boun<iary-Line  of  the  British  Provinces  of  Ijower
Canwla  and  New  Brunswick  and  the  United
States  of  America"  (Queliec,  18:«>);  "  Review  of
the  Pnx-eeilings  of  the  Legislature  of  Lower  Cana-
da, IHJil"  (Montreal,  1832);  and.  with  William
Badgley.  an  "Account  of  the  Kndowments  f<-r
E«lucation  in  Ijower  Canjula"  (London.  IKW).

STl'ART,  John  Todd,  lawver,  b.  near  Lexing-
ton, Ky.,  10  Nov.,  1807;  d.  in  Springfield.  111..  28
Nov.,  1885.  His  ancestry  was  Scotch-Irish;  his
father,  Robert  Stuart,  was  a  Presbyterian  clergy-
man, and  his  mntenial  gnindfather  was  I>»vi  Todd,
one  of  the  survivors  of  the  disjistrous  Indian  battle
at  the  Blue  Licks  in  1782.  He  was  gmduated  at
Centre  college,  Kentucky,  in  182(5.  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  removed  to'Springfield,  III.,  at  the  age
of  twenty-one.  He  t<K»k  at  once  a  high  |>lace  in  his
pn)fession,  ami  held  it  actively  for  nearly  sixty
years,  to  the  day  of  his  death.  He  was  a  Whig
until  the  formation  of  the  Republican  party,  servinl
in  the  legislature  fr«)m  18;{2  till  18:10.  and  was  de-
featwl  in  a  congressional  contest  in  the  latter  year.
Iieing  then  the  refogniz^nl  leader  of  his  jiarty.  He
n'new«»«l  the  contest  in  IKiH.  with  Ste|)hen  A.
Douglas  as  his  opponent,  and  was  successful  after


a  campaign  that  cxritMl  nation*]  •tUoUon.  After
two  terms  in  congnw  ho  declined  m  r»-«leetiao.
Mr.  Stuart  wam  a  nieinlicr  of  the  utatr  (ipnatc  from
1H4M  till  lK*i2.  and  wbm  diHtingiii»h4<«l  for  ihr  part
he  t4M)k  in  M-ttling  the  charter  of  the  lllin<ii*  l>n-
Inil  niilriMiil.  fn>m  the  |»mvifiiion»  of  which  the
state  dc'rivw  an  annual  rvvenue  that  amounlr«l  in
1887  to  I88MI5.07.  the  tot«l  rarenue  of  the  Mate
in  the  nine  year  lM<ing  $3,186,007.88.  He  ninainMl
out  of  public  life  until  1802.  when  hn  wa«  aipun
eUH-'twI  to  congretMi.  but  now  as  a  Denuicna.  aerving
one  term.  The  last  sfiecial  public  aenrioeaf  Mr.
I  .Stuart  was  as  a  commissidiicr  in  the  erection  of  the
new  state-houM>.  He  wnn  alxi  chairman  of  the  ex-
ecutive commiftii' of  the  National  Lincoln  monu-
ment asstM-iation.  He  serveil  ns  a  major  in  the
Black  Hawk  war  in  \Ki2,  and  this  title  was  always
us4m1  in  iuldn>s.sing  him.  In  this  camiiaign  he  met
Abraham  Lincoln,  and  thus  iiegan  a  fife-long  inti-
macy. They  were  fellow-memU'rs  of  the  legiala*
ture  in  1834.  He  induce<l  .Mr.  Lincoln  to  iktudj
law.  lent  him  the  nect-ssary  tMMiks.  and  t4x>k  him  as
a  partner  as  soon  as  he  was  ailinitteil  to  practice.
This  partnership  lasted  until  April.  1841 ;  in  1843
Mr.  Stuart  ass^x-iatiMl  with  himself  in  lp|;al  busi-
ness lk*njamin  .S.  Kdwards,  and  in  184MI  his  Mm-in-
law.  Christopher  C.  Bntwn.and  their  firm  was  at  Mr.
Stuart's  death  the  oldest  in  the  state.  In  perMMial
character  Mr.  Stuart  was  a  m<Mlel  of  kindness,
fidelity,  purity,  and  nobility,  and  in  his  busy  career
as  a  lawyer  and  legislator  he  foun<l  time  for  the
exercise  in  many  dirwtions  of  a  wis*-  public  spirit,
which  made  him  for  more  than  half  a  centurv  one
of  the  most  notable  citizens  of  the  community  in
which  he  livetl,

STl'ART,  MoHeti,  Hebraist,  K  in  Wilton. Coniu,
26  March.  1780;  d.  in  Andover.  Mass..  4  Jan..  1858.
He  was  graduated  at  Vale  in  17VU,  studie<l  law.  and
was  admitted  to  the  Itar  in  1802,  but  did  not  enter
on  the  practice  of  his  pmfession,  Iieing  calle<l  to  a
tutorship  in  Yale  college  the  same  year.  After  two
years  of  teaching  he  stu<li(Hl  theology,  and  in  1808
was  ordainiHl  as  |ta.stor  of  a  Congn-gational  church
in  New  Haven.  He  gained  high  repute  as  a  forci-
ble and  effwtive  preacher,  but  relinquishe«l  pastoral
work  in  1810,  when  he  was  electe«l  t«  the  professor-
ship of  sacred  literature  in  An«Iover  seminary,  al-
though at  that  time  he  ik>ss«»ss«>«1  but  a  limite*!
knowltnlge  of  Heb««w.  lie  applieil  himself  dili-
gently to  the  language.  Jeaniing  (Jerman  in  onler
to  study  the  philological  treatises  of  Frie<lri<h  H.
W.  (iesenius,  and  in  1813  c<nnpleted  a  grammar,
which  was  passeil  around  in  manuscript,  an<l  copied
by  his  pupils.  When  he  obtaiiunl  typi-  for  printing
the  work,  he  could  find  no  conifiositors  wqiiainted
with  the  IIel)rew  characters,  and  therefore  U-gan
the  composition  with  his  own  hands.  His  first
Hebrew  grammar,  which  was  without  the  diacriti-
cal {Ktints,  was  su|>ers<Hle«l  eight  years  later  bv  his
grammar  with  iM>int.s,  which  btn-ame  the  text-lwok
that  was  genorallv  us«'d  in  the  Unite*!  Stat*-*,  and
was  republislKil  I'li  Kngland  bv  Rev.  Dr.  tUlward
B.  Pus«»v,  n-gius  professor  of  llelirew  at  Oxford.
Prof.  Stuart  was  tlie  first  to  make  Americans  ac-
(|uainte«l  with  the  works  of  Rt»senin01Ier.  Kwald.
and  other  (Jerman  Orientalists,  and.  by  applying
their  s«ientiflc  methods  of  philological  and  arth«»-
ological  investigation,  foundeil  a  new  m-hcHtl  of
biblie.ll  exegi-sis.  He  retired  fn>ni  hU  profr  -sor-
ship  on  ai-coiint  of  advancing  agi*  and  inflrmitiea.
His  {lublications  include  a  "  .Sermon  "on  roi(cninff
his  pastoral  charge  (1SU»)  and  other  dlMcmrMS:
••  (Jrammar  of  the  Hebrew  I^nguaire  without
Points"  (Andover.  1813);  "  Ix-tters  to  Kev.  Will-
iam K.  Cluuining.  containing  Itemartis  on  his  Ser-


732


STUART


STUART


mon  recently  preached  and  published  at  Baltimore  "
( Andover,  1819) ;  "  Dissertations  of  Jahn  and  Others
on  the  Best  Method  of  studying  the  Languages  of
the  Bible,"  translated,  with  notes  (1821);  "Gram-
mar of  the  Hebrew  Language,  with  a  Copious  Syn-
tax and  Piaxis"  (1821);  "  Elements  of  Interpreta-
tion." translated  from  the  Latin  of  Johann  A.
Krnesti,  with  notes  (1822) ;  "  Two  Discourses  on
the  Atonement"  (1824);  with  Edward  Robinson,  a
translation  of  Georg  B.  Winer's  "  Greek  Grammar
of  the  New  Testament "  (1825) ;  "  Commentary  on
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews"  (2  vols.,  1827-8);
"  Hebrew  Chrestomathy,  designed  as  a  Course  of
Hebrew  Study"  (2  vols.,  1829-'30) ;  "Practical
Rules  for  Greek  Accents  and  Quantity"  (1829);
"  Exegetical  Essays  upon  Several  Words  relating
to  Future  Punishment  (1830);  "  Letter  to  William
E.  Channing  on  the  Subject  of  Religious  Liberty  "
(Boston,  1830);  "Commentary  on  the  Epistle  to
the  Romans,  with  a  Translation  and  Various  Ex-
cursus" (Andover,  1832);  "Is  the  Mode  of  Chris-
tian Baptism  prescribed  in  the  New  Testament?"
(1833),  to  which  Prof.  Henry  J.  Ripley  replied
(1837) ;  "  Cicero  on  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul "
(1833),  which  was  severely  criticised  by  Prof.  James
L.  Kingslcy  in  the  "  American  Monthly  Review  " ;
"  Grammar  of  the  New  Testament  Dialect "  (1834) ;
"  On  the  Discrepancies  between  the  Sabellian  and
Athanasian  Methods  of  representing  the  Doctrine
of  a  Trinity  in  the  Godhead,"  translated  from  the
German  of  Friedrich  Schleiermacher,  with  notes
and  illustrations  (1835)  ;  "  Pliilological  View  of
Modern  Doctrines  of  Geology"  (183(5);  "  Hints  on
the  Interpretation  of  Prophecy  "  (1842) ;  "  Critical
History  and  Defence  of  the  Old  Testament  Canon  "
(1845) ;  "  Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse "  (An-
dover, 1845) ;  "  Miscellanies,"  comprising  his  letters
to  Channing  and  sermons  on  the  atonement  (1840) ;
"  Hebrew  Grammar  of  (iesenius,  as  edited  by  ROdi-
ger,  translated,  with  Additions,  and  also  a  Hebrew
Chrestomathy  "  (1846),  which  drew  forth  a  volume
of  strictures' from  the  first  translator,  Thomas  J.
Conant  (New  York,  1847) ;  "  A  Letter  to  the  Editor
of  the '  North  American  Review '  on  Hebrew  Gram-
mar," replying  to  Conant's  criticisms  (1847) ;  "  Con-
science and  the  Constitution,  with  Remarks  on  the
Speech  of  Webster  on  Slavery,"  a  defence  of  Daniel
Webster's  acquiescence  in  slavery  and  the  Missouri
compromise  (Boston,  1850),  to  which  Rev.  Rufus
W.  Clark  replied  (1850) ;  "  Commentary  on  the
Book  of  Daniel "  (1850) ;  "  Commentary  on  Ecclesi-
astes"  (New  York,  1851);  and  "Commentary  on
the  Book  of  Proverbs"  (1852).  See  his  "  Funeral
Sermon,"  preached  by  Rev.  Edwards  A.  Park  (An-
dover, 1852) ;  and  "  Discourse  on  the  Life  and  Ser-
vices of  Moses  Stuart,"  by  Rev.  William  Adams
(New  York,  1852).— His  son,  Isaac  William,  edu-
cator, b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  Hart-
ford, Coim.,  2  Oct.,  18G1,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1828,  and  taught  in  Hartford.  Conn.,  till  1835,
when  he  became  professor  of  Greek  and  Roman
literature  in  the  South  Carolina  college,  Columbia.
He  resigned  in  1839,  and  subsequently  resided  in
Hartford,  where  he  was  thrice  elected  to  the  state
senate.  He  was  the  owner  of  the  Wyllis  estate,  on
which  stood  the  charter  oak.  He  was  a  student  of
Oriental  literature,  and  became  interested  in  Egypt-
ology, publishing  a  translation  of  Abbe  Henore
Greppo  s  "  Essai  sur  le  systeme  hieroglyphique  de
ChampoUion  le  jeune,"  with  notes  and  a  preface
by  his  father  (Boston,  1830).  While  professor  at
South  Carolina  college  he  produced  an  annotated
edition  of  the  "  G^^dipus  Tyrannus"of  Sophocles
(New  York,  1837).  In  later  life  he  gave  much  at-
tention to  American  history  and  antiquities,  pub-


lishing "  Hartford  in  the  Olden  Time,"  bv  "  Sc»va  "
(Hartford,  1853) ;  "  Life  of  Captain  Nathan  Hale,
the  Martyr  Spy"  (1850);  and  "Life  of  Jonathan
Trumbull,  the  Revolutionary  Governor  of  Con-
necticut "  (Boston,  1859).

STUART,  Philip,  soldier,  b.  in  Maryland  in
1700;  d.  in  Wjishington,  D.  C,  14  Aug.,  1830.  He
received  a  good  English  education,  and  soon  after
the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war  became  an
officer  in  Col.  George  Baylor's  dragoons.  Subse-
quently he  served  under  Col.  William  A.  Washing-
ton, and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Eutaw,  where
he  was  wounded.  Col.  Stuart  was  elected  as  a
Federalist  to  congress  from  Maryland,  and  served,
with  re-elections,  from  4  Nov.,  1811,  till  3  March,
1819.  During  the  war  of  1812  he  was  an  officer
in  the  Maryland  volunteers  at  the  time  of  the
British  invasion.  He  continued  a  resident  of  Wash-
ington after  his  retirement  from  congress.

STUART,  Robert,  explorer,  b.  in  Callender,
Scotland,  19  Feb.,  1785;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  28  Oct.,
1848.  He  was  the  grandson  of  the  Alexander
Stuart  who  is  mentioned  in  the  life  of  Rob  Roy  as
the  successful  opponent  of  that  chieftain.  At  the
age  of  twenty-two  he  came  to  the  United  States,
and  after  spending  some  time  in  Canada  went  out
in  1810  as  one  of  the  founders  of  Astoria,  Oregon.
(See  AsTOR,  John  Jacob.)  It  became  necessary  to
communicate  with  the  Atlantic  coast,  and  Mr.
Stuart  volunteered  to  make  the  effort.  He  set  out
in  June,  1812,  with  only  five  attendants.  The
story  of  the  journey  is  given  at  length  by  Wa.sh-
ington  Irving  in  his  "Astoria."  After  enduring
incredible  hardships,  in  which  Mr.  Stuart  developed
all  the  qualities  of  a  leader  and  hero,  they  reached
St.  Louis  in  May,  1813,  the  third  party  to  cross  the
continent  north  of  Mexico.  In  1819  he  removed
to  Mackinaw,  and  conducted  there  for  fifteen  years
the  affairs  of  the  American  fur  company.  He  was
also  appointed  by  President  Harrison  as  commis-
sioner for  all  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  northwest.
In  1834  he  removed  to  Detroit,  became  trea.surer
of  Michigan,  and  held  other  offices  of  public  trust
and  importance  connected  with  the  development
of  the  great  lake  region.  He  was  known  as  "  the
friend  of  the  Indian,"  while  his  energetic,  lofty,
and  austere  character  niade  him  equally  venerated
among  the  white  population. — His  son,  David,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  12  March,  1816;  d.  in
Detroit,  Mich.,  19'  Sept.,  1868.  He  removed  to
Michigan,  studied  law,  and  practised  in  Detroit.
He  wais  there  elected  to  congress  as  a  Democrat,
and  served  from  5  Dec,  1853,  till  3  March,  1855.^
He  subsequently  settled  in  Chicago,  111.,  becoming'
solicitor  for  the  Illinois  Central  railroad.  He  was
appointed  colonel  of  the  55th  Illinois  infantry  on
31  Oct.,  1861,  and  commanded  the  2d  brigade  of
Gen.  William  T.  Sherman's  division  from  27  Feb.
till  14  May,  1862.  His  brigade  held  the  position
on  the  extreme  left  at  Shiloh,  and  suffered  severe
loss,  while  he  was  wounded  in  the  shoulder.  He
was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteei-s  on
29  Nov.,  1862,  and  commanded  a  brigade  of  Mor-
gan L.  Smith's  division  during  the  siege  of  Corinth
and  subsequent  operations  till  Gen.  Smith  was
wounded  at  Chickasaw  Bayou,  after  which  he  led
the  division,  participating  in  the  capture  of  Ar-
kansas Post.  When  the  senate  failed  to  confirm
his  appointment  as  brigadier-general,  he  left  the
service  on  3  April,  1863,  and  returned  to  legal
practice  in  Detroit.

STUART,  Hubert  Lei&rbton,  merchant,  b.  in
New  York  city,  21  July,  1806;  d.  there,  12  Dec,
1882.  His  father,  Kinloch,  was  a  successful  candy-
manufacturer,  who  came  from  Edinhtirgh,  Scot-


STUART


STlTROFX)N


788


U\rMudv)A^^


land,  in  IWVJ,  and  diod  in  lH2fl.  The  !«on  mioooedw!
t(i  tho  inann^'oincnt  of  thi>  i>i)sinfsi.s,  and  in  1828
f«)rm('d  a  jmrtnor^liip  with  his  l>r«»lh«'r.  Alexander.
Thoy  bejran  reflnin^f  »ui;ar  l»y  steam  in  1H32.  an<i
were  the  first  to  succeed  in  this  imKCss,  They
almndoncd  candy-making  in  1H.*)<{,  (iev<iiiiijf  them-
selves s^iU-iy  to  sujrar-
refininjr.  aiid  in  1H?J
they  retiriHl  f mm  ac-
tive l>usin<*sK.  He
was  pri'siileiit  of  the
American  .museum
of  natural  history
and  of  the  Preshyte-
rian  hospital.  5<ew
York,  wa-s  connecte<l
with  various  chari-
tahle,  wientiflc.  and
s<H'ial  organizations,
and  was  known  also
as  the  |M>sses.s4ir  of  a
lar;;e  and  valuable  li-
brary and  frallery  of
paintinj^s.  and  a  mu-
nificent jjiver  to  edu-
cational and  relig-
ious institutions.  In
1880  he  gave  $55,000  to  the  Presbvterian  hospital.
New  York  city.  $100,000  to  Princeton  theological
seminary,  $100,000  to  Princeton  college,  and  $50,-
0(X)  to  the  San  Francisco  theological  seminary.
Mr.  Stuart's  charities  are  continued  by  his  widow,
whose  New  York  residence  is  among  the  finest  in
the  country. — His  brother,  Alexandor,  b.  in  New
York  city,"23  Dec,  1810;  d.  tlure.  2'.i  Dec.  1879,
was  a  generous  donor  to  philanthropic  objects.
The  brothers  began  in  1852  U>  devote  each  year  a
certain  minimum  sum  to  works  of  Ix'nevolence,
chiefly  connected  with  the  Presbvterian  church,
and  Ix-fore  the  death  of  Alexander  ha<l  given  away
$1.:{91,000.  which  was  increased  by  the  subsecpient
gifts  of  Robert  L.  to  nearlv  $2.00().()0C>.

STl'ART,  WiUiam,  journalist,  b.  in  Galway,
Ireland,  7  July,  1821;  d.  in  New  York  city.  27
Dec.,  1880.  His  real  name  was  Edmund  O'Fla-
herty.  He  was  educated  at  Eton  college,  and  s<K)n
after  l>eing  gratluated  l)ecame  intereste<l  in  Irish
politics.  He  was  elected  to  parliament,  and  iden-
tified himself  with  a  group  that  oi»|K)sed  the  w-
desiastical-titles  bill,  but  mmie  terms  with  I^ord
Abenleen's  coalition  ministry  in  1852,  Edmund
O'Flaherty  receiving  the  appoirjtment  of  commis-
sioner of  the  income  tax.  Two  years  later,  U'com-
ing  pecuniarily  embarrasse<l  by  election  exj)taises
and  tosses  on  the  turf,  he  attemj)tetl  to  raise  money
by  a  fraud,  and  fle<l  to  Paris  to  avoid  prosecution,
and  thence  to  New  York  city.  Taking  the  name
of  his  mother's  family,  he  wrote  newspaix-r  articles
for  a  liveliho<xl,  and  gained  a  reputation  as  a  dra-
matic critic  by  caustic  strictures  in  the  New  York
"Tribune"  on  Edwin  Forrest's  style  of  acting,  en-
hancing the  jKipular  interest  in  his  criticisms  by
sarcastic  replies  that  he  wrote  for  the  "  Evening
Express."  He  Ix'came  a  theatrical  manager  in
Washington  and  Philailelphia,  and  then  the  lessee
of  the  Winter  (lanlen  theatre  in  New  York  city,
where  Edwin  H<K)th  gained  his  first  success  as
Hamlet  and  Dion  Uoucicault  and  Agnes  Uol»ert-
son  were  intnMluced  to  the  public  in  the  "Octo-
roon," which  had  to  l»e  taken  off  the  stage  on
account  of  the  political  feeling  that  it  excite<l.
After  the  burning  of  the  Winter  Oanlen  in  18«7,
ho  was  associateil  with  li«'ster  Wallack,  and  in  18W)
returned  to  the  pmfession  of  jounmlism.  Stuart
wa»  a  connoisseur  in  gastronomy,  and  in  the  club*


of  New  York  and  daewher*  he  «it«rUln«l  manr
notable  piNiple  of  \talh  oontinetiUi.
HTrOKENBKRfl. John Honry Wilbnra.

clergyman, b. in HraniM-he.  Hanover.  <M-t!tfinv.
«  Jan.,  IKtt. He  emigrated  ia  oarlv  I
United  .States,  and  wat  graduated  at  \\
college,  Springfield,  Ohio.  In  1857.  n'-
H'turne*! to  (lermany to  irtuily  t)

universities  of  (lOttingen.  IkTiin.  u.  . ^. :..

He  was  ordained  a*  a  Lutheran  minmler  in  IMJO.
and  hehl  (wittoral  chargm  in  Iow«  and  Prnnnyl-
vania,  iH'sid*^*  ofiiciating  in  lH62-'a  an  chaplain  of
the  45lh  Pennsylvjuiia  voluntti-n*.  Ho  wan  profr^
Hor  of  theology  at  Wiitenltorg  (-(illege  fnim  187Ji
till  1880.  and  since  that  time  has  \n-i'n  |Nu«lor  of
the  American  cliai>el  in  Ii4>rlin.  (iermany.  He  in  a
meml)er  of  the  ls4-rlin  phihmoohieal  MM-ietr.  In
addition  to  contributions  to  religiouH  iMTiiMiitnlK.
he  has  publinlKxi  "(ierman  Kaiionalt»m  in  iti>
Rise.  Progress,  and  De<-line."  fn»m  the  (ierman
of  Carl  Rudolf  Hagetilmch.  in  conjunction  with
William  L.  Gage  (E<linburgh.  18<15):  "Ninety-five
Theses"  (Baltimon-,  18«7):  "  History  of  the  Augv-
burg  Confession  from  its  Origin  till  the  Aiioption
of  the  Formula  of  l'<mcord  "  (Philailelphia.  186U):
"('hristian  .Sociology"  (New  York,  1880;  Ix>ndon.
1881);  "Life  of  Emanuel  Kant "  (I/..ndon.  1882);
and  "  Intro«luction  to  the  .Studvof  Philos4iphy."

STUEBER,  Honry.  author!  b.  in  Philadelphia.
Pa.,  al)out  1770;  d.  there  in  17J»2.  He  wan  of
Oerman  extraction.  After  gra«luation  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1784.  and  at  the  medi-
cal defiartment  in  1788.  he  obtaim^il  a  clerkship  in
a  government  ofllce  and  began  the  .study  of  law.
but  s(H>n  ditnl  of  pulmonary  diM«ase.  after  csttat*-
lishing  a  reputation  as  a  versatile  M.-hular  ami
original  thiimer.  lJesi<les  contributions  to  peri-
(Hlicttl  literature,  he  wrote  a  se<|uel  to  lienjamin
Franklin's  "Autobiography,"  containing  an  ac-
count of  his  discoveries  in  electrical  s<  u-nco.  A
memoir  was  [)nbiislK><l  shortly  after  his  death.

STrN(i  SERPENT  (or  Le  Skri-knt  Piryv^).
chief  of  the  Natchez  ln<lians,d.  in  Ixtuisiana,  alioul
1725.  The  Natchez  having  killed  some  Fn-nchmen
in  1713,  and  Bienville  having  U'en  s<Mit  to  punish
them,  a  deputation,  headinl  by  Stung  Serpent  and
other  chiefs,  c«me  to  negotiate  with  him.  After
Bienville's  ex|HHlition  ha«l  en«U"d  suwessfully,  he
made  jn-ace  with  the  Natchez,  and  relea-sed  their
chiefs.  In  1722  several  Natchez  villagj-s  rose  against
the  Frt'nch,  ami  a  s<ildier  was  munlere«L  TrxKn*
were  sent  to  nnlm-e  them,  but  Stung  SeriH-nt.  who
wa.s  then  great  chief,  endeavored  to  make  rv|>ara-
lion  by  fininir  the  villages.  He  act<«il  as  interpreter
to  the'Frencn.  an<l  is  dest-rilxnl  as  Ix-ing  their  bcrt
friend  among  the  Natchez.  Some  authorities  plaw
his  death  later  than  1?25.

STl'RGE,  Joseph,  English  author,  b.  in  Elver-
ton,  (lloucestershire.  England,  in  171W;  d.  in  Bir-
nungham.  1  Mav.  185».  He  was  a  niemlier  of
the  SiK-iety  of  l'rien«ls,  established  him.«elf  as  a
corn-factor  in  Birmingham  in  1^^2<^  acfiuired  gri«at
wealth,  and  devoteil  hims«-lf.  among  other  philan-
thropic objects,  to  the  alnilition  of  slavery.  To
familiarize  himself  with  the  subject  of  sUvenr,  he
visited  the  West  Indies  in  18:{7.  and  four  jreai*
later  the  Unite<l  Slates.  He  publishwl  "The  Wert
Indies  in  1887  "  d-iomlon.  18:i8),  and  "  Visit  to  ibr
United  States  in  1841  "  (Boston,  1842).  The  "  Me-
moirs of  Jos.'ph  Sturge"  were  written  by  Ilenn*
Richard  (I,..ii.lon.  184M>.

STIRifEON. Daniel,  senator,  b. in Adan»

ccuntv.  Ph..  27  0»t..  1789:  d.  in  Unmnt F-v-

ette  CO.. Pa..  2  July. 1878. He  was  •■
Jefferson  college.  Pa.,  studied  nunlieine i


734


STURGES


STURM


county,  and  in  1813  began  practice.  In  1818  he
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  Peimsylvania  house
of  representatives,  serving  three  terms,  and  in  1825
ho  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  being  speaker  of
that  body  the  last  three  years  of  his  term.  In
1830  he  was  appointed  auditor-general  of  the  state,
whicli  office  he  filled  six  years,  and  in  1838  and  1839
he  was  state  treasurer  and  ended  the  "  Buckshot
war"  by  refusing  to  honor  Gov.  Ritner's  warrant
for  payment  of  the  troops.  He  was  elected  U,  S.
senator  jis  a  Democrat  for  the  term  that  began  4
March,  1839,  and  was  re-elected  to  that  body,  his
last  term  expiring  3  March,  1851.  In  1853  Presi-
dent Polk  appointed  him  treasurer  of  the  U,  S.
mint  at  Philadelphia,  which  post  he  held  until
1858.  Although  lie  was  called  the  "silent  sena-
tor," he  was  considered  a  hard-working  commit-
tee-meml)er.  He  made  but  one  speech,  and  that
was  to  reiterate  a  remark  he  had  made  in  commit-
tee: "Any  senator  who  says  anything  that  would
tend  to  the  disruption  of  the  Union  is  a  black-
hearted villain."

STURGES,  Jonathan,  member  of  congress,  b.
in  Fairfield,  Conn.,  23  Aug.,  1740:  d.  there,  4
Oct.,  1819.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1759,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  prac-
tised at  Fairfield.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the
pre-Revolutionary  movements,  and  was  a  repre-
sentative from  Connecticut  in  the  1st  and  2d
congresses,  serving  from  4  March,  1789,  till  2
March,  1793.  He  was  a  judge  of  the  state  su-
preme court  in  1793-1805,  and  wfis  a  presidential
elector  in  1797  and  1805.  He  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  Yale  in  1806. — His  grandson,
Jonathan,  merchant,  b.  in  Southport,  Conn.,  24
March,  1803 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  28  Nov.,  1874,
went  to  New  York  in  1821  and  became  a  clerk  in
a  mercantile  house,  in  which  he  rose  to  be  a  junior

partner  in  1828,  and
senior  partner  in
1836.  He  remained
connected  with  the
firm  till  1868,  when
he  retired  with  a
large  fortune.  He
was  one  of  the  chief

f)romoters  of  the  II-
inois  Central  rail-
way and  a  director,
during  the  civil  war
was  among  the  most
liberal  and  outspoken
supporters  of  the  gov-
ernment, and  took  an
active  part  in  estab-
lishing the  Union
league  club,  of  which
he  was  president  in
18ft^.  He  was  active
in  the  measures  to  break  up  the  Tweed  ring  and  to
promote  municipal  reform  in  the  government  of
the  city  of  New  York.  He  was  distinguished  for
philanthropy,  and  was  liberal  as  a  founder  or  sup-
porter of  many  charities  in  that  city.  He  was  at
one  time  vice-president  of  the  New  York  chamber
of  commerce,  an  active  member  of  the  Century
club,  and  a  generous  patron  of  art,  Mr.  Sturges
was  an  intimate  friend  of  the  j)oet  Bryant,  and  was
among  the  most  active  in  the  movement  that  led
to  the  presentation  of  the  vase,  known  as  the  "  Bry-
ant vase."  now  in  the  ^letropolit^n  museum  of  art.
STUROIS,  Frederic  Russell,  physician,  b.  in
Manila,  Luzon,  Philippine  ishmds,  7  July,  1844.
He  was  eduaited  in  London,  England,  and  Boston,
Mass.,  was  graduated  as  a  physician  at  Harvard


in  1867,  practising  in  New  York  city.  He  has  been
visiting  surgeon  of  the  Charity  hospital.  New  York,
from  1872,  was  surgeon  of  the  New  York  dispen-
sary in  1877-'8,  and  became  house  physician  tliere
in  1878.  He  was  appointed  in  1874  clinical  lec-
turer on  venereal  diseases  in  the  University  of  the
city  of  New  York,  in  1880  professor  of  that  de-
partment in  the  same  institution,  and  in  1882  pro-
fessor of  venereal  and  genito-urinary  diseases  in
the  Post-graduate  medical  school  and  hospital.
Prof.  Sturgis  was  president  of  the  New  York
county  medical  society  in  1881-2,  and  a  member  of
its  board  of  censors  in  1878-'81.  He  has  published
"Students'  Manual  of  Venereal  Diseases"  (New
York,  1880);  annotated  and  edited  Diday's  work
on  "Infantile  Syphilis"  (1883);  and  is  the  author
of  maiiv  articles  on  medical  subjects.

STURGIS,  Samnel  Daris,  soldier,  b.  in  Ship-
pensburg.  Pa.,  11  June,  1822 ;  d.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,
28  Sept.,  1889.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  aca<lemy  in  1846,  entered  the  2d  dragoons,
served  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  was  made  pris-
oner before  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista,  but  was  ex-
changed. He  afterward  served  in  California,  New
Mexico,  and  the  territories,  and  was  commissioned
captain,  3  March,  1855.  At  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  he  was  in  command  of  Fort  Smith,  Ark.,  but, all
his  officers  having  resigned  and  joined  the  south-
ern Confederacy,  he  evacuated  the  fort  on  his  own
responsibility,  and  thus  saved  his  command  and
the  government  property.  He  was  appointed  major
of  the  4th  cavalry,  3  May,  1861,  and  served  in  Mis-
souri under  Gen.  Nathaniel  Lyon,  whom  Sturgis
succeeded  in  command  after  his  death  at  the  battle
of  Wilson's  Creek.  He  was  made  brigadier-general
of  volunteei"s,  10  Aug.,  1861,  was  assigned  to  the
Army  of  the  Tennessee,  and  afterward  to  the  com-
mand of  the  Department  of  Kansas.  In  1862  he
was  called  to  Washington  to  assist  the  military
governor,  and  was  given  command  of  the  fortifica-
tions around  the  city.  At  the  battles  of  South
Mountain,  Antietam,  and  Fredericksburg  he  com-
manded the  2d  division  of  the  9th  army  corps,
and  he  was  engaged  in  the  operations  in  Kentucky
from  April  till  July,  1863.  lie  was  chief  of  cavalry
of  the  Department  of  the  Ohio  from  July,  1863,  till
April,  1864,  and  captured  Gen.  Robert  B.  Vance
and  his  command,  13  Jan.,  1864.  He  was  engaged
at  Bolivar,  Tenn.,  10  May,  1864,  and  in  the  expe-
dition against  Gen.  Nathan  Forrest,  and  in  the
fight  near  Guntown,  Miss.,  10  June,  1864.  He  was
appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  6th  cavalry.  27
Oct.,  1863,  colonel  of  the  7th  cavalry,  6  May,  1869,
and  was  retired,  11  June,  1886.  He  had  been  bre-  '
vetted  colonel  for  Fredericksburg,  and  brigadier-
general  and  major-general,  U.  S.  army,  13  March,
1865.  —  His  son,  James  Garland,  b.  in  Albu-
querque, N.  M.,S54  Jan.,  1854,  was  graduated  at  the
United  States  military  academy  in  1875,  and  was
killed  in  the  Indian  massacre  on  Little  Big  Horn
river,  25  June,  1876.

STURM,  Daniel,  French  author,  b.  in  Hague-
nau,  Alsace,  in  1761  ;  d.  there  in  1814.  He  re-
ceived liis  education  at  the  University  of  Stras-
burg,  and  was  graduated  m  medicine  in  1789.  In
the  following  year  he  was  appointed  assistant  sur-
geon of  a  regiment  in  Santo  Domingo,  but  he  fled
to  the  United  States  during  the  civil  war  in  1793,
and  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  practised  his
profession.  After  the  peace  of  Amiens  he  returned
to  France,  re-entered  the  army  as  surgeon-major,
and  served  till  1811,  when  he  was  retired  on  a  pen-
sion. His  works  include  "  Dictionnaire  de  mede-
cine  therapeutique,  ou  expose  des  moyens  curatifs
employes  dans  les  Antilles,  La  Louisian^et  I'Amo-


STUKM

Squc  (III  Nord  "  (2  vols..  Nnnc  y.  1800).  and  -  Ijm
iHts-l'iiis  en  18(X).  on  jounmf  i«t  iniiirnHiionii  «|o
voyap'  !i  Inivors  rAmi'riiiinj  du  Nord (1812).

JiTl'llM,  Jarqu(>M  (st<)..rm).  Kmieh  nutumlist.
h.  in  liH^iii'miu,  Al.xiK-e,  in  174:{:  d.  in  Nancy  in
1802.  \U'  vuU'rM  i\w  church,  hut  rc<vivfd  only
minor  orders,  and  wits  for  sHrvoral  years  pn»c«ptor
in  tlu'fanulyof  the  Duke d'AigiiiHoii.  who  ol»tanu>d
for  hin>  a  scientific  mission  to  S>uth  AmericA.
Sailini;  from  Brest  in  1775,  he  visit***!  the  Canaries
and  tlie  C»[h}  Vertlo  islan<ls  and  Brazil,  cojistwl
alonjf  t'hili.  Peru,  and  California,  and  visiljnl  the
Philippines,  Batavia,  and  Sumatra, colle<>tiri);  s{iei*i-
mens  of  natural  history.  In  178.")  he  n>turneil  to
South  America,at  the  invit^ttionof  the  Aca<lemy  of
me<licine.  to  study  the  medicinal  plants  of  Brazil.
After  exph)rin(f  the  ba.sin  of  the  OriniK'o,  he  crossed
to  A nwizoit  river,  which  he  descended  for  (teveral
hundred  miles  amid  many  danjjers  and  hardship.
I)es«'rted  by  his  escort,  he  lived  fi>r  months  with
half-civilized  Indians,  and  in  1791  n>a<'he<i  Para,
after  forminjj  a  collection  of  1,100  plants,  4(X)  of
which  were  new.  belonjrinjf  to  150  families.  Owirvjf
to  the  state  of  affairs  in  France,  he  delayed  his
departure,  and  accepted  a  chair  in  the  city  college.
In  1795  he  returned  to  Paris  and  pri'sented  his  col-
lections to  the  institute,  of  which  he  was  electetl  a
correspt)ndinc  memlx-r  in  1798.  His  works  include
"Deux  ans  de  sejour  dans  les  desert-s  de  I'Ama-
zonie"  (Nancy,  1796);  "Catalogue  raisonne  de  la
flore  Brc'silienne  "  (2  vols.,  1798):  "  Rssai  sur  I'hLs-
toiro  niiturelle  du  Brcsil  "  (1800);  "  Dictionnaire
des  plaiites  medicinales  propres  au  Brcsil  "  (1801).

STl'RTEVANT,  Edward  Li'wis,  agriculturist,
5.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  23  Jan.,  1842.  He  was  fjradu-
ated  at  Bowdoin  in  18(}3,  and  served  during  that
'year  as  captain  in  the  24th  Maine  volunteers,  after
which  he  was  graduateil  at  the  medical  defwrtment
of  Harvard  in  1806.  Dr.  Sturtovant  settled  in
South  Framingham,  where  he  devoted  himself  to
agricultural  pursuits  on  a  liberal  scale,  ami  to  the
cultivation  of  favorite  breeds  of  dairy  cattle,  als*)
contributing  frequent  pa{)ers  to  the  press  and  ile-
livering  lectures  on  topics  relating  to  his  chosen
work.  In  1881  he  was  called  to  the  charge  of  the
New  York  agricultural  station  at  Geneva,  where  he
remainetl  for  six  years.  He  is  a  fellow  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, and  was  president  of  the  Soc-iety  for  the  pro-
motion of  agricultural  science  in  1887.  Besides
making  large  contributions  to  agricultural  pajxTs,
he  etlited  the  "Scientific  Farmer"  in  1870-'9.  the
"North  American  Ayrshire  Register  "and  the  an-
nual "  Keports  of  the  New  YorK  Agricultural  Ex-
geriment  Station"  (1882-7),  and,  with  Joseph  N.
turtevant,  published  "  The  Dairy  Cow,"  a  mono
grapli  on  the  Avrshire  breed  of  cattied^iston.  1875),

STrRTEVANT.  Julian  Monson,  eihuator.  b.
in  Wurren,  Conn.,  20  Jul  v.  1805;  d.  in  Jackson-
ville, 111.,  11  Feb.,  188(J.  'He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1820,  and  at  Yale  divinity-school  in  1829.
began  to  teach  before  his  educatioii  was  completed,
and  continued  to  do  so  till  a  few  immths  liefore  his
death.  He  was  a  tutor  in  Illinois  c<»llege  in
1828-'30,  professor  of  mathematics,  natural  phi-
losophy, and  astronomy  in  the  same  in  18:il-'44.
[)re8ulent  and  profes.sf>r  of  mental  an<l  inonil  phi-
os<3phy  in  1844-'70,  and  pn)fess«)r  of  mental  sci-
ence and  the  science  of  government  from  1870  till
his  death. He  was  successful as  an educator,

S reached  frequently,  and  publishtnl  "  FkH>nomic»,  or
cienco  of  Wealth  "  (New  York,  1876).  and  "  Keys
of  Sect,  or  the  Church  of  the  New  Testament"
(Boston,  18711).  He  was  a  fn-«pieiit  contrilnitor  to
ihe  "  New  Englander"  and  other  |H.>riodicals.


8TUYVESANT


780


CJ^-^^^


'  STl' Y  VESA  NT.  Peter,  governor  of  New  York
b.  in  Holland  in  16«r.>;  d.  in  New  York  Htr  in
Augiwt,  1682.  He  wmm  the  wm  «.f  a  cli<r|fTman  of
Friesland,  and  at  an  earlv  age  di«plavr«l  a  fondnna
for  military  life.  He  wrved  in  thi"  Woa  Indies,
was  governor  of  the  colony  of  Cur«<.T)«,  l<»t  a  leg
<luringtheunsuc-
cj'jtsful  attack  on
the  Portuguew*
island  of  St.  Mar-
tin, and  returned
t<i  Holland  in
1044.  Ik'ing  a|>-
|>ointed directitr-

SL-neral  of  New
etherlands,  he
to<)k  the  oath  of
offic-e  oil  28  July,
1W6,  and  rem-hed
New  Amsterdam
on  11  May,  1047,
amid  such  vehe-
ment firing  of
guns  from  the
fort  that  nearly
all  the  iK)wder  in
the  town  was  con-
sumed in  salutes.
StMin  after  his  inauguration  on  27  Mar  he  orgBii-
ized  a  council  and  establishe«l  a  «-ourt'  of  jurtioe.
In  deference  to  the  i>opular  will,  he  onlerwl  a
general  election  of  eight«H'n  delei.'ati's.  from  whom
the  governor  and  his  council  wlectwl  a  Umnl  of
nine.  whos«>  |K)wer  was  advisory  ancl  not  legisla-
tive. Among  his  first  pnK-lamations  were  onlerv
to  enforce  the  rigid  obs^-rvance  of  Sunday,  prohibit
the  sale  of  liquor  and  firt^arms  to  the  Indians,  and
protect  the  ix'venue  and  increaj**'  ihe  treasury  br
heavier  taxation  on  imports.  He  also  endeavomi
to  erect  a  better  class  of  houM>s  and  tavenis.  es-
tablished a  market  and  an  annual  catth>-fair.  and
was  also  intcreste«l  in  founding  a  public  school.
One  of  the  first  acts  of  the  new  governor  was  tc
enter  into  a  corresjxjndence  with  the  other  colo-
nies regarding  the  decisive  settlement  of  the
Itoundary  question ;  but  New  England  would  not
agree  to  terms.  He  also  Ux-ame  involved  in  a  con-
troversy with  Gov.  Theophilus  Eaton,  of  Connecti-
cut, over  the  claim  of  the  Dutch  to  juriMliction  in
that  state.  In  1648  a  conflict  arose  l)et  ween  him
and  Brant  Arent  Van  Slechtenhors-t,  the  (Nimmi»-
sary  of  the  young  fiatroon  of  Hensselaerswyck  at
Beverswick,  Stuvvesant  claiming  jiower  irrespect-
ive of  the  sjiecial  feudal  privileges  that  had  wen
grante<l  in  the  charter  of  m21>.  In  1649Stuyve8ant
marched  to  Fort  Orange  with  a  military  export,  and
onlennl  certain  houses  to  Ik*  razed  to  |M>miit  of  a
letter  defence  of  the  fort  in  case  of  an  attack  of
the Indians, also c>ommanding that ston>s and

I  timl)er  should  l»e  taken  fn)m  the jvitnM>n's  land  tr
repair  the  fortifications. This  \  an  .siechtenhor»t

'  refuse<l  to  do,  and  the  director  sent  a  body  of  sol-
diers to  enforce  his  r»rders. The  contn>Ter«jr  that

,  followe<l  resultetl  in  the  commissary's  maintaining
his  rights  and  the  director's  ItisinfCMme  popularity.

I  The  first  two  vears  of  his  ad  in  in  ist  rat  ion  were  not
successful. He  hiul  serious  db>cussions  with  th«

!  patriMius.  who  interfere<l  with  the  ooin{Niny's  tra<Ic
and  denieil  the  authority  of  the  pnerimr.  and  he
was  also  embroiled  in  contentions  with  the  council,
which  sent  a  deputation  to  the  Hague  to  n'ltort  the
condition  of  the  t-olony  to  the  8tate»-Kvnenu.  This
re|x>rt was  published  as  "  VertooM  van Nieuw

'  Netherlandt iThe  Hague,  1650). The  iUtogcn-

I  eral  afterward  commanded  StuyTeMUit  to  appear


736


ST UY VESA NT


STUYVESANT


personally  in  Ilolland  ;  but  the  order  was  not  con-
firmed by  the  Ainsterduin  chamber,  and  Stuyvesant
refused  to  obey,  sayinj;  :  "  I  shall  do  as  I  please."
In  Septeml)er,  1650,  a  meeting  of  the  commission-
ers on  boundaries  took  place  in  Hartford,  whither
Stuyvesant  travelled  in  state. The line  was  ar-

rantjed  much
to  the  dissatis-
faction of  the
Dutch,  who
declared  that
"  the  governor
hati  ceded
awaj'  enough
territory  to
found  fifty
colonies  each
fifty  miles
square."  Stuy-
vesant grew
haughty  in  his
treatment  of
his  opponents,
and  tnreaten-
ed  to  dissolve
the  council.  A
plan  of  municipal  government  was  finally  arranged
m  Holland,  and  the  name  of  the  new  city — New
Amsterdam — was  officially  announced  on  2  Feb.,
1658.  Stuyvesant  made  a  speech  on  this  occasion,
-  'showing  that  his  authority  would  remain  undimin-
ished. The  governor  was  now  ordered  to  Holland
again  ;  but  the  order  wtis  soon  revoked  on  the  decla-
ration of  war  with  England.  Stuyvesant  prepared
against  an  attack  by  ordering  his  subjects  to  make
a  ditch  from  the  North  river  to  the  East  river,  and
to  erect  breastworks.  In  1665  he  sailed  into  the
Delaware  with  a  fleet  of  seven  vessels  an<l  about  700
men  and  took  possession  of  the  colony  of  New  Swe-
den, which  he  called  New  Amstel.  In  his  absence
New  Amsterdam  was  ravaged  by  Indians,  but  his
return  inspired  confidence.  Although  he  organized
militia  and  fortified  the  town,  he  subdued  the  hos-
tile savages  chiefly  through  kind  treatment.  In
1658  a  convention  of  two  deputies  from  each  village
in  New  Netherlands  hiul  demanded  reforms,  and
Stuyvesant  commanded  this  assembly  to  disperse,
saying:  "We  derive  our  authority  from  God  and
the  company,  not  from  a  few  ignorant  subjects."
The  spirit  of  resistance  nevertheless  increased,  and
the  encroachments  of  other  colonies,  with  a  de-
pleted treasury,  harassed  the  governor.  In  1664
Charles  II.  ceded  to  his  brother,  the  Duke  of  York,
a  large  tract  of  land,  including  New  Netherlands;  j
and  four  English  war  vessels  bearing  450  men,
commanded  by  Capt.  Richard  NichoUs,  took  pos-
session of  the  harbor.  On  30  Aug.  Sir  George
Cartwright  bore  to  the  governor  a  summons  to  sur-
render, promising  life,  estate,  and  liberty  to  all
who  would  submit  to  the  king's  authority.  Stuy-
vesant read  the  letter  before  the  council,  and,  fear-
ing the  concurrence  of  the  people,  tore  it  into
pieces.  On  his  appearance,  the  people  who  had  as-
sembled around  the  city-hall  greeted  him  with
shouts  of  "  The  letter  1  the  letter !  "  and,  returning
to  the  council-chamber,  he  gathered  up  the  frag-
ments, \yhich  he  gave  to  the  burgomasters  to  do
with  the  order  as  they  pleased.  He  sent  a  defiant
answer  to  Nicholls,  and  ordered  the  troops  to  pre-
pare for  an  attack,  but  yielded  to  a  petition  of  the
citizens  not  to  shed  innocent  blood,  and  signed  a
treaty  at  his  Bouwerie  house  on  9  Sept.,  1664.  The
burgomasters  proclaimed  Nicholls  governor,  and
the  town  was  called  New  York.  In  1665  Stuy-
vesant went  to  Holland  to  report,  and  labored  to


secure  from  the  king  the  satisfaction  of  the  sixth
article  in  the  treaty  with  Nicholls,  which  granted
free  trade.  During  his  administration  commerce
had  increased  greatly,  the  colony  obtaining  the
privilege  of  trading  with  Brazil  in  1648,  with  Africa
for  slaves  in  1652,  and  with  other  foreign  ports  in
1659.  Stuyvesant  endeavored  unsuccessfully  to
introduce  a  specie  currency  and  to  establish  a  mint
in  New  Amsterdam.  He  was  a  thorough  conserva-
tive in  church  as  well  as  state,  and  intolerant  of
any  approach  to  religious  freedom.  He  refused  to
grant  a  meeting-house  to  the  Lutherans,  who  were
growing  numerous,  drove  their  minister  from  the
colony,  and  frequently  punished  religious  offenders
by  fines  and  imprisonment.  On  his  return  from
Holland  after  the  surrender,  he  spent  the  remain-
der of  his  life  on  his  farm  of  sixty-two  acres  ont-
side  the  city,  called  the  Great  Bouwerie,  lieyond
which  stretched  woods  and  swamps  to  the  little
village  of  Haarlem.  The  house,  a  stately  speci-
men of  Dutch  architecture,  was  erected  at  a  cost  of
6,400  guilders,  and  stood  near  what  is  now  Eighth
street.  Its  gardens  and  lawn  were  tilled  by  about
fifty  negro  slaves.  A  pear-tree  which  he  brought
from  Holland  in  1647  remained  at  the  corner  of
Thirteenth  street  and  Third  avenue  until  1867,
bearing  fruit  almost  to  the  last.  The  house  was
destroyed  by  fire  in  1777.  He  also  built  an  execu-
tive mansion  of  hewn  stone  called  Whitehall,  which
stood  on  the  street  that  now  bears  that  name.
Gov,  Stuyvesant  was  above  medium  height,  with  a
fine  physique.  He  dressed  with  care,  and  usually
wore  slashed  hose  fastened  at  the  knee  by  a  knotted
scarf,  a  velvet  jacket  with  slashed  sleeves  over  a  full
puffed  shirt,  and  rosettes  upon  his  shoes.  His  lost
leg  was  replaced  by  a  wooden  one  with  silver
bands,  which  accounts  for  the  tradition  that  he
wore  a  silver  leg.  Although  abrupt  in  manner,
unconventional,  cold,  and  haughty,  full  of  preju-
dice and  passion,  and  sometimes  unanproachable,
he  possessed  large  sympathies  and  tenaer  affection.
His  clear  judgment,  quick  perception,  and  extent
of  reading  were  remarkable.  Washington  Irving
has  humorously  described  him  in  his  "  Knicker-
bocker's History  of  New  York."  The  illustrations
represent  the  old  Stadt  Huys,  and  the  tombstone  of


•'  In  this  Vault  lies  buried

'' PETRUS STUYVESANT

late  Captain  General  and  Governor  in  Chief  of  Amsterdam^

inNewNetherland  ncwcalled  Nev/York

and  the DutchWest India  Islands. died  inAD167r

aged 80  years.


;».


Stuvvesant  in  the  outer  wall  of  St.  Maik's  church
in  5lew  York  city,— His  wife.  Judith  Bavard,  b.
in  Holland;  d.  in  New  York  in  1687,  was  tlie  sister
of  Samuel  Bayard,  of,  Amsterdam,  who  married
Anna  Stuyvesant.  She  spoke  several  languages,
possessed  an  excellent  voice  and  a  cultivated  taste
m  music,  displayed  artistic  skill  in  dress,  and  ex-
tended a  wide  hospitality.  She  left  a  fund  to  the
Dutch  church  in  New  York  for  St.  Mark's  chapel. —
Stuyvesant's  son.  Nicholas  William,  b.  in  1648;
d.  in  1698,  married  Maria,  the  daughter  of  Will-
iam Beekman,  and  afterward  the  daughter  of
Brant  Van  Slechtenhorst.  Of  their  three  children,
Gerardus  married  his  second  cousii^  Judith  Bay-


8UARI)


8UARE7.  Y  ROMERO


787


ard.  and  only  ono  «tf  their  four  sons,  Pkteb,  b.  in
1727.  left  «lesocndant,M,  Ho  married  Marsarvt,
daughter  of  (lilliert  liivincsfnn,  an«l  their  non«
were  IVter  (Icninl  an<l  Nicholat*  Williaut.  Their
daujjhters  were  Judith,  who  nuirried  Ik>njamin
Winthrop;  Cornelia,  who  marri<-<l  I)irek  Ten
BriKi-k  :  and  Klizaln'th,  who  niarri)'<l  Col.  Ni(-hohu>
Fish,  and  U-catne  the  iiinthtT  of  ilnmilton  Vi^U.
—Peter's  son.  Fetor  Gerard,  iawver,  b.  in  New
York  eitv  in  1778;  d.  at  Niagara  Falls,  N.  Y..  16
Aug.,  1847,  was  graduattnl  at  Coliiinbia  in  1794,
8tudie<l  law,  was  admitted  to  the  Imr,  ami  prac*
tis<Ml  for  a  short  time  in  New  York  city.  lie  was
a  founder  of  the  New  York  historical  s<K-ietv.  of
which  he  was  president  from  1«3«  till  1K40.  His
residence.  "  IVtersfield,"  and  that  of  his  brother
Nicholas  William,  the  "  Howery  House,"  were  built
before  the  Kevolution,  and  wen*  situated  on  their
father's  Houwerie  farm.  The  chief  portion  of
this  extensive  property  was  devis<Hl  to  his  nephew
Gerard  .Stuyvesant.  Hamilton  Fish,  and  Hutiur-
funl  Stuyve>*nnt.

SIJARI),  Nicolas  (soo-ar),  ITaytian  patriot,  b,  in
Jacmel  aiK>ut  1740;  d.  in  Port  au  Prince,  2<J  PVb..
1791.  He  was  a  mulatto,  and  a  rich  merchant  of
Ca|>e  Fran<,'ais  at  the  l)e|jinningof  the  French  revo-
lution. In  1790  he  tried  vainlv  to  l»e  electe<l  a
meml)er  of  the  colonial  assembly,  and.  \mi\e  de-
feat*«l  on  account  of  his  color,  went  to  Paris,  whore
he  became  a  meml)er  of  the  club  "  lios  amis  des
noirs,"  and  devoted  his  large  fortune  to  the  cause
of  the  enfranchisement  of  the  slaves  and  to  gain
efjual  |x)litical  rights  for  the  mulattoes.  The  jis-
sembly  having  negatived  a  motion  for  enfranchis«>-
ment,  Suard  and  his  countryman,  Vincent  Oge,
resolved  to  secure  it  by  force.  They  went  to  Phila-
tlelnhia  and  New  Orleans,  enlisted  2'^)  men.  and,
witn  a  supply  of  arms  and  ammunition,  landed
near  Cape  trangais,  28  Oct..  17JK).  where  they  were
joined  by  Jean  Bantiste  Chavannes  and  other  in-
surgents. Suard  snared  in  Oge's  defeat,  fled  with
him  to  the  Spanish  part  of  the  island,  and  was  de-
liverwl  to  the  Frencli  authorities  and  executed.

Sl'AKEZ,  Jos^  Bernardo,  Chilian  author,  b.
in  .Santiago.  20  Aug.,  1H22.  He  received  his  edu-
cation in  the  colleges  of  Meroe<l  and  .San  Francist;o.
and  finished  his  studies  in  1B42  in  the  normal
school.  In  1848  he  was  ap|X)inted  inspector  of  the
lyceum  of  San  F'elipe,  Aconcagua,  and  in  lH47-'9  he
occupied  the  chair  of  humanities  in  several  colleges
of  Santiago.  He  was  appointed  in  1H.">0  visitor  of
.schools  in  Valparaiso,  and  in  IMO  director  of  the
first  fiscal  school  of  .Santiago,  which  was  foundinl
bv  order  of  President  Montt.  He  establishetl  in
Valparaiso  and  Santiago  the  first  free  evening-
schools  for  artisans,  became  in  1H<J0  director  of  the
model  college,  and  in  18«»1  visitor-general  of  scho«ils
for  the  republic,  retiring  in  1HI>»  on  a  |K'nsion.  He
is  a  member  of  the  jwilagogical  stK-ieties  of  .Santi-
ago and  Rio  .Janeiro,  ha.s  l)een  connecte<l  wit'h  va-
rious journals,  and  has  written  al)out  twenty  his-
torical and  didactic  works,  among  which  are
"  Hombres  colebres  de  Chile"  (Santiago.  1859):
"  Plutarco  de  los  Jovenes"  (1801);  "Tesoro  de
Bellas  Artes  "  (1862) ;  "  Recreo  del  soldado  Chileno"
(1804) ;  •'  Kasgos  BiogrAflcos  de  nifios  celebres  "
(1867);  "Guia  del  Preceptor  Primario"  (IMfW);
"  Manual  del  Ciudadnno  "  (187H);  and  "  Principit>s
de  Derecho  Internacional  "  (1888).

Sl'ARKZ,  Juan  (s<K)-ah  -reth),  S|>antsh  colonist,
b.  in  Andalusia  about  I.VIO;  d.  in  Araucania  in
1588.  He  servetl  as  capt«in  in  the  expe^lition  of
Diego  Flores  de  Valdes  and  Pe«lro  Sarmiento,  who
sailed  frt>m  Seville.  25  .Sept..  l.Wl.  to  found  a  colo-
ny in  the  Strait  of  Magellan.  After  five  ships  were
VOL.  V. — 47


wrecked,  the  fleet,  redooed  to  dstcMi . _

rived.  34  March.  1582.  at  Rio  Janeira.  HaTinff  made

srreral  vain  attempts  to  rt-uch  the  strait,  Uiejr  at
lenjjth  arrivr^l  nt  if i  i-ntranco.  7  F«'b..  1588.  and  caat
anchor,  but  d  out  again  bva  rale. They

return*-*!  tli  _•  year,  when  the  flwl  wan  re*

^\uc^'i\  to  fivi-  MiipH.  and  were  again  carried  back  by
the  Ktnngth  r>f  the  eblt  tide,  but  anchored  eloaa  to
Cape  de  las  Virgines,  an<l  the  landing  of  tba  mUf
tiers  bmn  immediately  under  the  difMtkm  of  8«>
area.  When  800  persons  hiu\  gone  on  land  a  gala
obliged  the  shifw  to  quit  their  anchorage.  On  the
same  day  Diego  de  Kitjem  left  for  Sfiain  during
the  night,  taking  with  him  the  whole  fleet  except
the  vensel  of  Suarez,  wh«»  refused  to  i^andon  the
colony. Sarmiento  had  400  men.  SO  women,  and

Crovisions  for  eipht  months.  They  iinme<liately
uilt  a  city,  Nombre  de  Jesus,  near  the  mouth  of
the  strait,  and  about  eighty  milcH  Mouth  founded
San  Feli|)e.  .Sanniento.  leaving  the  command  to
Suarez,  saileil  on  25  May.  1584,  for  Bnucil,  and
subsequently  went  to  Sfiain  in  April.  15H5.  In
August.  1584,  the  two  colonies  uni(4>4i.  but  Kubae-

auently  .Suarez  remove<l  with  200  men  to  Numbre
e  Jesus.  Many  «lie<l  during  the  winter,  and  by
the  hands  of  the  Indians,  who  niine<I  the  crona.
In  the  lH>^inning  of  1.X6  an  attempt  was  made  oy
the  colonists  of  San  Felipe  to  build  two  barks,  bat
they  were  wrwkcHl,  and  in  January,  1.187.  only
eigfiteen  men  survive*!.  One  of  thej*  was  re«cuel^
by  Thomas  Cavendish,  and  one  other  liv«-<!  to  be
taken  from  the  strait  in  1589  by  Andrew  Merrick.
He  l>elonge4!  to  the  colony  of  Nombre  de  Jesus.
The  latter  suffere<l,  [lerhaps,  greater  hardshi|*s  than
those  that  were  exi»erience<l  jiy  the  <-olonists  of  San
Felifie.  Nearly  all  of  them  set  out  toward  the  mid-
dle of  1587  in  hope  of  reaching  by  land  the  estab-
lishments of  the  Plate  river:  but  they  were  either
kille*!  by  the  Indians  or  die<!  from  hunger  in  the
deserts  of  Araucania.  .\ccoiints  of  the  exite^iition
arc  to  l>e  found  in  Hakluyt's  and  James  Bumey's
collections,  and  in  the  "  Noticias  de  las  exfietlitionea
al  Magellanes"  (Madrid,  1788).

SrAREZ,  I^renzo.  Mexican  missionary,  h.  in
Mexict)  alxiut  1.560:  d.  in  San  Gregori**  in  1887.
He  was  employed  among  the  Indians  of  north-
ern Mexico,  attAinin!  great  distinction  as  an  ora-
tor Ixtth  in  S|MUiish  and  native  Mexican  lan-
iruages,  and  in  1620  was  ap|K>inted  n>yal  preacher,
■lis  works  include  ••.S<>rmones  en  lengua  Mexi-
I  cana "  (Mexico.  1617),  an  exlremely  ran^  work,
which  wa.s  among  the  first  printed  in  the  New
World.  A  copy  of  it  was  sold  at  public  auction  in
Brussels  in  184^  for  t'2,!iO0.

Sl'AREZ  PERALTA.  Jnan.  b.  in  the  city  of
Mexico  altout  l.'>80.  Nothing  further  is  known  of
his  life  than  that  he  was  a  S4>n  of  one  of  the  .Siian-
ish  officers  of  the  c<»ni|uest.  and  M><'ms  to  have  been
educattnl  and  stmlious.  .\  maniis<-ripl  chronicle
of  events  in  Mexi«-o.  written  bv  him  in  1589,  was
some  years  ago  distntvervd  J»y  Nlan-os  Toledo.  AI-
thoiiglli  many  of  its  conivptions  are  errt>nr<iu«,  it
has  a  spe<-ial  merit  as  containing  information  not
funiishi"*!  by  any  previous  wi»rk.  The  iiiHiiuscriftt
was  published  by  Justo  Zarajj^oza.  under  the  ori(d-
nal  title  of  "Noficins  llistoncas  de  la  Nueva  !•-»-
iMina"  (Miidrid.  1H7H).

srARKZ  Y  ROMERO.  Aniielno.  Culaui  writ-
er, b.  in  Havana  in  1818:  d.  there  in  1882.  He
was  educates!  in  his  native  city.  devolr«l  himself
to  teaching,  and  did  a  great  deal  in  ln-lialf  of
public  etlucation.  His  literary  career  Ugan  with
the  put  '■  ■  f  his"  BiografiadcCarlota  Vaidis"
(HavHi  V  Inch  was  foltowtnl  by  a  series  of

nuii>lerl,v ..  ~  and  descriptions  of  Cuban  soa-


738


SUBERCASE


SUCRE


nery  and  customs,  which  was  afterward  collected  in
a  large  volume  under  the  title  of  "  Coleccion  de
Articulos  "  (1859).  Some  of  these  sketches  have  been
translated  into  English  and  French.  In  New  York
he  published,  in  i860,  his  novel  "Francisco,"  a
powerful  picture  of  the  horrors  of  Cuban  slavery,
written  many  years  before  the  publication  of  Mrs.
Stowe's  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin."  Suarez  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1866.  He  has  published  also  "  Escuelas
Primarias,"  a  series  of  essays  on  public  education
and  school  reforms  (Havana,  1862),  and  "  Cartas
criticas  sobre  asuntos  juridicos"  (1870),  and  has
left  many  uni)ublished  works.

SUBEKCASE,  Daniel  Anger  de,  governor  of
Acadia,  b.  in  Limousin,  Prance,  about  1655 ;  d.
there  after  1710.  He  was  sent  early  to  Canada  as
an  ensign  and  rose  rapidly  in  the  service.  In  1690,
with  100  men,  he  occupied  the  Isle  d'.Orleans,
and  this  movement  aided  in  compelling  the  Brit-
ish to  raise  the  siege  of  Quebec.  He  served  dur-
ing the  following  years  in  the  war  against  the  Iro-
quois, and  in  1096  was  major-general  in  Fronte-
nac's  expedition  that  burned  the  villages  of  the
Onondagas.  In  1703  he  was  appointed  governor
of  Fort  St.  Louis  of  Placentia,  and  waged  war
against  the  English.  His  main  oV)ject  was  to  ex-
pel them  from  Newfoundland,  and  this  being  ap-
E roved  at  court,  he  set  out,  15  Jan.,  1705,  at  the
ead  of  450  well-armed  men,  soldiers,  Canadians,
privateersmen,  and  Indians,  all  accustomed  to
march  in  snow-shoes.  They  were  obliged  to  ford
four  rivers  filled  with  floating  ice.  and  they  were
also  delayed  two  days  by  a  heavy  fall  of  snow.  On
26  Jan.  they  surprised  Bebou,  took  Petty  Har-
bor, three  leagues  from  St.  John,  and  burned  every
house  in  the  latter  place,  but  they  were  unable^to
capture  the  large  fort  that  protected  St.  John.  Re-
turning by  way  of  Ferryland,  which  he  burned,
Subercase  sent  out  parties  in  several  directions  and
ruined  the  English  trade  in  Newfoundland.  On
10  April,  1706,  naving  succeeded  Brouillan  as  gov-
ernor of  Acadia,  he  continued  the  war  with  renewed
vigor,  and  attracted  to  Acadia  several  West  India
buccaneers,  whom  he  employed  against  English  com-
merce. The  English  besieged  Port  Royal  in  June
and  again  in  August,  1707,  but  Subercase  compelled
the  invaders  to  retire  with  loss.  The  governor  in
vain  urged  Louis  XIV.  to  make  a  permanent  es-
tablishment in  Acadia,  whose  strategical  value  he
also  demonstrated ;  but  he  could  not  even  obtain
money  to  return  the  advances  that  had  been  made
by  the  settlers.  This  may  account  for  the  fact
that  Subercase  made  no  resistance  when  he  was
attacked  in  1710.  On  2  Oct.  he  surrendered
Port  Royal  to  Sir  Francis  Nicholson,  and  obtained
the  honors  of  war  for  his  garrison  of  156  men.  No
provisions  were  found  in  the  place,  and  on  the
next  day  Nicholson  had  to  issue  rations  to  the
French  soldiers.  Subercase  was  conveyed  to  La
Rochelle,  and  in  1711  court-martialled  at  Roche-
fort  for  the  surrender  of  Port  Royal,  but  was  ac-
quitted on  accoimt  of  his  former  services.  See
"An  Acadian  Governor,"  in  the  "International
Review"  for  1881.

SUCHET,  Pierre  Joseph  (soo-shay),  Haytian
historian,  b.  in  Fort  Dauphin  in  1734 ;  d.  in  Nantes,
France,  in  December,  1793.  He  was  the  son  of  a
wealthy  Creole,  received  his  education  in  Paris,
entered  the  colonial  administration,  and  was  for
several  years  commander  of  the  province  of  the
west  in  Santo  Domingo.  He  was  transferred  to
Dominica  as  king's  lieutenant  in  September,  1778,
was  provisional  governor  of  St.  Eustatius  in  1781,
and  during  the  whole  of  the  war  with  England  did
his  utmost  to  forward  re-enforcements  and  supplies


to  the  French  fleets  and  to  the  United  States.
After  the  conclusion  of  peace  he  held  for  three
years  the  office  of  king's  lieutenant  at  Tobago,  but
returned  subsequently  to  Santo  Domingo,  retiring
with  a  pension  m  1784.  He  devoted  the  remainder
of  his  life  to  literary  labor  and  historical  works,
and  made  several  voyages  to  Paris  for  researches
in  the  libraries  and  in  the  archives  of  the  navy  de-
partment. Being  driven  from  Santo  Domingo  by
the  risings  of  1791,  he  made  Nantes  his  residence,
but  was  arrested  during  the  reign  of  terror  and
executed  as  a  pensioner  of  the  monarchy.  His
published  works  include  "  Expose  historigue  des
progres,  du  commerce,  et  de  la  navigation  dans  les
Antilles  Frangaises  de  I'Amerique"  (2  vols.,  Paris,
1784);  "  Histoire  de  la  guerre  soutenue  par  les
Fran^aisdans  les  Antilles  de  1778  k  1783  "  (2  vols.,
1790) ;  and  "  Histoire  des  campagnes  du  Comte  de
Bouille  dans  les  Antilles"  (1792).  His  manuscript
works,  preserved  in  the  National  library  at  Pans,
include  "  Histoire  generale  des  Antilles  "  and  "  Me-
moires  pour  servir  k  I'histoire  de  I'administration
Frangaise  dans  les  Antilles."

SUCKLE  Y,  George,  physician,  b.  in  the  city  of
New  York  in  1830 ;  d.  there,  30  July,  1869.  He  was
graduated  at  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,
New  York,  in  1851,  served  as  resident  surgeon  in
the  New  York  hospital  in  1852,  and  was  assistant
surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  1853-'6.  He  became
brigade  surgeon  in  1861,  and  was  staff  surgeon,
U.  S.  volunteers,  in  1862-'5.  He  became  brevet  lieu-
tenant-colonel and  colonel,  U.  S.  volunteers,  15
Au^.,  1865.  Dr.  Suckley  contributed  to  the  trans-
actions of  the  American  medical  association  and
the  Philadelphia  academy  of  natural  sciences.  With
James  G.  Cooper,  M.  D.,  he  published  "Reports
on  the  Natural  History,  Climate,  and  Physical
Geography  of  Minnesota,  Nebraska,  Washington,
and  Oregon  Territories"  (New  York,  18()0).

SUCKLEY,  Tliomas  Holy,  philanthropist,  b.
in  New  York  city,  21  Nov.,  1809;  d.  in  Rhinebeck,
N.  Y.,  9  Feb.,  1888.  He  inherited  great  wealth
from  his  father,  an  Englishman  of  good  family,
who  had  been  engaged  in  business  in  New  York
city.  The  son  was  never  engaged  in  any  active
business.  He  gave  large  sums  for  the  support  of
the  missions  of  the  Methodist  church,  and  was  a
benefactor  of  the  Children's  aid  society,  the  Brook-
lyn Methodist  Episcopal  hospital,  and  the  Society
for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals.  He  estab-
lished the  Mount  Rutson  home  for  aged  Methodist
ministers  near  Rhinebeck,  and  endowed  it  liberally.

SUCRE,  Antonio  Jos6  de  (soo'-crav),  South
American  soldier,  b.  in  Cumana,  Venezuela,  3  Febr,
1795;  d.  near  Pasto,  Colombia,  4  June,  1830.  He
studied  mathematics  at  Caracas,  was  graduated  at
the  College  of  military  engineers  in  1810,  and,  join-
ing the  patriot  cause,  was  sent  in  May  of  that  year
as  post-commander  to  the  province  of  Barcelona,
ana  in  1811  called  to  the  pereonal  staflf  of  Gen.
Miranda.  After  the  capitulation  of  the  latter,
Sucre  fled  to  his  native  province  and  joined  the
invading  forces  of  Santiago  Mariflo,  with  whom  he
took  part  in  the  campaign  of  1813.  In  March,  1814,
he  joined  Bolivar,  who  appointed  him  to  the  staff  of
the  Army  of  the  Orient,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel.  After  the  defeat  of  Gen.  Ribas  at  Urica,
5  Dec.,  1814,  Sucre  took  refuge  in  Trinidad,  and,  on
Bolivar's  landing  in  Venezuela  in  1816,  Sucre  joined
Marino's  forces;  but  when  the  latter  refused  alle-
giance to  Bolivar  in  Caritico,  8  May,  1817,  Sucre
abandoned  his  command  to  join  Bolivar  in  Guay-
ana,  and  was  appointed  chief  of  staff  of  Bermudez's
division.  In  1818  he  was  promoted  brigadier
and  commissioned  by  Bolivar  to  solicit  arms  and


8UCRK


8UDD6


780


ammunition  in  tho  Wiwt  ln(Hi>«(.  ami,  pletlrin^  hin
IK?rs«)nal  crwlit,  ht*  wxm  returmtl  with  9.7W  («tantl
of  arms,  twelve  cannon,  anil  a  plentiful  Hunply  of
ammunition.  IkMii^  H|i|N>int<Ml  Mvonil  ehiof  of'the
general  staff,  he  diiittlayed  such  encr|;y  in  the  re-
organizatiun  of  the  loruus  that  Itolivur  cHllcd  him

the  "soul  <»f  the
army."  In  this
oflUce  he  assisteil
in  the  victorious
invasion  of  New
Uninada  i;i  IHIO,
and  waA  rommis-
siontnl  by  Itolivar
to  arrani^  for  a
8ix-months*armis-
tice,  which  was
8i>;ne<iinTrujillo,
25  Nov.,  1820.  He
was  then  sent  to
the  south  to  take
command  of  the
forces  o|><>ratinf;
against  the  Span-
ish president  of
t^uito,  who  n-
fused  to  rtH'ojinize
the  validity  of  the
treaty  of  Trujil-
lo. He reorgan-


,>/^^cL^€i:^


ized  the  patriot  forces,  marching  to  the  port  of
Buenaventura,  embarked  his  army,  and  in  May,
1821,  su<ldeidy  hinded  in  Guavjuiuil,  to  protect  the
republican  government  that  }ia<i  l>een  established
there.  On  19  Aug.  he  defeat<?d  the  S|>aniards  nt
Yaguachi,  but  he  was  routed  on  12  Sept.  at  (tuachi,
hnd  in  November  obtainetl  a  susjKjnsion  of  hostili-
ties, which  he  employed  to  reorganize  his  forces  and
obtain  auxiliary  tro<ips.  He  now  marched  upon
Quito,  and  on  24  May  defeated  the  enemy  in  the
battle  of  Pichincha,  granting  him  a  capitulation,
which  finished  the  Spanish  don)ination  in  K/Cuador.
the  nrovince  declaring  itself  incoriJoratj-d  in  the
republic  of  Colombia.  Sucre  was  promoted  major-
gencml  and  intt'ndant  of  the  department  of  Quito,
and  in  May,  1823,  was  s«^nt  with  a  i'olomltian
auxiliary  division  to  Peru.  Refusing  the  commaml-
in-chief,  he  remained  with  his  forces  in  the  defence
of  Callao,  and  sent,  on  4  July,  a  division  to  assist
Santa  Cruz  in  the  south.  After  the  arrival  of
Bolivar,  1  Sept.,  who  assumed  the  supreme  com-
mand, Sticre  co-oiK*rated  with  him  in  n-organizing
the  army  for  the  final  cam[)aign  against  the  S|)an-
ish  dominion.  In  July,  1824.  they  marchinl  a«Toss
the  Andes  to  attack  the  army  of  t'anterac.  and  de-
feated him  at  Junin  on  0  Aug.  Bolivar,  U'ing
obliged  to  leave  for  Lima  to  organize  the  govern-
ment, appointed  Sucre  to  the  command-in-chief  of
the  allieil  army,  ordering  him  to  force  a  decisive
campaign  on  the  viceroy.  La  S«>rna.  On  J>  Dec..
Sucre  met  with  5.8(K)  men  the  Spanish  army  of
9,8(M)  men  on  the  plateau  of  Ayacucho,  an<l  totally
defeate«l  it,  capturing  the  viceroy  and  ending  the
Spanish  jK)wer  in  Peru.  Sucre  was  createtl  by  the
Peruvian  congress  grand  marshal  of  Ayacucho.
and  man-hed  at  once  to  upiK*r  Peru  to  suImIiu*
Olafieta,  who  refuse<l  to  submit  to  the  capitula-
tion of  Ayacucho.  He  convoke<l  an  assembly  of
delegates  to  tlecide  upon  the  future  of  the  coun-
try, which,  nu-eting  a(,  ('hu(pjisa<'a.  dwlarwl  u|>-
pe'r  Peni  an  indejKMident  rei>ublic,  umler  the
name  of  Bolivia,  on  10  Aug.,  isi*).  The  constituent
congress,  which  met  2.')  May,  1820,  ele<>te<l  Sucre
president  for  life.  He  accepted  the  executive,  how-
ever, only  for  two  years; but  the  n'volution  of


'  Januarjr,  1827,  in  Peru.  aniiMt  the  authoritjr  of
,  liolivar,  oauwd  aJao  Mretml  fnfltinltf  in  La  Pax,
an<l  finally,  on  IN  April.  Iti98,  %  Colombian  ivgi-
I  nient  rt'ViiltiHl  in  ('hu(|uijgu^ Soorv  was  danger-
ously  woundetl,  and,  on  bin  rrrorerr,  he  reai'nMd
and  returmnl  to  (iuayaquil. When' finally  Keoa-
dor was  inva4le4l  by'  the  I'eruvian troopa.  8iicr»
was apiM)int(Hl c«)mmander-in-chief, and  totally
ciefeattMl the invmlent  under (ien. lia Mar  at
Tar«jui.  20  Feb., 1821». He  now  ntin-d to  pri-
vate life,  but  was  wnt  w  deputy  for  (Juajaquil  to
the  Colombian  cou^resM  at  Bogota,  90  Jan^  1(90,
which  eUH-t4>d  him  president,  and  vent  him  aa  oon-
roi»«ioner  to Itotgirio  de  Cucuta  to  arrange  the
difllcultu^  with  Venezuela. Sfing  the  hopehaa-
ness  of the task, he  wmn retumecl to Bogota,
and  when  congrew  cloaed  its  wmionx.  ho  was  re-
turning to  his  home  in  Uuayaquil  when  be  was
shot  from  ambush  in  the  mountain  of  Ik'mMOOik
At  first  it  wati attserteil  by  (ien.  Jrise  Maria  Obando.
district  contmander  of  P'astu,  that  the  murder  had
lH»en  wjmmitti'd  by  robU-rs.  but  it  is  generally  bo-
lievcnl  that  the  crime  was  instigatctl  br  Obando
himself,  though  he  tried  to  implicate  6en.  Juan
!  Jose  Fhjres. The  latter  was  vindicated  by  his  ("on.
Antonio,  in  his  "  Kl  (iran  .MariM-al  ile  .\yacu<-ho**
\  (New  York,  188.5). Sucre's  remains w«'n> tran»-
I  i>orted  by  his  family  to  the  Church  of  San  Kran-
I  Cisco  in  Quito,  wheiv  they  still  rc«st,  although  the
government  of  Itolivia  in  1845,  and  that  of  Vene-
,  zuela  in  1875,  asked  {M'rmissiun  to  transport  them
to  their  resjH-ctive  |*tinth<Mins.

SrCRf], Etlenne Henry (soo-crar),  Fn«nch
iiaiuter,  b.  in  Port  Koyal,  Acadia,  in  1703;  d.  in
Paris  in 1745. He  was  the  son  of  a  rich  settler
who  returned  to Francv  after  tli}-  taking  of  the
j  colony  by  the  Knglish. Young  Etienne  n^vived
I  his  early  e<lucation  at  Caen,  but  finisluHl  his  stud-
I  ies  at  the  College  of  the  Jesuits  at Paris,  and  be-
came afterwartla  pui»il  of  the  Acwlemy  of  designs.
In 1721)  he  exhibited in the  Aca<lemv  jnillery  a
"  Descente  de  croix  "  that  was  mm-h  aiin)in-<l.  and
in  1741  he  was  given  the  title  of  royal  |iainter  with
a  |)ension  of  1.200  livres. His  works  include"  Por-
trait of  the  Dauphin"  (1732): "Portrait  of  the
Duke  de  Saint  Simon  "  (1780);  "Christ  at  theCra-
'  die"  (ITJiO):  "An  Kpismle  of  the  War  in  A<-a«lia"
(175^7):  "  A  cad  ians  driven  Awav  from  their  Home"
(17:{8);  an<l  "  Portrait  of  liouis  XV."  (1741).

Sl'DDAKHS.  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Brad-
fonl.  Kngland,  in  180.1.  lie  emigrat<-<l  to  the
rnit*-*!  States  in  IKW.  was  onlaine<l  to  Ute  uiiui»-
'  try  of  the  Protestant  Kpiscopal  church  in  1888,
an<l  the  same  vear  Inn-ame  rector  of  .St.  James's
church.  Zanesville,  Ohio.  In  \XW  he  assumeil  the
rectorship  of  Grace  chun-h,  IMiiladelphia.  He  re-
'■  ceived  the  degriH*  of  D.  D.,  was  for  ftft«M>n  years
either  associate  or  s<>le  eiiitor  of  "The  Kpiscoiial
R«»corder."  and  tMlitiil  "  The  British  Pulpit '  (2
vols..  Phiiadeli.hiH.  ls;{5).

Sri)l>S.  William  F..  musician,  \x  in  Ixindon,
England.  5  March.  I84i{.  At  the  age  of  seven  be
came  with  his  |iarent.s  to  the  Tnite*!  States*.  While
he  was  yet  a  lK»y  he  leanie<l  to  play  on  several  in-
struments. I)ut  lie  had  no  regular  music-letwons  un-
til 1804.  Nine  years  later  he  became  a  pupil  at  the
Boston  cons(>rvatory  of  music.  Mr.  .Sudds  residesat
(iouverneur.  .St.  I^wrenw  co.,  N.  Y..  where  he  keeps
a  music-sfon'.  His  com|M>sitions  comprise  both  to-
cal  and  instrumental  music,  and  some  of  his  pieces
have  be<*ome  very  oopular.  He  has  also  imblished
"  National  Sclutol  for  the  Piano- Forte"  (IHHI),  and
several  collwtions  of  music  in  I  '  '  ,  includ-
ing "Anthem  (Jems"  (Philad*  I;  '3)  and
"  Mo»lem  Sttcnnl  Duets"  (Cincinii.....  .-----.,.


740


SULLIVAN


SULLIVAN


SULLIVAN,  Edward,  Canadian  Anglican  bish-
op, b.  in  Ireland  about  1835.  He  was  ordained
a  priest  of  the  Church  of  England  in  1857,  was
assistant  minister  at  St.  George^  church,  Montreal,
afterward  rector  of  Trinity  church,  Chicago,  And
then  took  charge  of  another  parish  in  Montreal.
He  became  bishon  of  Algoma  in  1882,  and  was
elected  bishop  of  Huron  in  1883,  but  declined.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1882.

SULLIVAN,  Jeremiah,  lawyer,  b.  in  Harrison-
burg, Va.,  21  July,  1794;  d.  in  Madison,  Ind.,  6
Dec,  1870.  He  was  educated  at  William  and  Mary
college,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Winchester,
Va.,  m  1814.  He  served  for  some  time  as  a  major
of  volunteers  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  in  1816  re-
moved to  Indiana,  and.  settling  at  Madison,  en-
f^aged  in  practice.  In  1821  he  was  elected  to  the
egislature,  and  while  a  member  of  that  body  pro-
posed Indianapolis  as  the  name  for  the  state  capi-
tal. From  1831  till  1837  he  was  one  of  the  fund
commissioners  for  the  state,  in  1837  he  was  ap-
pointed one  of  the  judges  of  the  state  supreme
court,  and  he  was  judge  of  the  criminal  court  of
Jefferson  county  from  1869  till  his  death.  He  was
once  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  congress,  and
had  been  appointed  by  the  governor  of  the  state  a
commissioner  to  adjust  the  land  question  that
arose  between  Ohio  and  Indiana  out  of  the  con-
struction of  the  Wabash  and  Erie  canal. — His  son,
Algernon  Sydney,  lawyer,  b.  in  Madison,  Ind.,  5
April,  1826 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  Dec,  1887,
was  educated  at  Hanover  college,  Ind.,  and  Miami
university,  Ohio,  and  graduated  at  the  latter  in
1850.  Having  been  admitted  to  the  bar,  he  prac-
tised for  several  years,  in  1855  removed  to  Cincin-
nati, and  in  the  spring  of  1859  to  New  York,  where
he  soon  attracted  attention  by  his  legal  talent  and
his  oratory.  Shortly  after  the  opening  of  the  civil
war  he  was  counsel  for  several  privateersmen  that
had  been  captured  and  taken  to  New  York,  and
his  acting  in  that  capacity  having  caused  him  to
be  suspected  by  the  authorities,  he  was  arrested
and  confined  in  Fort  Lafayette  for  three  months.
He  was  assistant  district  attorney  of  New  York  for
three  years,  and  public  udniinistrator  from  1875  till
1885,  resigning  each  of  those  ofTices  to  attend  to  his
private  practice.  Mr.  Sullivan  was  pi-esidentof  the
Southern  society,  and  connected  with  many  char-
itable associations. — Another  son,  Jeremiah  C,
soldier,  b.  in  Madison.  Ind.,  1  Oct..  1830;  d.  in  Oak-
land, Cal..  21  Oct.,  1890,  served  during  the  civil  war,
became  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  28  Ajjril,
1862.  and  resigned,  11  May.  1865.

SULLIVAN,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Berwick,  Me.,
17  Feb.,  1740;  d.  in  Durham,  N.  H.,  23  Jan.,  1795.
Dermod,  chief  of  Beare  and  Bantry,  Ireland,  who
was  killed  in  his  castle  of  Dunbov  in  1549,  was  his
well-known  lineal  ancestor,  rfis  father,  Owen,
who  died  in  1796  at  the  age  of  105,  was  born  in
Limerick  during  the  siege  in  1691,  and  came  to
this  country  in  1723.  The  son  studied  law,  prac-
tised with  success  in  Durham,  N.  H.,  and  from
1772  held  the  commission  of  major  in  the  militia.
He  was  sent  from  New  Hampshire  in  May,  1774,
to  the  Continental  congress  at  Philadelphia  at  the
age  of  thirty-three,  and  was  appointed  in  June,
1775,  one  oi  the  eight  brigadier-generals  of  the
Continental  army,  then  engaged  in  the  siege  of
Boston,  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene  and  himself  being

g laced  in  command  of  the  left  wing  under  Gen.
harles  Lee.  Before  this,  in  December,  1774,  he
had  led,  with  John  Langdon,  a  successful  expe-
dition against  Fort  William  and  Mary,  near  Ports-
mouth. He  took  a  principal  part  in  the  siege  of
Boston,  but  for  a  brief  period  was  detached  for  the


cAo^i^


z-c-^o4-'\>-tfv-»-».


defence  of  Portsmouth.  By  his  influence,  when
the  time  was  up  for  the  stipulated  service  of  the
troops  from  Connecticut,  the  army  was  re-enforced
by  2,000  men  from  his  own  state  of  New  Hamp-
shire. After  the
evacuation  of  the
city,  Sullivan  took
command,  on  2
June,  1776,  of  the
northern  army  on
the  borders  of
Canada.  He  made
an  unsuccessful
attack  on  the
British  at  Three
Rivers,  but  his
troops  were  pros-
trated by  small-
pox and  menaced
oy  greatly  supe-
rior numbers,  and
he  led  them  in  a
skilful  retreat  to
join  Washington
at  New  York.  Af-
ter holding  for  a
brief  period  the
chief  command  on
Lon^  Island,  and  being  appointed  major-general,
he  yielded  command  on  the  island  to  Gen.  Benja-
min Lincoln,  his  senior  in  years  and  date  of  com-
mission. With  Lord  Stirling  and  about  8,000  men
on  Long  Island  they  held  at  bay  for  a  time  23,000
British  troops,  better  equipped  and  disciplined.
Sullivan  and  Stirling  were  captured,  but  soon  ex-
changed. The  former  did  good  service  in  the  oper-
ations of  Westchester,  receiving  the  thanks  of  Wash-
ington in  general  orders  at  the  close  of  the  campaign.
When  Gen.  Charles  Lee,  lodging  apart  from  nis
troops,  was  taken  prisoner,  Sullivan  led  the  right
wing  to  join  Washington  on  the  Delaware,  and  com-
manded the  right  wing  in  the  passage  of  the  river
on  Christmas  night,  and  the  capture  of  the  Hessians
at  Trenton.  He  also  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Princeton.  While  waiting  for  the  British  to  attack
Philadelphia,  Sullivan  made  a  night  descent  on
Staten  island  to  capture  several  regiments  that  were
posted  there,  and  took  100  prisoners.  He  received
the  approbation  of  congress.  He  then  marched
rapidly  to  join  Washington,  and,  in  command  of
the  right  wing,  fought  at  the  Brandywine  and  at
Germantown,  where  he  defeated  the  British  left.
When,  early  in  1778,  the  alliance  was  made  with
France,  Sullivan  was  sent  by  Washington  to  take
command  in  Rhode  Island,  and  when  D'Estaing
arrived  with  his  fleet  he  did  his  part  to  raise  10,000
men  in  a  few  weeks  to  co-operate  with  it  against
Newport,  which  was  then  garrisoned  by  7,000
British  and  Hessians.  The  volunteers  were  dis-
concerted by  the  withdrawal  of  the  French  fleet,
which  sailed  away  to  fight  the  English,  and  being
instructed  by  Washington  that  5,000  more  troops
were  on  their  way  to  re-enforce  the  garrison,  Sulli-
van marched  the  army,  now  reduced  to  6,000  men,
to  Butt's  hill,  and  from  7  a.  m.  to  7  P.  M.  on  29
Aug.  fought  what  Lafayette  pronounced  the  best-
contested  battle  of  the  war,  6,000  on  each  side,  vir-
tually ending  about  4  p.  M.  in  driving  the  enemy
from  the  battle-field  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet.
While  waiting  in  the  sujnmer  of  1779  for  the
promised  return  of  D'Estaing  from  the  West  In-
dies to  co-operate  against  Canada,  Sullivan,  in  com-
mand of  4.000  men,  to  prepare  the  way,  entered
the  Iroquois'  country  in  the  state  of  New  York  to
punish  and  prevent  the  devastations  ttf  the  Indian


SULLIVAN


Sn^LIVAN


741


tribes  and  their  English  allies,  and  dcfeatinf;  all
that  venturiHl  to  op|>«»se  him,  incliidini;  a  fon-c
under  Josenh  Brant  mid  Sir  John  Johnitun  at  New-
town on  20  Aujf..  1771>,  drove  out  of  the  country
thousands  f)f  Itxliun  warriors  and  dt'stmvi'd  their
villas-sand  iTops.  Aftor  moving  M-vora!  ImndnMl
miles  through  the  wilderness,  he  retiimetl  to  Penn-
sylvania to  leani  that  D'Hstaing  had  fruitlessly
spent  his  strength  in  the  sifgt*  of  Savannah  and
sailed  for  France.  His  health  Wing  shattennl  hv
five  years'  active  and  continuous  serviw  in  the  field,
he  resigned,  and  was  again  sent  in  17H0  to  the
Continental  congress,  wIutc  he  hel()e<l  to  reorgan-
ize  the  army  and  to  establish  the  flnatices  and
puttlic  credit.  He  was  chairman  of  the  committee
that  aided  in  sup|)ressing  the  mutiny  of  Penn-
sylvania troops  in  1781.  Kesuming  his  practice  in
ifew  Hampsnirc.  ho  was  president  of  the  state  in
178tJ-'9,  a  memlx'r  of  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention of  1784.  councillor  in  1781,  an«l  a  commis-
sioner to  settle  the  "New  Hampshire  grant"
troiihl&s  with  Vermont.  In  1780.  hy  intrepidity
and  gfXMl  management,  he  saved  his  state  from
anarchy,  and  in  1788  he  was  active  in  securing  the
adoption  of  the  constitution  of  the  L'nitml  States.
From  1789  till  his  death  he  was  U.  S.  ju«lge  for  his
state.  Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  I),  in
1780.  See  his  life  by  Oliver  W.  B.  Peabo<ly,  in
Sparks's  "  American  Biography";  his  "  Military
Services  and  Public  Life,"  by  Thomas  {'.  Amory
(Boston,  1868);  and  "Journals  of  the  Military  Kx-
pedition  of  Major-General  John  Sullivan  against
the  Six  Nations  of  Indians  in  1779.  with  Ilecords
of  Centennial  Celebrations,"  prenared  by  order  of
the  state  government  (Auburn,  N.  Y.,  1887). — His
son,  George,  statesman,  b.  in  Durham,  N.  H.,  29
Wug.,  1771 ;  d.  in  Exeter,  N.  H..  14  June,  18:i8,  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1790.  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise  at
Exeter  in  1793.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state
house  of  representatives  in  1805,  attorney-general  of
New  Hampshire  in  l^OS-'B,  a  mcml)er  of  congress
in  18ll-'18,  and  of  the  state  senate  in  1814-'l.j.
and  was  again  attomev-general  in  1816-*3i).  He
published  orations  and  pamphlets. — (ten.  John's
brother,  JailieH,  statesman,  b.  in  Berwick.  Me..  22
April,  1744;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass..  10  Dec,  1808,
was  intended  for  a  military  life,  which  he  was  pre-

\ented  from  fol-
lowing by  the  frac-
ture of  a  limb.  He
studied  law  under
his  bnither,  was
admitted  to  the
bar,  l»egan  pnn--
tice  at  Biddefonl,
and  in  1770  re-
ceive<l the ap-

1>ointment  of

:ing's  attorney
for  York  county.
He  early  ttM>k  an
active  part  in  the
Revolution,  was  a
member  of  the
^  Provincial cou-

^'  ^ tM  .  gri'ss of Massa-

*:ya^nm^  t/ucOtAy^-u^^^ chusetts  in  1775.

and  with  two  oth-
ers ably  executetl  a  difficult  mi.ssion  to  Ticon<leroga.
In  the'early  part  of  177«J  he  was  ap(>ointe<l  a  juilge
of  the  sujM'rior  court,  which  nost  he  resigned  in
February,  1782.  In  1779-'80  he  wjis  a  memUr  of
the  State  constitutional  convention. and  in  17K4-'5
he  was  a  delegate  from  Massachusetts  to  the  Con-


tinental eongwML  n«  rep«>ate«llT  renrraBtited  Bos-
ton in  the  state  aaeeinbly.  and  in  I7H4  whji  •  com-
mi!«i«»ner  to  nettle the  con'  •  n  New

York  and  MaM-sachuAettJi  x\-^  uma  to

western  lands.  In  ITU?  he  was  of  tl»e  execatiTS
council  and  judge  of  probate  of  Saffolk  ooantr.
an<l  he  served  an  attorner-general  from  17W  tUl
1807,  when  he  was  electca  governor  of  MaMscba-
M>tls  by  the  Republican  party,  and  n>^If<'l<-4l  in
IHOH. Ho  was  one  of  the c>'  -il

by  Washington  to  settle  th*  ..-n

this  country  and  the  British  North  Americau  prov-
inces, and  the  projector  of  the  Middleaex  canaU
which  was  constructed  under  the  saperintendenoc
of  his  son,  John  I^angdon.  He  wa*  a  Bcniber  of
the  American  atademy  of  arts  and  srtences  from
its  institution,  and  one  of  the  princi(ial  foundenof
the  Massachusi'tts  historical  s<MMfiy,  ami  f<»r  many
years  its  president.  Harvanl  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1780.  He  publijihwl  "Olwervations
on  the  (iovemment  of  the  I'mtwl  States"  (Boston,
17iM);  "The  Path  to  Riches,  or  Dissertation  on
lianks  "  (1792) ;  "  Historv  of  the  District  of  Maine  "
(1795);  "The  Altar  of  liaal  thrown  Down,  or  tho
French  Nation  Defendwl"  (171>5);  "Impartial  Re-
view of  the  Causi>s  of  the  French  Revolution"
(1798);  "  History  «)f  Land-Titles  in  Massachusetta"
(1801);  "  Dis.sertation  on  the  Constitutional  Liber-
ty of  the  Press"  (1801);  *•  Corresjxtndence  with
Col.  Pickerinc"(1808);  and  a  "Historv  of  the
Penol>s<"ot  Inuians,"  in  "  Ma.ssa<-hus«'tts  flistorical
Collections."  His  life,  with  selections  from  his
writings,  was  publishe<l  by  his  grandson.  Thomas
C.  Amorv  (2  vols.,  lioston,  1859), — James's  son,
William,  author,  b.  in  Saco.  Me.,  30  Nov.,  1774:
d.  in  lioston,  Mass..  3  Sept..  ISW,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1792,  admitted  to  the  liar  in  1795.  and
practistil  successfully  for  many  years  in  Ii<»ston,
where  he  wa.s  long  presitlent  of  the  Suffolk  liar
association.  He  was  fri-ijucntlv  a  memU'r  of  the
state  legislature  and  council  k\{  Massachusetts  l>e-
tween  1804  and  1830,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
State  constitutional  convention  in  1830.  He  was
a  briga<lier-generBl  of  militia, and  a  memlter  of  the
-\cademy  of  arts  and  sciences  the  Massachusetts
historical  society,  and  the  American  |ihilt>soi>hicaI
society.  Mr.  Sullivan  was  a  fine  U'lles-Iettres
scholar,  and  a  p«'rsua.«'ivo  orator.  Harvard  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  182«.  He  published
"Political  Class-BtMik"  (Ii4>ston.  18:n):  "Moral
Class- Ii4K)k " (18*{) ;  "  Historical Cla.ss-B<wk  " ( 1838);
"  Familiar  lictters  on  the  Public  .Men  of  the  Kevo-
lution.  including  Events,  178;j-1815"  (lK34;  new
e«l.,  with  a  biographical  sketch  of  the  author,  bjr
his  son.  John  T.S.Sullivan,  Philadelphia,  1847);
"Sea  liife"  (Boston,  18:J7);  "Historical  Causes
and  Effects.  A.  D.  47(J-1517"(18:i8):  aiul  maiiv  ad-
dresses.—William's  son,  John  Turner  Sargent,
lawver,  b.  in  Boston,  in  1813;  d.  then-.  30  Dec.,
18:J8,  was  e<lucate<l  in  (Jermany.  studie«l  law.  wa:.
admitted  to  the  l»ar.  ami  practise<l  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  and  St.  I»uis,  Mo.  His  Mx-ial  and  convivial
qualities  ma«le  him  very  |>opular.  He  wrote  sev-
eral well-known  songs,  ami.  In'si«les  the  memoir  of
his  father.  publishe<l  translation-*  of  ^loru-s  from
the(Jerman. — .Aimther  son  of  (tow  James.  JollB
liMngdun,  engineer,  b.  in  Sbc«».  Me.,  9  April.  1777;
d.  ill  Itoston.  Mavs.,  9  FeU.  18«W.  after  engaging  in
mercantile  business  travelled  in  Euro|>e.  !4u»lie«l
the  const rm-tion  of  canals  in  France  and  England.
an<l  in  181)4  was  ap|H)iiite<l  agi-iit  and  engim-er  of
the  Mid<llesex  canal.  U-twttn  Bo>ton  and  Conconl.
N.  H  He  invent*-*!  a  >team  tow-Umt,  for  which
he  n-ceive*!  a  patent  in  1814.  in  preferem^e  to  Rob-
ert Fulton,  who  appliiil  for  it  at  tho  same  lime.


742


SULLIVAN


SDLLIVANT


Sullivan's  priority  of  invention  being  fully  shown.
In  1834  he  was  appointed  by  President  Monroe
associate  civil  engineer  of  the  board  of  internal
improvements,  which  post  he  resigned  in  1825,
after  re{x)rtin^  the  practicability  of  a  canal  across
the  Alle^hanies.  lie  then  studied  medicine,  re-
ceived his  degree  at  Yale  in  18JJ7,  and  engaged  in
practice  at  New  Haven,  adopting  the  views  of  the
noraoeopathists.  In  1847  he  removed  to  New  York.
Dr.  Sullivan  made  some  important  inventions  and
discoveries  in  medicine  and  surgery,  and  published

Samphlets  on  steamboat  navigation. — Jonn  Lang-
on's  son,  Thomas  Russell,  clergyman,  b.  m
Brookline,  Mass.,  in  1799 ;  d.  in  Somerville,  Mass.,
23  Dec,  1862,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1817,
was  settled  as  a  Unitarian  minister  at  Keene,  N.  H.,
in  1825-'35,  and  taught  in  Boston  from  1835  till
his  death.  He  published  "  Remarks  on  Robin-
son's Sermon  on  the  Divinity  of  Christ "  (Keene,
N.  H.,  1826) ;  "  Letters  against  the  Immediate
Abolition  of  Slavery  "  (Boston,  1835) ;  "  Limits  of
Responsibility  in  Reforms  "(1861) ;  and  other  con-
troversial writings.  He  edited  sermons  on  "  Chris-
tian Communion."

SULLIVAN,  Michael,  Canadian  educator,  b.
in  Killarney,  County  Kerry,  Ireland,  13  Feb.,  1838,
He  came  to  Camula  in  1842,  and  settled  with  his
parents  at  Kingston,  where  he  was  educated  at
Regiopolis  college,  and  graduated  as  a  physician
at  Queen's  college  in  1858.  After  pnictising  four
years  in  that  place,  he  was  appointed  in  1862  lec-
turer in  anatomy  in  Queen's  college,  and  upon  the
establishment  of  tlie  Royal  college  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  affiliation  with  Queen  s,  he  be-
came its  professor  of  anatomy.  He  is  now  (1888)
f)rofessor  of  surgery  and  histology  in  the  same  col-
ege  and  of  anatomy  in  the  Female  medical  college,
a  trustee  of  Kingston  hospital,  and  a  member  of  the
Ontario  medical  council,  and  was  president  of  the
Medical  association  of  Canada  in  1883.  He  was
mayor  of  Kingston  in  1874  and  1875,  an  unsuc-
cessful candidate  for  the  Dominion  parliament  in
the  Conservative  interest  in  1882,  and  was  ap-
pointed senator,  29  Jan.,  1884.  He  was  purveyor-
general  during  the  northwest  rebellion  in  1885,  and
received  the  thanks  of  the  minister  of  militia.

SULLIVAN,  Peter  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Counter
Cork,  Ireland,  15  March,  1821 ;  d,  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  2  March,  1883,  He  was  descended  from  Gren.
William  O'Sullivan  of  the  British  army,  came  to
this  country  with  his  parents  when  he  was  two
years  old,  passed  his  earlv  years  in  Philadelphia,
and  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylva-
nia. He  omitted  the  prefix  "  O "  from  his  name
on  reaching  manhood.  He  served  through  the
Mexican  war,  attaining  the  rank  of  major,  and  at
its  close  was  appointed  an  official  stenographer  in
the  U.  S.  senate.  In  1848  he  removed  to  Cincin-
nati, studied  law,  and  was  a  draughtsman  for  the
U.  S.  topographical  corps.  In  1855  he  was  elect-
ed colonel  of  the  German  regiment  and  contrib-
uted toward  the  suppression  of  the  "  Know-Noth-
ing"  riots  of  that  year.  At  the  opening  of  the
civil  war  he  raised  four  regiments  at  his  own  ex-
pense, was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  48th  Ohio
volunteer  infantry,  and  was  present  at  Shiloh,
where  he  captured  a  Confederate  flag  and  was
wounded  three  times.  In  consequence  of  his  in-
juries he  was  unfitted  for  service  for  nine  months,
but  he  was  present  at  the  fall  and  capture  of
Vicksburg,  was  post-commander  at  Memphis  and
Fort  Pickering,  and  during  the  last  days  of  the
war  was  the  presiding  judge  of  the  military  court
of  claims.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  13  March,  1865,  for  gallant  and  meri-


torious services,  and  immediately  aft«r  was  ap-

Eointed  by  President  Johnson  minister  to  the
Tnited  States  of  Colombia,  serving  till  1869,  when
his  health  compelled  him  to  resign.  He  subse-
quently practised  occasionally  in  the  U.  S.  su-
preme court,  in  the  court  of  claims,  and  in  the
fovernment  departments  at  Washington,  I).  C.
le  was  the  author  of  the  '•  Don  Felix  Letters,  or
Pen-Portraits  of  Members  of  the  Bar."

SULLIVANT,  William  Starlinff,  botanist,  b.
in  Franklinton,  near  Columbus,  Ohio,  15  Jan.,
1803 ;  died  in  Columbus.  30  April,  1873.  He  was
educated  at  Ohio  university,  and  at  Yale,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1823.  The  death  of  his  father,
Lucas,  prevented  him  from  studying  a  profession,
and  he  was  called  to  the  charge  of  the  family  prop-
erty. This  duty  led  to  his  becoming  a  surveyor
and  practical  engineer,  which  occupation  he  fol-
lowed until  late  m  life.  Meanwhile  he  turned  his
attention  to  botany,  and  collected  and  studied  the
plants  of  central  Ohio,  publishing  "  A  Catalogue
of  Plants,  Native  or  Naturalized,  in  the  Vicinity  of
Columbus,  Ohio  "  (1840).  Soon  afterward  he  turned
his  attention  to  mosses,  which  became  the  subject  of
his  special  study  until  he  was  recognized  as  the  most
accomplished  bryologist  that  this  country  has  ever
produced,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  his  superior
existed  anywhere.  His  first  publication  in  this
branch  of  botany  was  "  Musci  Alleghanienses  "  (2
vols.,  1845),  the  materials  for  which  were  collected
on  a  botanical  excursion  along  the  Alleghany
mountains  from  Maryland  to  Georgia  in  1848.
His  next  work  of  importance  was  "Contributions
to  the  Bryology  and  Hepaticology  of  North  Amer-
ica "  (2  parts,  1846-'9),  which  appeared  originally
in  the  "Memoirs  of  the  American  Academy  of
Arts  and  Sciences."  The  description  of  th^  Musci
and  Hepaticai  in  the  second  edition  of  Gray's
"  Manual  of  the  Botany  of  the  Northern  United
States  "  was  prepared  by  him  and  issued  separately
as  "  The  Musci  and  Hepaticae  of  the  United  Stat^
East  of  the  Mississippi  River "  (New  York,  1856).
In  association  with  Leo  Lesquereux  (5'.  v.)  he  pub-
lished "  Musci  Boreal i  A mericaniExsiccati"  (1856),
containing  the  results  of  a  journey  through  the
mountainous  parts  of  the  southern  states.  He  ex-
amined the  specimens  that  were  collected  by
Charles  Wright  in  Cuba,  and  issued  "  Musci  Cu-
bensis"  (I860);  also  those  gathered  by  August
Fendler  in  Venezuela  and  by  Charles  Wright  on
the  North  Pacific  exploring  expedition,  but  the
results  had  not  been  published  at  the  time  of  his
death.  The  mosses  collected  by  the  South  Pacific
exploring  expedition  under  Capt.  Charles  Wilkes;
and  those  of  the  Pacific  railroad  exploration  under
Lieut.  Amiel  W.  Whipple,  were  examined  by  him,
and  his  results  appeared  in  the  government's  reports
of  the  expeditions.  His  greatest  work  was  "  Icones
Muscorum  "  (1864 ;  Supplement,  1874),  consisting
of  figures  and  descriptions  of  most  of  those  mosses
pecmiar  to  eastern  North  America  that  had  not
oeen  represented  up  to  that  time.  The  name  of
Sullivantia  Ohionis  was  given  by  his  associates,  Asa
Gray  and  John  Torrey,  to  a  rare  saxifragaceous
plant  which  he  had  discovered  in  Ohio.  "The  de-
gree of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Gambler
m  1864,  and,  besides  his  membership  in  scientific
societies  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  he  was
elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences  in
1872.  His  bryological  books  and  his  collections
and  preparations  of  mosses  were  given  to  the  Gray
herbarium  of  Harvard  university, and  the  remainder
of  his  botanical  library,  his  choice  microscopes,  and
other  collections  wei-e  bequeathed  to  the  Univer-
sity of  Ohio  and  to  Starling  medical  college,  which


SULLY


SULLY


748


was  foiindwl  by  hit*  uncle,  nnd  of  which  hr>  wn.<«
the  M'nior  trustiH'.— Ili»  brothor,  Mirhttol  LuraH,
fanner,  b.  in  Franklinton,  Ohio.  ((  Auk..  1N4J7:  d.
in  Ilendcrson,  Ky.,  21>  Jnn..  IHTil,  wtut  nlucaud
at  t)hi«)  univcn<ity  an<l  at  Centn-  collcp-.  Ken-
tucky. an«l  aflerwanl  cn^fiiK*'*!  in  fanning;.  He
IinxHfdetl  at  once  to  improve  the  ininieiise  tract  of
and  that  lie  inherite<l  fnjin  his  father.  rai-Hnl  muicM
and  bliHHliil  hors4'^,  and  wa.s  an  ori|i;inator  of  the
Ohio  stock  im(K)rtin);  coin|uiny,  which  introduced
anew  em  of  sttx-k-breedin^  in  the  west.  In  IH.'M
ho  s<ild  his  Ohio  estate,  l>ouKht  H(»,(HX)  acres  of  liind
in  Illinois,  and  engapnl  in  fanning;  on  h  larf;er
8<?ale  than  hatl  ever  Vmhmi  at  tempt  chI  l»efon\  He
intrfKluce<l  new  mctlxMlsand  improvtnl  ma^-hinery
on  his  farm  of  "  Hr«uwllands."bnt.  meeting;  with  re-
verses, he  sold  part  of  his  proiwrtv  and  rt'tired  to
his  farm  of  4(>,0(K)  ai-res  at  Hurf  Oaks,  111.  The
estate  embractMl  sixty-flve  s<|uan?  miles.

SrLLY,  ThoiiiaMi  painter,  b.  at  Horncastle.  Lin-
colnshire, Kntrland,  8  June,  178:$;  d. in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  ri  Nov.,  1872. At  the  a^^*  of  nine  he  was  !
Drought  by  his  parents  to  the  Unitt^l  States. His  \

father  placetl  him  in  ^
179.)  in  an  insurance  ■
broker's office, but  I
it  soon  liecame  evi-  |
dent  that  art  was  his  i
true vocation. In
1799 he  joined  his
brother  Laurence,  a
miniature-painter.at
Richmond.  Va.,  and  !
two years  later  re-  i
moved  with  him  to  j
Norfolk, Thomas  |
soon surpassed his  ,
brother,  and  began
to  try  his  han<l at
oil |M>rt  raits, aided
somewhat  by  Henry
Ik'mbr'dge. He  de-
termined  to  go to  ,
London  for  study,  and  worked  hard  to  gain  sufll-
cient  money  to  carry  him  there. But  the  death  of
his  brother  in  1804  decided  him  to  remain  and  pro-
tect the  latters  family,  whom  he  had  left  unpnv  j
vided  for. In  1806,  after  marrying  his  brother's  i
widow.  Sully  went  to  New  York,  where  he  residwl  I
until  1808.  '  In  1807  he  made  a  short  visit  to  IJos-
ton.  where he  had  some  instruction ami  a<lvice
from  Gilbert  Stuart. He  returned  to  Philadelphia
in  1809,  and  went  the  same  year  to  London. Here
he  studied  for  some  time  un<ler  Ik>njamin  West,
and  made  copies  after  old masters  that  had  been
contracted  for  in  this  country,  after  which  he  em -
Iwrked  for  New  York in 1810. He now  settlfnl
permanently  in  Philiulelphia. During  the  follow-
ing years  he  executed  numerous  |H>rtniits,  notably
tho.se  of  George Frederick  Cooke  as  UichanI  III.,
which is  owned by  the  Peimsylvania  academy;
lk?njamin  Hush  (1814):  an«l  Com.  Decatur,  in  the
city-hall.  New York.  •  In  1818 the  legislature  of
North  Carolina  applied  to  him  for  two  full-length
portraits  of  Wiushingt<m. Sully,  in  reply.  pr<t|H)se<l
to  paint  a  historical  picture  which  should repre-
sent stune memorable  action  of  the great  com-
mander, and  suggested  the  crossing  of  the iK'la-
ware. This was agreed upon ; but when  Sully
wrote  for  the  dimensions  of  the  s|>ace  that  the  pic-
ture was  to  occupy,  he  re<'eivwl  no  answer. Nev-
ertheless, he  pnx-WHled  with  the  work  on  a  canvas
of  large  size. When,  after  a  consiilerable  ex|K'ns4'
of  time  and  money,  the  picture  was  (inishe«l.  he
was  informe*!  that  I  here  was  no  place  titttnl  to  n-


''''?^^€cr'^t/oc££c/.


ceivett,  and  it  wan  thrown  u|ion  hi«  handn. The

i»uture  Anally  came  int<i  th<'  i««*.-«.t<in  of  tb«
Bost4*n  muxeum. Sully »  ~<ici>

CMvfuI  in  his  |M>rtraitN  lif  »  k>

erman  says  of  him  :  "  Hiw  orgam/jui.  to

svm|>athize  with  the  fair  and  lovclt  Jto

the  grand  or  wjniii".  .  .  .  .Sully'n  fori.  <  v>-

ful." Among  bin  numer«>u)>  {mrtm  :<h

many  have  Un-n  engravwl,  are  th"*-  ik»-

than'  Williams  (IHl.*.):  Kif>hop  W  ..f

IVnnsvlvania ; I^ifavette, in ii  -ill,

Philatielphia :  Thomast  JeffepM^n.  |mtm<il  f<>r  lh«
I'liittnl  States  military  acmlemv  (1821):  Fanny
Kemble  and  Imt  father,  Charles  fCembli- ;  Ut-verdy
Johnson  ;  Charles  Carnill, of  Carn«llton  ;(^u<Tn  Vic-
tt>ria,  t>ainte<l  in  |k:j7-'m  for  the  St.(i<'i-'-  «.«  iitr,
Philatielphia;  Ki'm  brand  t  Peale ;  Pet'  'in

(1827);  Alexander  J.  Dalian;  Dr.  Philii  >*-

ick ;  Josi-ph  Hopkinson  ;  George  iM.  Dallas;  and
Rtil>ert  F.  St4Kkton  (IMl).  The  Conoran  gallery
owns  the  ijortraits  of  James  Madi.son,  Andrvw
Jackson  (1825),  John  .Marshall,  and  a  fiortmit  of
himself.  He  |>ainte«l  alw>  some  llgur«»-pii'«fji  and
historical  iiicturi's.  among  which  an-  "<  apturv  of
Major  Andn'"(  1812) and  "  Minin«la"(181.')>.  .Sulljr
wrote  an  autobiograplii<-al  sketch,  "  iJecol lections
of  an  Old  Painter,"  which  apiH>ared  in  "Hours  at
Home"  for  November,  1WJ9.  His  "  Hint»to  Young
Painters,"  which  he  pre|»are<I  for  the  press  in  1851
and  revise<l  in  1871,  was  publishcHl  after  his  dt'Sth
(Philadelphia,  1H7:1).— His  son.  Thomas,  nn<l  hi«
daughter,  Ja.nk,  afterward  Mrs.  John  C.  Darley,
followe«l  their  father's  profession. — Another  sou,
Alfred,  soldier,  b.  in  Philwlelphia,  Pa,  in  1821 :
d.  in  Fort  Vancouver,  Washington  territory,  17
April,  1879.  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1841.  assii;ne«l  to  the  2d  infantry,
which  was  then  enpigiMl  in  the  S-minoU?  war.  and
participated  with  cn'«lit  in  the  attack  on  Hawe
Creek  camp,  2.")  Jan.,  1842.  He  was  on  garrison
tluty  on  the  great  lakes  till  the  Mexican  war,  and
after  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz  in  1847  was  ordered
to  the  north  on  recruiting  service.  He  was  then
stationed  in  California,  and  on  22  Feb.,  1849,  was
promoted  to  cautain.  In  1853  he  was  sent  with
others  to  rt'-enforce  the  governor  of  On'gr>n  in
his  op<'rations  against  the  Kogue  river  Indiana,
and  in  DecemU-r  of  that  year,  while  on  hi*  way  to
New  S'ork,  he  was  wn-ckeil  off  the  California  cxMSt
ami  remained  six  tlavs  on  a  desert  island.  He  was
then  in  Minnesota  Sebniska.  and  Dakota  till  1858,
and,  aft*>r  spending  a  year  in  Kurr»|»e  on  leave  of
absence,  to»)k  jmrt  in  o|)erations  against  the  Chey-
enne Indians  in  18({0-'l.  He  then  servinl  in  the  de-
fences of  Washington  till  4  Manh,  1802,  when  he
became  coUmel  of  the  'M\  Minnesota  regiment.  He
le<l  a  brigade  during  the  change  of  biuie  Iti  James
river,  and  was  brevetteil  lieutenant-colonel,  l'.  S.
armv,  for  mllantrv  at  Fair  t>ak.-.  ami  colonel  for
Malvern  Hill.  After  engaging  in  the  northern
Virginia  and  Maryland  camiwigns.  he  wa*  nuule
brigatlier-genenil  i)f  volunt«-«Ts.  1  IK't..  18<l5j,  He
le«l  his  bri>:jule  at  Chancellorsville.  and  in  May,
18<KI,  was  avsjgtKHl  to  the  command  of  the  De-
partment of  Dakota,  where  he  »M>n  gaineil  note
bv  his  exjHMlitioii.s  again.st  ht>stile  northwi-rtem
Indians,  especially  in  the  engagement  at  White
Stone  Hill.  8  Sept.,  18(W.  that  at  Tah-kah-ha-
kulv,  28  July.  1864,  and  the  skinnish  in  the  Dad
l>auds,  8  Aug.,  1864.  He  was  given  the  brevet  of
major-general  of  v«>luntecrs.  and  that  of  briga«lier-
general  in  the  n-cular  armv.  at  the  do**'  of  the
war.  and  sul»s«'<jnentiv  «-rvetl  on  the  Uwrxl  of  pn>-
moiion.  aiitl  was  on  sjHtial  service  in  the  mterkir
il.|«irtment  at  Washington. Ho  was  made  lieu-


744


SULTE


SUMNER


tenant-colonel,  28  July,  1866,  and  colonel  of  the
10th  infanlry,  10  Dec,  1872.

SULTE,  Benjamin,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Three  Rivers,  Quebec,  17  Sept.,  1841.  He  early
devoted  himt^elf  to  literary  pursuits,  became  edi-
tor of  "  Le  Canada"  in  1866,  entered  the  service
of  the  Canadian  parliament  as  one  of  its  trans-
lators in  November,  1867,  and  in  1870  became  at-
tached to  the  department  of  militia  and  defence.
He  established  in  Three  Rivei-s  the  Literary  insti-
tute, of  which  he  was  the  first  president,  was
elected  in  1866  corresponding  member  of  the  •'  Cer-
cle  artistique  et  litteraire "  of  Brussels,  Belgium,
was  president  of  the  Institute  Canadien-PVan9ais
in  1874-'6,  and  was  corresponding  delegate  of
"  L'Institution  ethnographique  de  France  "  m  1879.
He  became  a  member  of  the  Royal  society  of  Can-
ada in  1882,  and  in  1885  was  made  president  of  its
first  section.  He  is  also  connecteu  with  various
learned  societies  in  the  United  States,  Canada,  and
Europe.  He  has  contributed  to  periodicals,  and
published  "  Les  Laurentiennef! "  (Montreal,  1870);
"History  of  Three  Rivers"  (1870);  "Les  chants
nouveaux "  (1876) ;  "  Melanges  d'histoire  et  de
litterature"  (Ottawa,  1876);  "Chronique  triflu-
vienne  "  (Montreal,  1879);  and"Histoire  des  Ca-
nadiens-Fran9ais "  (8  vols.,  1882-5).

SUMMERFIELD,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in
Preston,  England,  31  Jan.,  1798 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  13  June,  1825.  He  was  educated  at  a  Mora-
vian  school,  and removed  to  Dublin in 1813,

where  he  plunged
into  a  life  of  dissipa-
tion, and  was  final-
ly imprisoned.  A
period  of  contrition
succeeding,  he  unit-
ed in  1817  with  the
Wesleyans,  where
his  pulpit  talents  at-
tracted universal  at-
tention, and  in  1819
he  was  preaching  to
immense  congrega-
tions in  Dublin  and
doing  missionary  la-
bor. His  health  fail-
ing, he  removed  to
New  York  in  1821,
and  was  admitted  to
the  Methodist  con-
ference of  that  state.
In  1822  he  visited
Philadelphia,  Baltimore,  and  Washington,  his  elo-
quence everywhere  arousing  enthusiasm.  The  same
year  he  visited  France  and  England,  again  in  quest
of  health,  and  having  been  appointed  a  delegate  to
the  anniversary  meeting  of  the  Protestant  Bible
society  in  Paris.  Upon  his  return,  in  April,  1824,
he  preached  in  the  large  cities  with  great  success,
and  formed  missionary  societies  till  the  following
February.  He  was  a  founder  of  the  American
tract  society  a  short  time  before  his  death.  Prince-
ton gave  him  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1822.  His
biography  was  written  by  John  Holland  (New
York,  1829)  and  by  William  M.  Willett  (Philadel-
phia, 1857),  and  his  "Sermons  and  Sketches  of
Sermons"  were  published  (New  York,  1842).

SUMMERS,  Thomas  Osmond,  clergyman,  b.
in  Dorsetshire,  England,  11  Oct.,  1812.  He  came
to  the  United  States  in  1830,  united  wilh  the
Methodist  church,  was  admitted  to  the  Baltimore
conference  in  1835,  and  appointed  to  the  Augusta
circuit,  Va.  In  1840  he  was  one  of  the  organizers
of  the  first  Texas  conference,  four  years  later  he


was  transferred  to  the  Alabania  conference,  of  which
he  was  a  member  till  1876,  and  in  1845,  as  secre-
tary of  the  Louisville  convention,  he  assisted  in
the  organization  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,
south.  The  following  year  he  was  appointed  co-
editor  of  the  "Southern  Christian  Advocate"  and
chairman  of  the  committee  to  compile  a  new  hymn-
book.  In  1850  he  was  elected  by  the  generaf  con-
ference editor  of  their  books  and  tracts  and  of
the  "  Sunday-School  Visitor,"  and  in  1858  he  took
charge  of  the  "Quarterly  Review."  During  the
civil  war  he  returned  to  Alabama  and  performed
pastoral  work  till  1866,  when  he  was  appointed
editor  of  the  Nashville  "  Christian  Advocate."  He
became  professor  of  systematic  theology  in  Van-
derbilt  university,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  in  1874,  was
dean  of  the  theological  faculty,  and  ex-officio  pas-
tor of  the  institution.  He  has  been  secretary  of
every  general  conference  of  his  church.  The" de-
grees of  D.  I),  and  LL.  D.  have  been  conferred  upon
him.  Dr.  Summers  has  revised  and  edited  hundreds
of  church  books  with  introductions,  notes,  and  ad-
ditions. Among  his  works  are  "Commentaries  on
the  Gospels  and  on  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles"  (6
vols.);  "Commentary  on  the  Ritual  of  the  M.  E.
Church,  South  " ; "  Talks,  Pleasant  and  Profitable  " ;
"The  Golden  Censer":  "Refutation  of  Thomas
Paine's  Theological  Writings,  not  answered  in
Bishop  Warren's  '  Apology ' " ;  Watson's  "  Biblical
and  Tneologieal  Dictionary,"  enlarged  and  revised ;
and  many  tracts,  pamphlets,  and  sermons.

SUMNER,  Charles,  statesman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  6  Jan.,  1811  ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  11
March,  1874.  The  family  is  English,  and  William
Sumner,  from  whom  Charles  was  descended  in  the
seventh  generation,  came  to  America  about  1635
with  his  wife  and  three  sons,  and  settled  in  Dor-
chester, Mass.  The  Sumners  were  generally  farm-
ers. Job,  grandfather  of  Charles,  entered  liarvard
in  1774,  but  in  the  next  year  he  joined  the  Revolu-
tionary army,  and  served  with  distinction  during
the  war.  He  was  not  graduated,  but  he  received  in
1785  an  honorary  degree  from  the  college.  He  died
in  1789,  aged  thirty-three.  Charles  Pinckney  Sum-
ner (b.  1776,  d.  1839),  father  of  Charles,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1796.  He  was  a  lawyer  and  was
sherifif  of  Suffolk  county  from  1825  until  a  few  days
before  his  death.  In  1810  he  married  Relief  Jacob,
of  Hanover,  N.  H.,  and  they  had  nine  children,  of
whom  Charles  and  Matilda  were  the  eldest  and
twins.  Matilda  died  in  1832.  Sheriff  Sumner  was
an  upright,  grave,  formal  man,  of  the  old  Puritan
type,  fond  of  literature  and  public  life.  His  anti-
slavery  convictions  were  very  strong,  and  he  fore-'
told  a  violent  end  to  slavery  in  this  country.  In
his  family  he  was  austere,  and,  as  his  income  was
small,  strict  economy  was  indispensable.  Charles
was  a  quiet  boy;  early  matured,  and  soon  showed
the  bent  of  his  mind  by  the  purchase  for  a  few
cents  of  a  Latin  gnimmar  and  "  Liber  Primus "
from  a  comrade  at  school.  In  his  eleventh  year
he  was  placed  at  the  Latin-school  where  Wen-
dell Phillips,  Robert  C.  Winthrop,  James  Freeman
Clarke,  and  other  boys,  afterward  distinguished
men,  were  pupils.  Sumri,er  excelled  in  the  classics,
in  general  information,  and  in  writing  essays,  but
he  was  not  especially  distinguished.  Just  as  he
left  the  Latin-school  for  college  he  heard  President
John  Quincy  Adams  speak  in  Faneuil  hall,  and  at
about  the  same  time  he  heard  Daniel  Webster's
eulogy  upon  Adams  and  Jefferson.  It  was  in  a
New  England  essentially  unchange<l  from  the  older,
but  refined  and  softened,  that  Sumner  grew  up.
At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  was  reserved  and  thought-
ful, caring  little  for  sports,  slender,  ta^,  and  awk-


ex


ITcwVftk  r  An>i<tiJiv.  &  Co


SUMNER


8UMNKU


749


ward.  ni«  thirst  for  ktiowlwlijp  of  pverr  klinl.
with  singular  Hbility  mid  mpidity  in  iu-i|umnK  it.
was  already  n-nmrkMlilo.  lie  had  made  a  cotniH'iid
of  Ktif^lish  history  iti  «>i(;hty-six  \Hkge»  uf  a  eupy-
book,  and  had  ruad  CfiltiM>n'rt  hi.story.

In  SenttMiitier,  1836,  ho  iM-^^an  \i'\»  Htudiet*  at  Mar-
vartl.  In  the  claHsics  and  history  and  forennicH,
and  in  lx.'lli's-lettn»H,  ho  was  ainon^;  thu  be(<t  HohoiarK.
Hut  he  failoil  entirely  in  niatheniaticH.  HIh  mcnt-
orv  was  extraoniinary  and  his  reading  exton»ive.
W^ithout  disyi]»atioii  of  any  kind  and  without  wn-
sitivenuhs  to  humor,  generous  in  his  iud);ment  of
his  comrades,  devoted  to  his  lxK)ks.  anu  p'i'nK  little
into  s4KMety,  ho  was  a  general  favorite,  although  his
college  life  gave  no  esjKH'ial  prt>mtse  of  a  distin-
guishe<l  career.  In  his  junior  year  he  made  his
first  journey  from  home,  in  a  iH'destrian  tour  with
some  classmates  to  liiike  Champlain.  returning  by
the  Hudson  river  and  the  city  of  New  York.  In
1880  ho  was  graduated,  and  dovotetl  himself  for  a
year  to  a  wide  ran^e  of  retuling  an<l  studv  in  the
Latin  classics  and  in  general  literature,  flo  reso-
lutely grappled  with  mathematics  to  re|>air  the
defect  in  nis  education  in  that  branch  uf  study,
wrote  a  prize  essay  on  commerce,  and  listene<l
carefully  to  the  Ik)ston  orators,  Webster,  Everett,
Choate,  and  Channing.  No  day,  no  hour,  no  op-
portunity, was  lost  by  him  in  the  pursuit  of  knowl-
e<lge.  Ilis  first  interest  in  public  questions  was
awakened  by  the  anti-Ma'Jonic  movement,  which
he  held  to  Ik?  a  "great  and  g<K>d  cause."  two  adjec-
tives that  were  always  ass^wiated  in  his  estimate  of
causes  and  of  men.  Mindful  of  Dr.  Johnson's
maxim,  he  diligently  maintained  his  friendships  by
correspondence  and  intercourse.  On  1  Sept,  1831,
he  entered  Harvard  law-scho<il,  of  whicn  Judge
» Joseph  Story  was  the  chief  professor.  Storv  had
been  a  frienil  of  Sumner's  father,  and  his  friendly
regard  for  the  son  S4)on  rij)ene<l  into  an  affection
and  confidence  that  never  ceas«'d.  Sumner  was
now  six  feet  and  two  inches  in  height,  but  weighing
only  120  pounds,  and  not  jwrsonally  attracti%-e.
He'was  never  ill,  and  was  an  untiring  walker;  his
voice  was  strong  and  clear,  his  smile  quick  and
sincere,  his  laugh  loud,  and  his  intellectual  indus-
try ami  his  memory  were  extraordinary.  He  1k?-
gan  the  study  of  law  with  the  utmost  enthusiasm,
giving  himself  a  wide  range,  keeping  can-ful  notes
of  the  moot-court  CAses,  writing  for  the  "  American
Jurist,"  and  preparing  a  catalogue  of  the  library  <.)f
the  Ijaw-school.  He  joined  the  temi>erance  so-
ciety of  the  professional  schools  and  the  wllege.
His  acquirements  were  already  large,  but  he  was
free  from  vanity.  His  mental  "habit  was  so  serious
that,  while  his  talk  was  interi'sting.  he  was  totally
disconcerted  by  a  jest  or  gay  re|iartee.  He  had
apparently  no  "ambition  except  to  learn  as  much
as  he  coultl.  ami  his  life  then,  as  always,  was  pure
in  word  and  deed.

The  agitation  of  the  question  of  slavery  ha<l  al-
ready begun.  "The  Lilx-nitor"  was  establisheil
by  Mr.  Ciarrison  in  Boston  on  1  Jan..  IHJJl.  The
"nullification  movement"  in  South  Carolina  <k'-
currtnl  whil«>  Sumner  was  at  the  liaw-school.  He
praised  President  Jatrkson's  proclamation,  ami  saw
civil  war  im|X'nding  ;  but  he  wrote  to  a  friend  in
1832  :  "  Politics  I  Ix-gin  to  loathe;  they  are  for  a
day,  but  the  law  is  for  all  time."  He  entered  the
law-ofllce  of  lien jamin  Itand.  in  Bost^jn,  in  January.
1884,  wrote  copiously  for  the  "Jurist,"  and  went  to
Washington  for  the  first  time  in  April.  The  favor
of  Judge  Story  oim-iuhI  to  Sumner  the  pleasantest
bouses  at  the'  ca|)ital.  and  his  professional  and
general  accomplishments  setrunHl  an  ever-wi<lening
welcome. But  Washington  only  deepened  hii>  love


for  the  law  and  hb  mrmwkoa  to  poUUa.  In  8m>-
umlwr,  1MH4.  he  wm admittod to  the  bnr.  Daitaf
the  month  tliat  he  nmtd  in  Wadiinfton,  Somnv
d(>MTil>e<l  hilt  flrnt  iniprwion  of  tb*  nnfortonato
nw-e  to  whow  welfare  hb  Ufv  was  to  be  dcvotad:
"  Fi>r  thr  first  time  I  ww  aUvM  [on  th*  joonMjr
through  .Maryland),  and  my  wont  prsoomMptioo
of  their  ap|iciarmnot)  and  isnorano*  did  not  fall  m
low  as  their  atrtual  stupintty.  Tbey  appanr  to  b*
nothing  inon*  than  m  "-^ea  M  flcoh,  an*

endowed  with  aiiythin.  .igencc  above  tho

bruteft.  I  have  now  an  uiea  of  tb«  blight  u|inn
that  part  of  our  couiitnr  in  which  thmj  live."  An*
tici|)ating  hearing  Calhoun,  be  my:  "He  will  ba
the  last  man  I  shall  ever  bear  apeak  in  Washing
ton."  In  l><i!)  he  was  appoinUid  by  Judcr  Slorr
a  commissioner  of  the  circuit  court  of  •■a

Stati>s  and  rv|>orter  of  .Storj'n  judicial  •  |  .nd

he  bepin  to  teach  in  the  I<aw-M-h<iol  during  the
judge  s  ab«en(*e.  This  mtvicv  ho  continued  in
1H:30-'7,  and  he  aidinl  in  pn  (>ariiig  a  digi-nt  of  the
decisions  of  the  .sui>n'me  court  of  Maine.  He  wrr>te
up<)n  literary  an(l  legal  topics,  be  IccUmxl  and
e<iite<l  and  pleade<l,  aiid  ho  was  much  orerworfced
in  making  a  bare  livelihood.  In  1885  hb  intereil
in  the  slaver^'  question  dwiientnL  The  flrrt  new»>
paper  for  which  he  subscriU-d  wa«*  "The  Liberator,**
and  ho  writes  to  Dr.  Francis  LieU-r,  then  profnaur
in  the  college  at  Columbia,  S.  C. :  "  What  Inink  yon
of  it  f  [slavery]  Should  it  longer  exiM  f  U  not
emancipation  pract  icable  f  We  are  Ui-oming  Aboli-
tioiiists,  at  the  north,  fast."  The  next  year,  1888^
his  "  blood  boils  "  at  an  indignity  offen><i  by  a  »lav»-
master  to  the  Ik)ston  counsel  <if  a  fugitive  »UiTa.
Sumner  now  saw  much  of  Channing.  by  whose  wia>
dom  and  devotion  to  freedom  he  was  deeply  in-
fluence«l.  His  articles  in  the  "  Jurist  "  had  o|iencd
corresiMindence  with  many  eminent  Kuropeati  pul>
I  Heists.  His  friends  at  home  were  chiefly  among
scholars,  and  alrea<ly  lyongfellow  wan  one  of  hfi
intimate  corn]>anions.  In  the  summer  of  1886  ba
made  a  journey  to  Canada,  and  in  December,
1837.  he  sailed  for  Franoe.

He  carrie<l  letters  from  distinguishe<l  Americana
to  distinguisheil  Kuroiieans  and  his  extnionlinarr
diligence  in  stu«ly  and  his  marvellous  memory  had
equip(>ed  him  for  turning  every  «>pj>ortunily  to  the
(test  account.  During  his  al>sence  he  kept  a  car»>
ful  diary  and  wn)te  Ittng  letters  many  of  which
an'  printiil  in  the  memoir  by  1-^wanl  I^  Pierce,
and  there  is  no  more  graphic  and  inton-wtinf
picture  than  they  present  of  the  social  and  pn)fc»-
sional  life  at  that  lime  of  the  countries  he  visited.
Sumner  remainetl  in  Paris  for  five  months,  and
carefully  improvinl  every  hour.  He  attended  150
university  Iwtures  by  the  most  renowned  profea-
sors.  He  walke<l  the  hospitals  with  the  great  eur>
gpons.  He  fre^pienteil  the  courttt  and  theatre*  and
operas  and  libraries  and  museums.  He  was  a  gueet
in  the  mctst  famous  salons,  and  he  saw  and  noted
everything,  not  as  a  loiterer,  but  as  a  student.  On
31  .May.  18:JH.  he  arrivinl  in  England,  when?  he
remaini?<l  f<^r  ten  months.  No  -American  had  erer
l)een  so  universally  re<five<l  and  like«l.  and  Carlyle
charaeteristieally 'doM'rilie*!  him  as  "  PojHiUnty
Sumner."  He  saw  and  studied  KngUuid  in  eTei7
as|HHt.  and  in  April.  1H30,  went  to  Italy  and  de-
vot«l  himself  to  the  study  of  its  language,  histonr.
and  literatur**.  with  which,  however,  he  wa* alltadjT
familiar.  In  Home,  where  he  r«<mained  for  aoaae
months,  he  met  the  M'lilptor  Thomas  Crawford,
whom  he  warmly  Iwfriemli'tl.  Early  in  October.
l?vJ».  he  left  Italy  for  Oennany.  in  the  roiildle  of
.March.  1H4U,  he'was  again  in  England,  and  in
May.  184U,  ho  returned  to  America.


746


SUMNER


SUMNER


He  showed  as  yet  no  sign  of  political  ambition.  !
The  "  hard-cider  campaign  "  of  184(),  the  contest  }
between  Harrison  and  Van  Buren,  began  imme-
diately after  his  return.  He  voted  for  Harrison,
but  without  especial  interest  in  the  measures  of  the
Whig  party.  In  announcing  to  a  brother,  then  in
Europe,  the  result  of  the  election,  he  wrote ;  "  I
take  very  little  interest  in  politics."  The  murder
of  Lovejoy  in  November,  1837,  and  the  meeting  in
Faneuil  hall,  where  Wendell  Phillips  made  his
memorable  speech,  and  the  local  disturbances  that
attended  the  progress  of  the  anti-slavery  agitation
throughout  the  northern  states,  had  plainly  re-
vealed the  political  situation.  But  Sumner's  let-
ters during  the  year  after  his  return  from  Europe
do  not  show  that  the  question  of  slavery  had  espe-
cially impressed  him,  while  his  friends  "were  in  the
most  socially  delightful  circles  of  conservative
Boston.  But  in  1841  the  assertion  by  Great  Britain,
of  a  right  to  stop  any  suspected  slaver  to  ascertain
her  right  to  carry  the  American  flag,  produced
great  excitement.  Sumner  at  once  showed  his  con-i
cern  for  freedom  and  his  interest  in  great  questions
of  law  by  maintaining  in  two  elaborate  articles,
published  in  a  Boston  newspaper  early  in  1842,  the
right  and  the  justice  of  such  an  inquiry.  Kent,
Story,  Choate,  and  Theodore  Sedgwick  approved
his  position.  This  was  his  first  appearance  in  the
anti-slavery  controversy.  In  1842  Daniel  Webster,
as  secretary  of  state,  wrote  his  letter  upon  the  ease
of  the  "  Creole,"  contending  that  the  slaves  who
had  risen  against  the  ship's  officers  should  not  be
liberated  by  the  British  authorities  at  Nassau.
Sumner  strongly  condemned  the  letter,  and  took
active  part  in  the  discussion.  He  contended  that
the  slaves  were  manumitted  by  the  common  law
upon  passing  beyond  the  domain  of  the  local  law
of  slavery;  and  if  this  were  not  so,  the  piracy
charged  was  an  offence  under  the  local  statute  and
not  under  the  law  of  nations,  and  no  government
could  be  summoned  to  surrender  offenders  against
the  municipal  law  of  other  governments.  In  April,
1842,  he  writes :  "  The  question  of  slavery  is  getting
to  be  the  absorbing  one  among  us,  and  growing
out  of  this  is  that  other  of  the  Union."  He  ad-
jured Longfellow  to  write  verses  that  should  move
the  whole  land  against  the  iniquity.  But  his  social
relations  were  still  undisturbed,  and  his  unbounded
admiration  of  Webster  showed  his  generous  mind.
"  With  the  moral  devotion  of  Channing,"  he  said
of  Webster,  "  he  would  be  a  prophet.''

In  July,  1843,  Sumner  published  in  the  "  North
American  Review  "  an  article  defending  Com.  Alex-
ander Slidell  Mackenzie  for  his  action  in  the  ease
of  the  "  Somers  "  mutiny,  when  a  son  of  John  C.
Spencer,  secretary  of  war,  was  executed.  He  pub-
lished also  a  paper  upon  the  political  relations  of
slavery,  justifying  the  moral  agitation  of  the  ques-
tion. In  this  year  he  contributed  largely  to  the
"  Law  Reporter,''  and  taught  for  the  last  time  in
the  Law-school.  In  the  election  of  1844  Sumner
took  no  part.  He  had  no  special  sympathy  with
Whig  views  of  the  tariff  and  the  bank,  and  already
slavery  seemed  to  him  to  be  the  chief  public  ques-
tion. He  was  a  Whig,  as  he  said  in  1848,  because
it  seemed  to  him  the  party  of  humanity,  and  John
Quincy  Adams  was  the  statesman  whom  he  most
admired.  He  was  overwhelmed  with  professional
work,  which  brought  on  a  serious  illness.  But  his
activity  was  unabated,  and  he  was  elected  a  member
of  various  learned  societies.  His  letters  during
1844  show  his  profound  interest  in  the  slavery
question.  He  speaks  of  the  "  atrocious  immorality
of  John  Tyler  in  seeking  to  absorb  Texas,"  anci
"  the  disgusting  vindication  of  slavery  "  by  Calhoun,


which  he  regrets  that  he  is  too  busy  to  answer.  In
1845  he  was  deeply  interested  in  the  question  of
popular  education,  and  was  one  of  the  intimate  ad-
visers of  Horace  Mann.  Prison-discipline  was
another  question  that  commanded  his  warmest
interest,  and  his  first  public  speech  was  made  upon
this  subject  at  a  meeting  of  the  Prison-discipline
society,  in  May,  1845,  This  was  followea,  on
4  July,  by  the  annual  oration  before  the  civil
authorities  of  Boston,  upon  "  The  True  Grandeur  of
Nations."  The  oration  was  a  plea  for  peace  and  a
vehement  denunciation  of  war,  delivered,  in  com-
memoration of  an  armed  revolutionary  contest,  to
an  audience  largely  military  and  in  military  array.
This  discourse  was  the  prototype  of  all  Sumner's
speeches.  It  was  an  elaborate  treatise,  full  of  learn-
ing and  precedent  and  historical  illustration,  of
forcible  argument  and  powerful  moral  appeal.  The
efEect  was  immediate  and  striking.  There  were
great  indignation  and  warm  protest  on  the  one
hand,  and  upon  the  other  sincere  congratulation
and  high  compliment.  Sumner's  view  of  the  ab-
solute wrong  and  iniquity  of  war  under  all  circum-
stances was  somewhat  modified  subsequently ;  but
the  great  purpose  of  a  peaceful  solution  of  inter-
national disputes  he  never  relinquished.  The  ora-
tion revealed  to  the  country  an  orator  hitherto  un-
known even  to  himself  and  his  friends.  It  showed
a  moral  conviction,  intrepidity,  and  independence,
and  a  relentless  vigor  of  statement,  which  were
worthy  of  the  best  traditions  of  New  England.
Just  four  months  later,  on  4  Nov.,  1845,  Sumner
made  in  Faneuil  hall  his  first  anti-slavery  speech,
at  a  meeting  of  which  Charles  Francis  Adams  was
chairman,  to  protest  against  the  admission  of  Texas.
This  first  speech  had  all  the  characteristics  of  the
last  important  speech  he  ever  made.  It  was  brief,
but  sternly  bold,  uncompromising,  aggressive,  and
placed  Sumner  at  once  in  the  van  of  the  political
anti-slavery  movement.  He  was  not  an  Abolition-
ist in  the  Garrisonian  sense.  He  held  that  slavery
was  sectional,  not  national ;  that  the  constitution
was  meant  to  be  a  bond  of  national  liberty  as  well
as  union,  and  nowhere  countenanced  the  theory
that  there  could  be  property  in  men ;  that  it  was
to  be  judicially  interpreted  always  in  the  interest
of  freedom  ;  and  that,  by  rigorous  legal  restriction
and  the  moral  force  of  public  opinion,  slavery
would  be  forced  to  disappear.  This  was  subse-
quently the  ground  held  by  the  Republican  party.
Sumner  added  to  his  reputation  by  an  elaborate
oration  at  Cambridge,  in  August,  1846,  upon  '•  The
Scholar,  the  Jurist,  the  Artist,  the  Philanthropist,"
of  which  the  illustrations  were  his  personal  friends;
then  recently  dead,  John  Pickering,  Judge  Story,
Washington  Allston.  and  Dr.  Channing.  The  refer-
ence to  Channing  gave  him  the  opportunity,  which
he  improved,  to  urge  the  duty  of  anti-slavery  ac-
tion. It  was  the  first  time  that  the  burning  ques-
tion of  the  hour  had  been  discussed  in  the  scholas-
tic seclusion  of  the  university.

In  September,  1846,  at  the  Whig  state  conven-
tion held  in  Faneuil  hall,  Sumner  spoke  upon  the
"  Anti-Slavery  Duties  of  the  Whig  Party."  conclud-
ing with  an  impassioned  ^appeal  to  Mr.  Webster  to
lead  the  Whigs  as  an  anti-slavery  party.  He  sent
the  speech  to  Mr.  Webster,  who,  in  replying  coolly,
politely  regretted  that  they  differed  in  regard  to
political  duty.  In  October,  Sumner  wrote  a  public
letter  to  Robert  C.  Winthrop,  representative  in
congress  from  Boston,  censuring  him  severely  for
his  vote  in  support  of  the  Mexican  war.  He  wrote
as  a  Whig  constituent  of  Mr.  Winthrop's.  and  dur-
ing his  aijsence  from  Boston  he  was  nominated  for
congress,  against  Mr.  Winthrop,  by  a,meeting  of


SUMNER


BUHNER


747


Whigs  InHudinjf  Charlos  FrHnoIji  AdnmH  And  Jolm
A.  Aiulrt'w.  Hut  ho  iiiniuHliHU'ly  nml  iifn'mj>-
torily  dwlinod,  mid  he  warmly  Miipptirtvil  Dr.  Swin-
ut'I  (}.  IloWf,  who  wa,H  tioininHt«><I  in  hi?*  iiIimt.
Diiriiij,'  this  iK>ri<Kl,  when  "Conscimi-e  Whijp^"
wtTi'  sf|Miratiri>r  from  "('ottfin  Whitrs."  Sumner
wasuntiriii^rin  his  nuhliciu'tivity.  IIe>*|xikeoft«'n.
and  he  ar^Me<l  l»cff»re  the  Muprt>me  «>urt  of  the
state  the  invalidity  of  enlistments  for  the  Mexican
war.  an<l  delivennf  a  leeture  ufMin  "  White  Slavery
in  the  Harlmry  States,"  whi<'h  wjis  elalKiniteil  inti)
a  pamphlet,  and  wa.s  a  valuable  historicAl  .study  of
the  sunjeet.  In  .huie.  1847,  a  s[KH»eh  u|>on  prison-
discipline  show«Ml  his  interest  in  the  (|uestion  to  U»
unaltatinl.  On  25*  .Sept..  1H47,  he  s|Mike  for  the  last
time  as  a  Whij;,  in  the  State  convent  i<in  at  Sprinjr-
fleld,  in  support  of  a  resolution  that  Mnssiu-huM-tts
Whi|fs  would  supp«irt  only  an  anti-slavery  man  for
the  presidency.  The  res4ilution  was  lost.anti  uiM»n
the  Whig  nomination  of  Gen.  Zachary  Taylor,
1  June,  1848,  a  convention  of  anti-slavery  men  of
both  |)arties  was  called  at  Won-ester  on  28  June,
at  which  Sumner,  ('bark's  Francis  Adams,  .Samuel
Hoar  (who  presided),  and  his  son,  K.  H<H-kw(M>d
Hoar,  with  many  other  well-known  Whi>;s,  with-
drew from  the  Whitf  party  and  orpinizinl  the
Free-stiil  party.  "If  two  evils  are  presente<l  to
me,"  said  Sumner  in  his  s|)eech,  alluding  to  Cass
and  Taylor.  "I  will  taki!  neither."  Sunmer  was
chairman  of  the  Free-soil  state  committee,  which
conducted  the  campaign)  in  Massachusetts  for  Van
Buren  and  Adams,  nominated  at  the  ItutTalo  con-
vention. In  OctoU'r,  1848.  he  was  nominated  for
congress  in  the  Boston  district,  receiving;  "i.IWG
votes  against  1,460  for  the  Demot^ratic  candi<iate.
But  Mr.  Winthrop  re<;eived  7,?26.  and  was  elected.
In  May,  1849,  he  renewed  his  plea  for  peace  in  an
exhaustive  a<ldress  before  the  American  |)eace
society  on  "The  War  System  of  the  Common-
wealth of  Nations,"  and  on  5  Nov.,  1850,  his  sinKH-h,
after  the  passage  of  the  Fugitive-slave  law,  was  like
a  war-cry  for  the  Free-soil  party,  and  was  said  to
have  made  him  senator.  In  the  election  of  mem-
bers of  the  legislature  the  Free-soilers  and  Demo-
crats united,  and  at  a  caucus  of  members  of  the
Free-soil  party  Sumner  was  unanimously  selwled
as  their  candidate  for  U.S.  senator.  He  was  more
acceptable  to  the  Democrats  liecause  he  had  never
been  an  extreme  Whig,  and  the  Deux  craticcau«'iis,
with  almost  ecjual  unanimity,  ma<le  him  its  candi-
date. The  legislature  then  chose  (leorgeS.  H«>ut-
well  governor,  Henry  W.  Cushman  lieutenant-
governor,  and  I{4)bert  liantoul,  Jr.,  senator  for  the
short  term.  These  were  all  Democrats.  The  house
of  representa'ives  voted,  on  14  Jan.,  18.")!,  for  sena-
tor, casting  o81  votes,  with  191  necessary  to  a
choice.  Sumner  received  18tt,  Robert  C.  Winthroj)
167.  scattering  28,  blanks  i.  On  22  Jan.,  of  liH
votes  in  the  si-nate,  Sumner  received  iii,  Winthrop
14,  and  H.  W.  Bishop  1,  and  Sumner  was  chostm  by
the  senate.  The  contest  in  the  house  conlinuetl
for  three  months.  Sumner  was  entreate*!  t<»  mo<lifv
some  expressions  in  his  last  si)eech  :  but  he  refuse*!,
saying  that  he  di«l  not  desire  the  office,  and  on
22  Feb.  he  aske<l  Henry  Wilson.  pr»'sident  of  the
senate,  and  the  Free-soil  memlK>rs,  toalmndon  him
whenever  they  could  elect  another  candidate.  On
24  April,  Sumner  was  elected  s«'nator  by  193  votes,
precisely  the  necessary  numlier  of  the  rotes  cast.
When  he  took  his  seat  in  the  senate  ho  was  as  dis-
tinctively the  uncoinf)romising  representative  of
freedom  and  the  north  as  Calhoun  hail  been  «»f
slavery  and  the  south.  But  it  was  not  until
26  Aug.,  18o2,  just  after  the  DemiK-ratic  aixl  Whig
national  conventions  had  acquiesced  in  the  ctmi-


pmmiflw  of  1880.  that  SnmiMr  ddKrwvd  hb  flni

inifMirtnnt i»p.>e.h. "  Fn-nlom N'ationMl.  Slavsrjr
'^  I  tiati'iiuu

flhc

1::.  ..  |-j^

i;i'inii4t vii-w ««•. iii'i-i'|iifi| lit nnvt>  iiT  in«' nnti*
slavi-ry  |xirty  km  sound. The  arfttOMoi  wetncvl  to
the anti-!>lavcry M-iitiinriit i<> tm iinMfi«i>..f-»i.i»
.Sewanl  and  Cha^c  \ti<\  ■
it was  evident  that r

e<|uip|>e<l  was  now  U>  bu  euouuutcniil  U  ih»  alave
l*ower.  On  2:(  Jan.,  1854,  StophM  A.  Douelaa  in-
trodu<-e<l  the  KanMM>Nebfuiui  bill,  by  which  the
.Missouri  comiiromiae  wm  reoMled.  and  on  SI
Feb.,  IK'Vl.  .Sumner  opposed  it  in  a  spcach  oharBC-
teristicallv  compn-henMve  and  exhaustive,  revirw-
ing  the  hislor)'  of  the  restriction  of  aUvMT.  On
the  eve  of  the  pamaf^  of  the  bill  he  made  a  aolenin
and  impressive  protettt,  and  his  reply  to  aiaailanta,
28  June,  1854.  stung  his  op|M>nents  to  tnatintiM.
He  was  now  the  most  uns|mring,  the  mo»t  fmrvd,
and  the  most  hate<l  oiitNUient  <>f  slaverv  in  eongma.
On  17  .Manh.  l^Vt.  Mr.  iK.udas  inti^Miiuwd  a  biU
for  the  a<lmission  of  Kansas  as  a  state.  On  10  and
20  .May,  Sumner  tlelivennl  a  f.pe««<-h  on  the  "Criine
against  Kansas."  which  again  antused  the  oountrr.
and  in  wiiich  he  sptike,  in  reference  to  the  slave  and
fre«'-soil  fa4^>tions  in  Kansas,  of  "the  fury  of  the
[tropagandists  and  the  calm  determination  of  their
op|K)nents,"  who  through  the  whole  country  were
"marshalling  hostile  divisions,  and  fore^^luufowing
a  conflict  which,  unless  happily  avcrli-tl  by  free-
dom, will  Ijecome  war — fratricidal,  |Ntrricidal  war."
It  provoked  the  bit-
terest rejoinders  in
the  Mtnate,  to  which
Sumner  replitHl  c«m-
temptuouslv.  In  his
s|H'ech  he  had  sharjv
Iv  censured  S«'nator
Butler,  of  South
Carolina,  and  Sena-
tor Douglas,  and
two  days  after  the
delivery  of  the  speech,  as  Sumner  was  sitting  after
the  adjournment  writing  at  his  desk  alone  in  the
senati^chamlx-r,  Preston  .Smith  Bmoks.  a  relative
of  Butler's  and  a  r«'pres<»nt«tive  fr«>m  S»»uth  Can>-
lina,entere4l  t he  chamU>r.  and.  after  sjieakinga  few
words  to  .Sumner,  struck  him  violently  up»)n  the
heiwl  with  a  bludgi>on.  and  while  Sumner  was  try-
ing in  vain  to  extricate  himself  fmm  the  desk  arid
seize  his  a.ssailant.  the  blows  continuitl  until  he
sank  bloo<lyand  stMi.seleas  to  the  floor.  This  event
start le<l  the  country  as  a  piwafce  of  civil  war.  The
excitement  was  universal  and  profound.  Tlie  house
of  repn>s4*ntativcs  refuseil  to  give  the  two-thini
vote  necessary  to  ex|)el  Bnxiks,  but  he  n>sign»'«l  and
ap|)i>aled  to  his  c-onstituents.  and  was  umuiimously
re-electe<l.  .Sumner  was  long  inca[MM>itnf«-<l  f<>r  pub-
lic service.  On  -i  Nov.,  18.'MJ.  he  r»'turi  ■  '■  -'"n
t4>  vote,  and  was  receive*!  with  awlan  lie
|M>oplean<l  with  the  highest  honor  by  iii<  >;i»i.  and
citvauthoritif*.  On  l.'i  Jan.,  XX'tl.  he  was  re-eleeted
s«Miator.  ^«•c^•i^  iiitrall  but  ten  vot«>s,  and  on  7  March.
1857.  he  s«iie<|  for  Kun»|ie.  where  he  submitted  to
the  seven-st  nunlical  treatment.  With  cluiracter-
istic energy  ami  industry-,  in  the  internals  of  »uffer>
ing.  he  ilevoleil  himself  to  a  thorough  study  of  the
art  and  history  of  engraving.

For  nearly  four  years  he  was  ahaeot  tram  hfc*
seat  in  the  senate,  which  he  rwnmed  on  ft  Dec,  IM^
at  the  oiiening  of  the  s««f<sion.  He  was  still  feebla,
and  tooK  no  |>art  in  debate  until  the  middla  of


748


SUMNER


SUMNER


March,  and  on  4  June,  1860,  on  the  question  of  ad-
mitting Kansas  as  a  free  state,  he  delivered  a
speech  upon  "  The  Barbarism  of  Slavery,"  which
snowed  his  powers  untouched  and  his  ardor  un-
quenched.  Mr.  Lincoln  had  been  nominated  for  the
presidency,  and  Sumner's  speech  was  the  last  com-

Srehensive  word  in  the  parliamentary  debate  of  frce-
om  and  slavery.  The  controversy  could  now  be
settled  only  by  arms.  This  conviction  was  un-
doubtedly the  explanation  of  the  angry  silence  with
which  the  speech  was  heard  in  the  senate  by  the
friends  of  slavery.  During  the  winter  of  secession
that  followed  the  election  Sumner  devoted  himself
to  the  prevention  of  any  form  of  compromise,
believing  that  it  would  be  only  a  base  and  fatal
surrender  of  constitutional  principles.  He  made
no  speeches  during  the  session.  By  the  withdrawal
of  southern  senators  the  senate  was  left  with  a
Republican  niajority,  and  in  the  reconstruction  of
committees  on  8  March,  1861,  Sumner  was  made
chairman  of  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs.  For
this  place  he  was  peculiarly  fitted.  His  knowledge,
of  international  law,  of  the  history  of  other  states,
and  of  their  current  politics,  was  comprehensive
and  exact,  and  during  the  intense  excitement  aris-
ing from  the  seizure  of  the  "  Trent "  he  rendered
the  country  a  signal  service  in  placing  the  surrender
of  Slidell  and  Mason  upon  the  true  ground.  (See
Mason,  James  Murray.)  While  there  was  univer-
sal acquiescence  in  the  decision  of  the  government
to  surrender  the  commissioners,  there  was  not
universal  satisfaction  and  pride  until  on  9  Jan.,
1862,  Sumner,  in  one  of  his  ablest  speeches,  showed
incontestably  that  our  own  principles,  constantly
maintained  by  us,  required  the  surrender.  One  of
the  chief  dangers  throughout  the  civil  war  was  the

Sossible  action  of  foreign  powers,  and  especially  of
Ingland,  where  iron-clad  rams  were  being  built
for  the  Confederacy,  and  on  10  Sept.,  1863,  Sumner
delivered  in  New  York  a  speech  upon  "  Our  Foreign
Relations,"  which  left  nothing  unsaid.  Happily,
on  8  Sept.,  Lord  Russell  had  informed  the  Ameri-
can minister,  Charles  Francis  Adams,  that  the  rams
would  not  be  permitted  to  leave  English  ports.

Throughout  the  war,  both  in  congress  and  upon
the  platform,  Sumner  was  very  urgent  for  emanci-
pation, and  when  the  war  ended  he  was  equally
anxious  to  secure  entire  equality  of  rights  for  the
new  citizens.  But  while  firm  upon  this  point,  and
favoring  the  temporary  exclusion  of  recent  Con-
federates from  political  power,  he  opposed  the
proposition  to  change  the  jury  law  for  the  trial  of
Jefferson  Davis,  and  disclaimed  every  feeling  of
vengeance.  He  was  strong  in  his  opposition  to
President  Andrew  Johnson  and  his  policy.  But
the  great  measure  of  the  Johnson  administration,
the  acquisition  of  Alaska  by  treaty,  was  supported
by  Sumner  in  a  speech  on  9  April,  1867,  which  is
an  exhaustive  history  of  Russian  America.  He
voted  affirmatively  upon  all  the  articles  of  impeach-
ment of  President  Jonnson,  which  in  a  long  opinion
he  declared  to  be  one  of  the  last  great  battles  with
slavery.

Early  in  the  administration  of  President  Grant,
10  April,  1869,  Sunmer  opposed  the  Johnson-Clar-
endon treaty  with  England,  as  affording  no  means
of  adequate  settlement  of  our  British  claims.  In
this  speech  he  asserted  the  claim  for  indirect  or
consequential  damages,  which  afterward  was  pro-
posed as  part  of  the  American  case  at  the  Geneva
arbitration,  but  was  discarded.  In  his  message  of
5  Dec,  1870,  President  Grant,  regretting  the  failure
of  the  treaty  to  acquire  Santo  Domingo,  strongly
urged  its  acquisition.  Sumner  strenuously  opposed
the  project  on  the  ground  that  it  was  not  the  wish


of  the  "black  republic."  and  that  Baez,  with  whom,
as  president  of  the  Dominican  republic,  the  nego-
tiation had  been  irregularly  conducted,  was  an  ad-
venturer, held  in  his  place  by  an  unconstitutional
use  of  the  navy  of  the  United  States.  Sumner's
opposition  led  to  a  personal  rupture  with  the  presi-
dent and  the  secretary  of  state,  and  to  alienation
from  the  Republican  senators,  in  consequence  of
which,  on  10  March,  1871,  he  was  removed,  by  the
Republican  majority  of  the  senate,  from  the  chair-
manship of  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs.  He
was  assigned  the  chairmanship  of  the  committee
on  privileges  and  elections;  but,  upon  his  own
motion,  his  name  was  stricken  out.  On  24  March
he  introduced  resolutions,  vvhich  he  advocated  in
a  powerful  speech,  severely  arraigning  the  president
for  his  course  in  regard  to  Santo  Dommgo.  In
December,  1871,  he  refused  again  to  serve  as  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  privileges  and  elections.
Early  in  1872  he  introduced  a  supplementary  civil-
rights  bill,  which,  since  January,  1810,  he  had  vainly
sought  to  bring  before  the  senate.  It  was  intended
to  secure  complete  equality  for  colored  citizens  in
every  relation  that  law  could  effect;  but  it  was
thought  to  be  unwise  and  impracticable  by  other
Republican  senators,  and  as  drawn  by  Sumner  it
was  not  supported  by  them.  He  introduced,  12
Feb.,  1872,  resolutions  of  inquiry,  aimed  at  the  ad-
ministration, into  the  sale  of  arms  to  France  during
the  German  war.  An  acrimonious  debate  arose,
during  which  Sumner's  course  was  sharply  criticised
by  some  of  his  party  colleagues,  and  he  and  Senators
Trumbull,  Schurz,  and  Fenton  were  known  as  anti-
Grant  Republicans.

Sumner  was  urged  to  attend  the  Liberal  or  anti-
Grant  Republican  convention,  to  be  held  at  Cincin-
nati, 1  May,  which  nominated  Horace  Greeley  for  the
presidency,  and  the  chairmanship  and  authority  to
write  the  platform  were  offered  to  him  as  induce-
ments. But  he  declined,  and  in  the  senate,  31  May,
declaring  himself  a  Republican  of  the  straitest  sect,
he  denounced  Grantism  as  not  Republicanism  in  a
speech  implying  that  he  could  not  support  Grant
as  the  presidential  candidate  of  the  party.  The
Republican  convention,  5  June,  unanimously  re-
nominated Grant,  and  the  Democratic  convention,
9  June,  adopted  the  Cincinnati  platform  and  can-
didates. In  reply  to  a  request  for  advice  from  the
colored  citizens  of  Washington,  29  July,  Sumner,
in  a  long  letter,  advised  the  support  of  Greeley,  on
the  general  ground  that  principles  must  be  pre-
ferred to  party.  In  a  snarp  letter  to  Speaker
Blaine,  5  Aug.,  he  set  forth  the  reasons  of  the.
course  he  had  taken.

But  the  strain  of  the  situation  was  too  severe.
His  physicians  ordered  him  to  seek  recreation  in
Europe,  and  he  sailed  early  in  September,  leaving
the  manuscript  of  a  speech  he  had  proposed  to  de-
liver in  Faneuil  hall  at  a  meeting  of  Liberal
Republicans.  He  opposed  the  election  of  Grant
upon  the  ground  that  he  was  unfaithful  to  the
constitution  and  to  Republican  principles,  and
otherwise  unfitted  for  the  presidency  ;  and  he  suf)-
ported  Greeley  as  an  original  and  unswerving  Re-
publican, nominated  by  Republicans,  whose  adop-
tion as  a  candidate  by  the  Democratic  party  proved
the  honest  acquiescence  of  that  party  in  the  great
results  of  the  civil  war.  He  returned  from  Europe
in  time  for  the  opening  of  the  session,  2  Dec,  1872.
The  Republican  majority  omitted  him  altogethBr
in  the  arrangement  of  the  committees,  leaving  him
to  be  placed  by  the  Democratic  minority.  But
Sumner  declined  to  serve  upon  any  committee,
and  did  not  attend  the  Republican  caucus.  On
the  first  day  of  the  session  he  introduce<J  a  bill  for-


SU3LNER


SUMNER


749


biddinf;  the  names  of  Itattles  with  fellnw-citizenH  to
be  contiiuHMl  in  the  arinv  rt'jfi»l«r  or  plnt-wl  on  th«<
regimental  colors  of  the  t'nitod  States.  Kroin  this
time  he  took  no  |)arty  part  and  made  no  j)olitical
speech,  (iloiulin^;  only  for  04|uality  of  civU  riKht.H
for  colorwi  citizens.  At  the  next  setMion,  1  Dec,
187J<.  he  was  placed  on  several  committees,  not  as
chairman,  but  as  one  of  the  minority,  and  he  diil
not  refuse  to  serve,  but  attended  no  meetinjfs.
During  this  session  the  cordial  relations  between
Sumner  and  the  Republicans  were  almost  whollv
restored,  and  in  Massachusetts  the  Republican  twi-
ing  for  him  was  very  friendly.  Again,  promptly
but  vaiidy,  2  IKh>..  iA73,  he  asked  consideration  of
the  civil-fights  bill.  On  27  Jan.,  1H74,  he  made  for
the  bill  a  last  brief  appeal,  and  on  11  March.  1H74,
after  a  short  illness,  he  died.  The  bill  that  was  his
last  effort  to  serve  the  race  to  whose  welfare  his

fublic  life  had  been  devoted  was  re|K)rte<l,  14  April.
874,  substantially  as  originally  dniwn,  and  i)assod
the  senate,  22  May.  But  it  failcil  in  the  house,  and
the  civil-rights  bill,  approved  1  March,  lH7.'i,  was
a  law  of  less  scope  than  his,  and  has  lieen  declared
unconstitutional  by  the  supreme  court.

Sumner's  death  was  universally  lamented.  One
of  the  warmest  and  most  striking  eulogies  was
that  of  Lucius  Q.  C\  Lamar,  then  a  representative
in  congress  from  Mississippi,  who  ha«l  tjeen  a  sin-
cere disciple  of  Calhoun  and  a  Confederate  officer,
but  who  recognized  in  Sumner  a  kin<lred  earnest-
ness and  fidelity.  The  later  differences  with  his
party  were  forgotten  when  Sumner  died,  and  only
nis  great  service  to  the  country*  in  the  most  peril-
ous hour,  and  his  uncompromising  devotion  to  the
enslaved  race,  were  proudly  and  enthusiastically
rememlwred.  Among  American  statesmen  his
life  est)ecially  illustrates  the  truth  he  early  ex-
pressocl,  that  politics  is  but  the  apnlication  of
moral  principles  to  public  affairs.  Throughout
his  public  career  he  was  the  distinctive  repre-
sentative of  the  moral  conviction  and  jM)litical  pur-
pose of  New  Kngland.  His  ample  learning  and  va-
rious accomplishments  were  rivalled  among  Ameri-
can public  men  only  by  those  of  John  Quincy
Adams,  and  during  all  the  fury  of  political  passion
in  which  he  lived  there  was  never  a  whisper  or
suspicion  of  his  political  honestv  or  his  jM-rsonal
integrity.  lie  was  fortunate  in  tlie  peculiar  adap-
tation of  his  qualities  to  his  time.  His  profound
conviction,  supreme  conscientiousness,  indomitable
will,  affluent  resources,  and  inability  to  compn>-
mise,  his  legal  training,  serious  tem|)er,  and  un-
tiring energy,  were  indispensable  in  the  final
stages  of  the  slavery  controversy,  and  he  had  them
all  in  the  highest  degree.  "There  is  no  other
side,"  he  said  to  a  friend  with  fervor,  and  Crom-
well's  Ironsides  did  not  ride  into  the  fight  more
absolutely  persuaded  that  they  were  «l(»ing  the  will
of  God  than  Charles  Sumner.  For  ordinary  i>oliti-
cal  contests  he  hatl  no  taste,  and  at  another  tim«
and  under  other  circumstances  he  wouhl  probably
have  been  an  all-accomi)lishe<l  sc!holar  or  leanunl
judge,  unknown  in  political  life.  Of  few  men
could  it  be  said  more  truly  than  of  him  that  he
never  lost  a  day.  He  knew  most  of  the  fannnis
men  antl  womeii  of  his  time,  and  he  was  familiar
with  the  contemporaneous  political,  literary,  and
artistic  mo%-ement  in  every  country.  In  public
life  he  was  often  accounte<l  a  man  of  one  idea ;
but  his  sfieeches  upon  the  "  Trent "  case,  the  Russian
treaty,  and  our  foreign  relations  showeil  the  ful-
ness of  his  knowledge  and  the  variety  of  his  inter-
est. He  was  dogmatic,  often  irritable  with  reso-
lute tipposition  to  his  views,  and  of  generous  self-
esteem,  but  he  was  of  such  child-like  simplicity


and  kindlinom  that  the  poitomMM  itiiif  of  vaoitj
and  malice  was  wanting  Darinir  tit*  diffemioa
iM'tween  Sumner  and  hitt  fellow- lirpublioaiu  in  the
senate,  one  of  them  mid  that  h«<  hn<i  no  envmy  bat
himself,  and  Sumner  n-fuMMi  t  himfortlM

rest  of  the  M>Msi<tn. But  the  i;  .11  bis  friend

sti'p|H-4l  intoanotnniliuit  in  Ni-m  t ... «  ,,,  whiofaSaflH
ner  was  fitting,  and,  onlirvly  forgetting  tl
greet«'<l  him  with  the  old  warmth. .Snmnrr
s|M)nil<'d  aa  wannly,  and  at  onc«>  the  <>!  v

wiis  lompletelv  re«lorwl. Prom  I'nvy  .  lii

of ill-nature he  was w  *  No mait  waa

more  constant  and  un>'i  'hi*  witrfan>  with

slavery  and  in  the  demana  <>t  i-<(uality  for  tb«
coloreil  race;  but  no  soldier  ever  fought  with  IcM
t)ersonal  animosity.  He  was  a)M4>lulely  tmxitm,
I>uring  the  heat  of  the  controveny  in  congw  hi*
life  was  undoubte<Ilv  in  danger,  and  he  was  urxcd
to  (*arry  a  pistol  for  liis  defence.  He  laughed,  and
said  that  he  hail  never  fired  a  pi5t4>l  in  his  life,  and,
in  case  of  extremity,  bcforv  he  could  pa»ibly  get
it  out  of  his  [KK-ket  he  woultl  be  shot.  Iiut  the  dan-
ger  was  so  real  that,  unknown  to  himself,  he  was  for
a  long  time  under  the  constant  prr)tection  of  armed
frien«ls  in  Washington.  The  savage  assault  of
Rrooks  undoubtedly  shortene<l  .Sumner's  life,  but
to  a  friend  who  asked  him  how  he  fell  toward  his
assailant,  he  answerc<l :  "  As  to  a  brick  that  should
fall  u(M)n  my  head  from  a  chimney,  lie  was  the
unconscious  agent  of  a  malign  fK»wcr."  IVrson*
ally,  in  his  later  years,  Sumner  was  of  command-
ing presence,  very  tall,  antl  of  a  stalwart  frame.
His  voice  was  full,  »leep,  and  resonant,  his  elocu-
tion declamator)-,  stately,  and  earnest.  His  Uler
si>eeches  in  the  senate  he  read  from  printed  slips,
but  his  speech  u{x)n  Alaska,  which  oc<'Upi«-<l  three
hours  in  the  delivery,  was  siK>ken  from  notes  writ-
ten ui>on  a  single  sheet  of  pa(M>r.  and  it  was  subee-
quently  written  out.  Few  of  the  bills  drawn  bjr
him  became  laws,  but  he  influenced  profoundly
legislation  uiM»n  subjects  in  which  he  was  mort
inten*sted.  lie  was  four  times  sucoewirelT  electtxl
to  the  sf'uate,  and  when  he  die<l  he  was  the  senior
senator  of  the  Unite<l  States  in  consecutive  service.
In  Octobi*r,  1866.  when  he  was  fifty-five  years  old.
Sumner  married  Mrs.  Alice  Mason  Hoofn-r,  of
lioston,  daughter-in-law  of  his  frien«l,  Samuel
HoojK*r.  representative  in  congress.  The  union
was  very  brief,  and  in  Septemlter,  1867.  Mr.  and
Mrs.  .Sumner,  for  reasons  that  were  never  <livulgr<l.
were  sefmratwl,  and  they  were  ultimately  <livorced.
Of  the  "  Memoir  ami  I^etten*  of  Charle?  Sumner."
written  by  his  friend  and  literarj-  executor,  Ed-
ward L.  Pien-e,  two  volumes,  covering  the  jieriiid
to  1845,  have  been  published  (IVvston,  1877).  Hi»
complete  works  in  fifteen  volumes  are  also  pub-
lishe<l  (Roston,  1870-'8a).  The  note*  by  himself
and  his  executors  supply  a  chronology  of  his  pub-
lic career.  There  are  several  portrait*  of  Sumner.
A  crayon  drawing  by  I'^*>tman  Johns«)n  <1846)
hung  in  liongfellow's'  study,  and  is  engravetl  in
Pierce's  memoir.  A  largi»  d«guerreoty|ie  (1848)  i»
also  engravwi  in  the  menniir.  .V  crayon  by  Will-
iam W.  Story  (1854)  for  I/ord  Morp«'th  is  now  at
Castle  Howanl.  Y«»rkshire.  An  oil  t«»rtrait  by
M«>s«'s  Wight  (1856)  is  in  the  Boston  imblic  library,
another  bv  Morrison  (1856)  in  the  library  of  Har-
vard college.  A  portrait  by  Edgar  Parker  was
jMiinted  several  years  l»efore  his  death.  There  b
a  photograph  in  the  "Memorial  History  of  lioe-
ton  "  :  a  photograph  (18<K»  tngravr*!  in  his  works;
another  (1871)  engrave«l  in  the  city  memorial  Tol-
ume  of  Sumner:  a  full-length  {wrtnit  by  Wrntj
Ulke  (187:{)  f.»r  the  Havtian  goTemment— i'opv  pr»-
senttd to the  state  of MasMohoMtts  by  James


750


SUMNER


SUMNER


Wormely  (1884),  now  in  the  State  library ;  a  photo-
graph (1873),  the  last  likeness  ever  Uiken,  engravec^
in  tne  state  memorial  volume ;  Thomas  Crawford's
bust  (1839)  in  the  Boston  art  museum ;  Martin  Mil-
more's  bust  (1874)  in  the  state-house,  a  copy  of  which
is  in  the  Metropolitan  art  musemn,  New  York ;  a
bronze  statue  by  Thomas  Ball  (1878)  in  the  Public
garden,  Boston ;  and  a  statuette  in  plaster  by  Miss
Whitney  (1877),  an  admirable  likeness.  The  illus-
tration on  page  747  represents  Mr.  Sumner's  tomb
in  Mt.  Auburn  cemetery,  near  Boston. — His  brother,
George,  political  economist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  5
Feb.,  1817:  d.  there,  6  Oct.,  18(53,  studied  at  the
universities  of  Heidelberg  and  Berlin,  and  travelled
through  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  devoting  him-
self to  the  study  of  the  customs  and  institutions  of
various  countries,  and  especially  to  comparative
jurisprudence,  international  law,  economic  subjects,
and  philanthropic  organizations.  After  his  return
to  the  United  States  he  associated  himself  with  Dr.
Samuel  Cr.  Howe  in  the  effort  to  establish  schools
for  idiots.  He  lectured  extensively  on  philanthropic
subjects,  and  contributed  to  the  "  North  American  "
and  the  "  Democratic  "  reviews  and  to  French  and
German  periodicals.  Alexander  von  Humboldt
praised  the  accuracy  of  his  research,  and  Alexis  de
Tocqueville  spoke  of  him  as  knowing  European
politics  better  than  any  European  with  whom  he
was  acquainted.  His  essay  on  the  education  of  the
feeble  -  minded  was  translated  into  French  and
Italian.  He  delivered  an  address  at  Cambridge  in
1845  entitled  "  Memoirs  of  the  Pilgrims  at  Ley-
den,"  which  was  published  in  the  "  Collections  "  of
the  Massachusetts  historical  society.  His  advo-
cacy of  the  system  of  solitary  confinement  in
prisons  led  to  its  adoption  in  French  penitentiaries,
which  furnished  the  subject  for  a  pamphlet  en-
titled "The  Pennsylvania  System  of  Prison  Dis-
cipline Triumphant  in  P'rance"  (Philadelphia,
1847)  and  an  "  Address  on  the  Progress  of  Reform
in  France."  An  oration  before  the  authorities  of
Boston  was  also  published  (Boston,  1859),  and  in  the
American  edition  of  Alphonse  M.  L.  de  Lamartine's
"  History  of  the  Girondists  "  he  printed  a  reply  to
the  author's  strictures  on  American  institutions.

SUMNER,  Charles  Allen,  stenographer,  b.  in
Great  Barrington.  Mass.,  2  Aug.,  1835.  His  father,
Judge  Increase  Sumner,  was  a  distant  relative  of
the  Increase  that  is  noted  elsewhere.  The  son
studied  at  Trinity,  but  was  not  graduated.  He
subsequently  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  but  his  chief  attention  was  given  to  the  prac-
tice of  stenography.  In  1856  he  sailed  for  Califor-
nia, and  reported  for  the  legislature  in  1857-61.
He  settled  at  San  Francisco,  and  between  the  legis-
lative sessions  he  was  engaged  in  the  state  and
county  courts,  in  law-reporting,  and  general  edi-
torial duties  till  1860,  when  he  entered  the  Repub-
lican canvass.  The  following  year  he  edited  the
*'  Herald  and  Mirror,"  in  which  his  opposition  to
the  "Shatter"  land  bill  succeeded  in  defeating  it.
Removing  to  Virginia  City,  Nev.,  Mr.  Sumner  was
made  assistant-quartermaster  in  the  U.  S.  forces  in
1862,  became  colonel  in  1864,  and  served  as  state
senator  in  1865-'8,  being  president  pro  tempore  dur-
ing one  session.  Meanwnile  he  had  been  twice  an
unsuccessful  Republican  candidate  for  congress.
He  returned  to  San  Francisco  in  1868,  and  began  to
advocate  a  government  postal  telegraph  in  the
"  Herald,"  of  which  he  was  editor.  After  this  he  was
appointed  official  note-taker  of  the  city,  and  in
1875  and  1880  official  reporter  of  the  supreme  court.
In  1878  he  was  defeateu  as  a  Democratic  candidate
for  congress,  but  he  was  elected  in  1882.  There  he
opposed  the  Pacific  railroads,  and  introduced  a


^5:^^:^


postal  telegraph  bill.  Trinity  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  A.  M.  in  1887.  He  has  published  "Short-
hand and  Iteporting"  (New  York,  1882);  "Golden
Gate  Sketches  "  (1884) ;  "  Travel  in  Southern  Eu-
rope" (1885);  and  "  Sumners'  Poems,"  with  his
brother,  Samuel  B.  Sumner  (1887).

SUMNER,  Edwin  Vose,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  30  Jan.,  1797;  d.  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  21
March,  1863,  Young  Sumner  was  educated  at
Milton  (Mass.)  academy,  and  entered  the  army  in
1819  as  2d  lieu-
tenant of  infan-
try. He  served
in  the  Black
Hawk  war,  be-
came captain  of
the  2d  dragoons
in  1833,  and  was
employed  on  the
western  fron-
tier.wherehedis-
tinguished  him-
self as  an  Indian
fighter.  In  1838
he  was  placed  in
command  of  the
School  of  caval-
ry practice  at
Carlisle,  Pa.  He
was  promoted
major  in  1846,
and  in  the  Mexi-
can war  led  the  cavalry  charge  at  Cerro  Gordo  in
April,  1847,  commanded  the  reserves  at  Contreraa
and  Churubusco,  and  at  the  head  of  the  cavalry  at
Molino  del  Rey  checked  the  advance  of  5,000
Mexican  lancers.  He  was  governor  of  New  Mexico
in  1851-'3,  when  he  visited  Europe  to  report  on
improvements  in  cavalry.  In  1855  he  was  pro-
moted colonel  of  the  1st  cavalry,  and  made  a  suc-
cessful expedition  against  the  Cheyennes.  In  com-
mand of  the  Department  of  the  West  in  1858  he
rendered  efficient  service  during  the  Kansas  trou-
bles. In  March,  1861,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-
general  in  the  regular  army,  and  sent  to  relieve  Gen.
Albert  Sidney  Johnston,  in  command  of  the  Depart-
ment of  the  Pacific,  but  was  recalled  in  the  following
year  to  the  command  of  the  1st  corps  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac.  He  commanded  the  left  wing
at  the  siege  of  Yorktown.  At  Fair  Oaks,  where
McClellan  s  army  was  divided  by  the  Chickahorai-
ny  and  the  left  wing  was  heavily  attacked,  the
orders  to  Sumner  to  cross  the  river  and  re-enforce,
that  wing  found  him  with  his  corps  drawn  out  and
ready  to  move  instantly.  In  the  seven  days'  bat-
tles he  was  twice  wounded.  In  1862  he  was  ap-
pointed major-general  of  volunteers,  led  the  2d
corps  at  the  battle  of  Antietam,  where  he  was
wounded,  and  commanded  one  of  the  three  grand
divisions  of  Burnside's  army  at  Fredericksburg,
his  division  being  the  first  to  cross  the  Rappahan-
nock. At  his  own  request  he  was  relieved  in
1863,  and,  being  appointed  to  the  Department  of
the  Missouri,  he  was  on  his  way  thither  when  he
died.  He  was  brevett^d  lieutenant-colonel  for
Cerro  Gordo,  colonel  for  Molino  del  Rey,  and
major-general  in  the  regular  army  for  services  be-
fore Richmond.  Gen.  Sumner's  last  words,  as  he
with  great  effort  waved  a  glass  of  wine  above  his
head,  were :  "  God  save  my  country,  the  United
States  of  America."— His  son,  Edwiii  Vose,  served
with  merit  through  the  civil  war,  and  was  ap-
pointed major  of  the  5th  cavalry  in  1879,  and  in-
spector of  rifle  practice.  Department  of  the  Mis-
souri, which  place  he  still  holds.  *


SUMNER


SmiTEB


TBI


SrMNER,  Weorfe,  nhysioian,  b.  in  Pomfret.
Conn.,  H>  Doc,  175W;  (I.  in  llartfortl.  t'onn..  20
Feb.,  IKV).  Ho  was  j;rii«luMt«Ml  »t  Y«le  in  lHi;{,
and  at  tin*  imtlical  (li>|>Hrtiiiont  of  tho  I'nivfrsity
of  Ponnsyivunia  in  1817.  Two  yours  lator  he  isi-
tubiishiHl  liiinsolf  ut  Hartford,  Conn.,  whorp  ho
wan  professor  of  Ixitany  in  Trinity  coilcifo  from  it*
foundation  in  1824  till  his  death.  lie  was  an
active  friend  of  the  collejfe.  and  to  hii«  last*'  and
liberality  the  beautiful  ((rounds  of  the  former  od-
lege  site  owihI  much  of  their  attnu-tiven(>si«.  For
manv  voars  he  wa.s  also  a  Iwtiiper  on  lM>tany.  He
publisfuMl  a  "Compendium  of  Phvsiolo^ical  and
Systematic  liotany (Hartfonl,  1820).

Sl'MNKR,  Increase,  jurist,  b,  in  lloxbun*.
Mass.,  27  Nov..  174«;  d.  there,  7  June,  17»».  His
ancestor.  William,  emigrat«Hl  from  Kn^dand  to
Dorchester,  Mass.,  about  l^W,  and  his  father.  In-
crease, was  a  prospen)US  farmer  and  a  select -man
of  Ro.xbury  in  \iM  and  17r)(J.  The  son,  after
graduatiot)  ut  Harvard  in  17U7,  studied  law  un<ter
Samuel  Adams  while  teaching  at  Uoxbury,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1770,  and  l)«>p^ati  prm-lice  in
his  native  town.  He  was  a  memlMT  of  the  lower
house  of  the  legislature  in  1770-'80,  and  senator
till  1782.  In  the  mean  time  he  was  a  meml>er  of
the  convention  of  1777  for  aj;rit>ing  on  a  fonu  of
government,  and  of  the  State  constitutional  conven-
tion in  1779.  He  was  electetl  to  congress  in  1782,
but  preferred  to  accept  an  api>ointment  as  ass<K!i-

ate  judge  of  the
supreme  judicial
court,  n>maining
on  the  IxMich  till
1797. Ho was
one  of  the  com-
mit tin"  on  the  ri'-
visionof  the  laws
of the state in
178.5.  a delegate
to  the  c<Mi  vent  ion  |
that  a<loptod  the  j
constitution of  i
the  UnitiKl  States  j
in 1789,  and at  |
the cl<)se  of his  |
judicial  office  was  i
electe<l  governor
for  three  succes-
sive terms.  .ludge
Sumner's  ability  and  intimate relations  with  his  !
kinsman,  .lohn  Adams,  and  other  statesmen,  gave
him  grciit  influence  in public,  affairs.  —  His  son,
William  Hyslop,  soldier,  b.  in  Koxburv.  4  July,
1780;  d.  in  Jamaica  Plains,  Mass.,  24  Oct.,  18<n
wasgra<luated  at  Harvard  in  1799.  admitted  to  tho
bar  in  1802,  and  in  1808-'19  was  a  memlMT  of  the
legislature. In  1814  he  was  sent  to  put  the  coast
of  Maine  in  a  state  of  defence  against  a  threateninl
invasion,  and  in  ISIS-'S")  he  servofl  as  a<ljulant-  <
general  of  the  state,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-  ]
general. He  oriranized  in  1833  the VmsI  lioston
comi«nv. He  was  one  of  the  original  memb»>rs
of  the  Massaclius*»tts  horticultural so<'iety. His
w

the

ti<mal  Defence"  (1824):  "  Reminisc-ences "  (1H.>4);
"  Memoir  of  Increase  Sumner,  Governor  of  Mas-
»achus«>tts"  (18.'>4);  "Reminiscences  of  (Jeneral
Warren  and  Bunker  Hill"  (18.W):  "History  of
East  Boston"  (18.')8);  and  "  liiMniniseenoe*  of  La-
fayette's Visit  to  Boston"  (1859).

"Sl'MNER,  Jethro,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  about
IT'iO;  d.  in  Warren  county,  N.  C..alH>ut  1790.  His
father,  William,  came  from  England  and  s<'tili-d


near  SuflTotk.  Va.,  aboot  1600. J>
in  the  measun-M  that  prBoeded  lh<-  i.  i

in  1 740  wajt  )iaymaiit<*rnf  the  provincial  tn«<|>»  of
North  Candina  and  ci»mmiind<T  at  Furt  ruuiUr-
land. In  1770  be  was  «|  Pnivincuii

cungmw  colonel  of  tb<  Una  rt^-

ment.  and  ttenred  ooder  the  north.

He  wa.H  comml— ioneri  -d by  the

Continental  conicrMe  in '  ntl  i«>  join

Uen.  Horatio  OatM  in  the  Kuuth.  and  vaa  at  the
Iwttle  of  Camden  in  I7H0.  He  then  nenrcwl  under
(}en.  Nathanael  (ireene.and  at  the  Iwltleof  Kutnw.
H  Sept.,  1781,  made  a  Iwyonet  chnrge,  after  «hi<'h
he  MIL'*  active  in  kei-pinc  the  Torien  in  chn'k  in
North  t'Hroiina  till  the  cl«»ic  of  the  var.

Sl'MNER.  John.  soMier,  b.  if  \|i.t.n..i..».,
Conn.,  in  May,  IT.tt;  d.  in  Febt
was  commissione<l,  24  March.  17*'mi
regiment  of  ffM>t  of  which  Phinean  IjMitaii  waa
coltinel.  and  in  this  servic4<  he  was  in  tho  battleH  of
I^ako  (ie<jrge  and  Ticonderoga.  and  at  the  capture
of  Cn)wn  I'oint  and  the  surrender  of  Montreal.
At  the  o[>ening  of  the  Revolutirm  he  wa.<*  a  zealous
iwtriot,  and  he  entered  the  Colonial  army  in  June.
1770,  U'iiig  commissioned  major  in  a  Ijnttalion  of
which  John  I)urke«'  was  ci>lonel.  and  continue<l  in
the  service  until  1  Jan..  1781.  He  wa»»  in  the  liat-
tles  of  Long  Island.  Harlem.  White  Plainn.  (ter-
niantown,  Trenton,  and  Monmouth,  where  he  was
in  the  thickest  of  the  fight  and  one  of  many  that
wen-  overcome  by  their  exertions  in  the  great  li<nl
of  that  <lay,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  n«  \er
riH'overed.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  .So-
ciety of  the  Cincinnati. —  His  son,  Josiina.  b.  in
Middletown,  Conn.,  11  Oct..  1761;  d.  after  IKM,
was  a  surgeon  in  the  army  of  (Jen.  St.  Cloir  during
his  unfortunate  expHslition  against  the  Miami  In-
dians in  1791.  and  subsi>quently  in  his  native  state
and  in  Massachusetts.  —  Another  son.  Willian,
b.  in  Middletown,  Conn..  22  Jan.,  1780;  d.  28  .S*-pt..
ISas,  was  colonel  of  an  Ohio  regiment  in  the  war
of  1812,  and  canii)e<l  his  command  in  the  forest  on
the  site  of  Columous.  the  capital  of  the  state,

Sl'MNER.  William  <iraham.  |M>litie«I  i^-ono-
mist,  b.  in  Paterson.  N.  J..  :J0  Ut..  1840.  He  wa»
graduate<l  ut  Vale  in  IstKJ.  and  studieil  at  OOt-
tingen.  Germany,  and  Oxfonl.  KnphuHl.  He  waa
tut<)r  at  Vale  in  181X1- 'Jl.  to«»k  onlers  in  the  Prot-
estant KpiM'ojml  chun-h  in  lHti7.  and  was  for  some
time  assistant  at  Calvary  church.  New  Vork  city.
In  18?2  he  was  upi»ointe<l"profess»ir  of  pcditical  and
social  wience  at  i  ale.  Prof.  Sumner  is.  an  earnest
advfK-ate  of  the  so-i«11«h1  laiaaei  fairr  prim-iple  in
ixilitical  economy.  He  favors  tfie  gohl  standard
in  currency  and  frw-trade.  He  has  done  much
to  prt>mote'  liU'ral  methods  of  instruction  in  his
dei>artment.  and,  among  other  innovations  li"»  —
tablished  a  loan  libnirv  of  fMilitical  e<H>nomy  f
use  of  his  class«'s.  lie  is  a  memlier  of  the  .\i  •,
can  social  science  asaociation.  to  whose  "Traiii^ao-
tions"  he  haacontribute<l  ivnjKr^  including  one  on
"American  Finance"  (1874).  Besides  artielea  in
i>eritHlicaIs,  he  has  pultli^ht>«l  a  translation  of
liange's  ••Commentary  on  the  S<«cond  IV>ok  of
orks  include  "  An  Inquiry  into  the  Im|K)rtanceof  Kings"  (New  Vork.  1872);  "  History  of  American
le  Militia"  (lioston,  182:?)';  "Obs.'rvationson  Na-  Currency"  (1874):  "  Ixvtures  on  the  IIiMonr  of
-  .. -. prr),,.^., ion  i„  the  l'nite«l  States  "(1875);  "Ijfe  of

.Vndrew  Jaiknon."  in  the  "American  .Statesmen"
seri.'s  (Boston,  1882);  "What  S<Kial  Clas*c»  Owe
t4>  Vjuh  Other"  (New  Vork,  1883) :  "Economic
l»rx.blems"  (1884);  "  F>-»ays  in  Political  and  Social
Scien«f"  (IMKTi):  and  ••  Pn^t.-it ionium "(1885).

Sl'MTER,  Thoma!*,  soKlier.  b.  in  vinrinia  14
July.  173«l:  il.  at  .*>«>uih  .Mount,  near  «
C.  1  June.  1832. Little  is  known  of  i


■X


-p


ni/rZOAt  Ju/m/yxi^^r^


762


SUMTER


SUMTER


age  and  early  life.  He  was  present  at  Braddock's
defeat  in  1755,  and  seems  afterward  to  have  been
engaged  in  military  service  on  tlie  frontier.  In
March,  177G,  ho  was  appointed  by  the  Provincial
congress  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  2d  regiment  of
South  Carolina  riflemen,  and  was  sent  to  overawe

the  Tories  and
Indians,  who
were  threaten-
ing the  upper
counties  of  that
state.  But  he
does  not  seem
to  have  distin-
guished himself
until  after  the
fall  of  Charles-
ton, in  May,
1780.  About
three  weeks  af-
ter that  event
Sir  Henry  Clin-
ton wrote  home
to  the  ministry:
'•  I  may  venture
to  assert  that
there  are  few
men  in  South
Carolina  who
are  not  either  our  prisoners  or  in  arms  with  us."
Among  the  few  who  were  neither  the  one  nor  the
other  was  Col.  Sumter.  After  hiding  for  a  while
in  the  swamps  of  the  Santee,  he  made  his  way  to
North  Carolina,  where  he  collected  a  small  force
of  refugees,  and  presently  returned  to  carry  on  a
partisan  warfare  against  the  British  invaders.  On
12  July  he  surprised  and  cut  to  pieces  Capt.  Chris-
tian Huck's  company  of  mounted  infantry.  Among
Sumter's  comrades  on  this  occasion  was  Col.  Will-
iam Neale,  whose  regiment  Lord  Cornwallis  was  at-
tempting to  impress  into  the  British  service.  On
hearing  of  the  approach  of  Sumter,  these  men  made
haste  to  join  him  and  place  themselves  under  their
former  commander.  Small  parties  of  Whigs,  com-
ing in  from  the  Waxhaw  settlements,  still  further
swelled  the  numbers  of  the  little  partisan  force,  and
Sumter  was  promoted  by  Gov.  Rutledge  to  the  rank
of  brigadier-general  in  the  state  militia.  Having
now  more  than  600  men  under  his  command,  on  30
July  he  crossed  Broad  river  and  made  a  desperate
assault  upon  the  log-fortres§  at  Rocky  Mount,  which
was  held  by  a  strong  body  of  New  York  and  South
Carolina  loyalists  under  Col.  George  Turnbull.
Finding  the  place  too  strong  to  be  reduced  without
artillery,  of  which  he  had  none,  Sumter  withdrew,
and  marched  suddenly  against  the  fortified  post  of
Hanging  Rock.  This  place  was  defended  by  500
men,  of  whom  at  least  IGO  were  British  regulars
from  Tarleton'S  legion ;  the  rest  were  Tories  from
the  two  Carolinas  and  Georgia.  They  were  sur-
prised by  Sumter,  and,  after  a  severe  struggle,  the
Tories  were  put  to  flight,  but  the  British  held  their

f  round  until  sixty-two  of  their  number  had  been
illed  or  wounded.  By  that  time  Sumter's  ill-
disciplined  men,  thinking  victory  assured,  had  be-
gun to  disperse  in  quest  of  plunder  and  liquor,
until  he  found  himself  unable  to  bring  up  force
snough  for  his  final  assault,  and  he  accordingly


ordered  a  retreat. On  this  occasion  Andrew  Jack-
son made  his  first  appearance  as  a  fighter.

Gen.  Sumter  now  crossed  the  Catawba  river  and
undertt)ok  to  act  in  co-operation  with  Gen,  Gates,
who  re-enforced  him  with  400  good  troops  and  two
field-pieces,  and  on  15  Aug.  Sumter  succeeded  in
cutting  Corpwallis's  line  of  communications  and
capturing  his  supply-train  with  its  convoy.  This
brilliant  exploit  was  more  than  neutralized  by  the
overwhelming  defeat  of  Gates  at  Camden,  16  Aug.,
which  made  it  necessary  ^or  Sumter  to  retreat  with
all  possible  haste,  encumbered  as  he  was  with
prisoners  and  fifty  wagons  laden  with  spoils.  At
noon  of  the  18th  he  encamped  on  the  north  bank
of  Fishing  creek,  a  small  stream  that  flows  into
the  Catawba  forty  miles  above  Camden.  Here  he
was  surprised  by  the  indefatigable  Tarleton.  As
the  jaded  men  were  resting  under  the  trees,  they
were  assaulted  by  the  British  dragoons,  who,  by
a  forced  march,  had  passed  the  stream  in  their
rear.  The  Americans  were  routed,  with  a  loss  of
nearly  500  in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners ;  the
remnant  of  their  force  was  dispersed,  and  the  stores
were  recovered  by  the  British.  After  this  stagger-
ing blow,  Sumter  fled  to  the  mountains,  where  his
men  gradually  came  together,  and  within  a  few
weeks  he  was  able  to  take  the  field  again  and
scout  the  country  between  the  Ennoree,  Broad,  and
Tiger  rivers.  Late  in  October,  Cornwallis  sent
Maj.  James  Wemyss  against  him,  with  the  63d  regi-
ment and  a  few  of  Tarleton's  dragoons.  In  a  night
attack  upon  Sumter's  camp  on  Broad  river,  8  Nov.,
Wemyss  was  badly  defeated  and  taken  prisoner.
Tarleton  himself  was  now  sent  up  with  re-enforce-
ments, and  advanced  upon  Sumter,  who  retreated
to  Blackstock  hill,  where  he  planted  himself  in  an
exceedingly  strong  position.  Here  Tarleton,  assault-
ing him,  20  Nov.,  was  repelled  with  a  loss  of  about
2CS  killed  and  wounded,  while  Sumter  lost  three
killed  and  four  wounded ;  and  the  disaster  of  Fish-
ing creek  was  thus  avenged.  In  this  action  Gen.
Sumter  received  a  wound  in  the  right  shoulder
which  kept  him  inactive  for  three  months.  In
February,  1781,  he  was  again  in  the  field,  and
{)layed  an  important  part  in  harassing  Lord
Rawdon,  whom  Cornwallis  left  in  command  in
South  Carolina,  while  he  followed  Gen.  Greene's
army  northward  to  the  Dan.  During  the  subse-
quent campaign,  April  to  July,  1781,  in  which
Greene  dislodged  Rawdon  from  Camden  and  re-
conquered the  interior  of  the  state,  Sumter's  opera-
tions, in  threatening  the  enemy's  communications
and  dispersing  parties  of  Tory  militia,  were  very
valuable,  although  he  usually  chose  an  independent
course  of  action,  and  was  sometimes  regarded  by
Greene  and  his  officers  as  insubordinate.  Before
the  end  of  the  campaign  he  was  obliged  by  failing
health  to  quit  active  service,  and  by  the  time  he
was  again  fit  for  duty  the  enemy  had  l)een  cooped
up  in  Charleston.  After  the  .war.  Gen.  Sumter  was
interested  in  politics,  and  at  the  time  of  the  adop-
tion of  the  constitution  he  was  a  zealous  Federalist.
He  was  a  member  of  congress  in  1789-'93  and
1797-1801,  and  U.  S.  senator  in  1801-'9.  He  was  the
last  surviving  general  oQicer  of  the  Revolutionary
war.  The  best-known  portrait  of  him  is  by  Charles
W.  Peale,  represented  in  the  accompanying  vignette.
His  son  Thomas  was  in  the  diplomatic  service.


END  OP  VOLUME  V.
